Virginia Driver's Manual: Table of Contents Section 1: The Driver Licensing Process . . . and Obtaining a Photo ID Card Qualifying for your Virginia Driver 's License First-time Drivers................................................
Learner's Permit..................................................
Driver Education Requirements...........................
Getting Your First License....................................
Section 2: Behind the Wheel
1 2 2 3
Before You Get Behind the Wheel.............................
19 8 o'clock, 4 o'cloclk.....................................
20 Virginia Insurance Laws................................
20 Your Best Protection: Safety Belts, Air Bags and Child Safety Seats...............................................
20 Tips for Traveling With Children...................
21 Good Driving Practices Scanning ......................................................
Sharing the Road..........................................
Trucks, Tractor-Trailers and RVs......................
Maintaining a Space Cushion........................
Changing Lanes............................................
Backing ........................................................
Visibility........................................................
Hazardous Conditions...................................
22 23 25 25 26 27 27 27
Restrictions Special Restrictions.............................................
3 Curfew Restrictions.............................................
3 Passenger Restrictions.........................................
3 New Residents Military Personnel..............................................
Out- of-State Students........................................
Non-Residents...................................................
Exchanging Your Out-of-State License.................
If You're a New Virginia Resident........................
Organ/Tissue Donation.......................................
Types of Virginia Driver's Licenses Commercial Driver's License..............................
School Bus Driver 's License................................
Motorcycle Driver's License................................
Motorcycle Learner's Permit...............................
International Driver 's License.............................
Steps to Obtaining Your Driver 's License or Photo ID Card Complete the Application Process.......................
Take the Required Tests.......................................
Vision Standards.................................................
Make Your Payment............................................
Complete the Process.........................................
Replacing , Renewing or Updating Your Driver's License and Obtaining Your Driving Record Renewing Your Driver 's License.........................
Replacing Your Driver's License.........................
Changing Your Address or Name........................
Obtaining Your Driving Record..........................
4 4 4 4 5 5 6 6 6 6 7
Communicating With Other Motorists Lights...........................................................
28 Turn Signals..................................................
29 Dangerous Driving Behaviors Aggressive Driving .........................................
Distracted Driving .........................................
Drinking and Driving .....................................
Alcohol and You............................................
Avoiding the Risks..........................................
Rules of the Road Speed Limits.................................................
Stopping ........................................................
Right-of-Way..................................................
U-Turns..........................................................
Parking ..........................................................
Traffic Crashes...............................................
Reading the Road Pavement Markings.......................................
Traffic Signals..................................................
Traffic Signs...................................................
Work Zone Devices.......................................
Railroad Crossings.........................................
Message Boards.............................................
Slow Moving Vehicle......................................
29 29 30 31 31 32 33 34 36 36 36 37 39 40 44 45 46 46
7 10 11 11 12
12 13 13 14
Services for Driver's With Disabilities..............................
15 Your License and the Law License Suspension and Revocation...................
16
Table of Contents
A Message from the Governor Each year, motor vehicle crashes nationally claim nearly 42,000 lives, cause millions of injuries and cost Americans more than $150 billion.
Motor vehicle crashes, however, aren't accidents.
They result from faulty decisions made by drivers.
You make some of the most important decisions before you turn the ignition key.
For example, make the decision to buckle up on every ride.
And make sure that everyone else in the vehicle is buckled up.
Be sure that children are securely placed in a child safety seat, booster seat or safety belt, depending on their age and size.
Choose not to drink or use drugs and drive.
And never ride with someone who has been drinking or using drugs.
Decisions like these can literally be life savers, reducing the risk of death and serious injury if you are involved in a crash.
I am committed to reducing the number of highway fatalities in Virginia.
But, I need your help.
Join the Department of Motor Vehicles, Virginia Department of Transportation, Virginia State Police, and local law enforcement agencies as well as many non-profit traffic safety partners in making Virginia's roads safe for everyone.
Drive smart and arrive alive.
Visit us on the Internet at www.dmvNOW.com as well.
A Message from the Commissioner Welcome to driving in Virginia.
In this manual, you'll find all the information you need to obtain your driver's license.
There are a few things you can do to ensure a smooth transaction when you apply for your driver 's license at one of our customer service centers (CSCs) throughout the state.
First, take the time to study this manual.
Everything you need to know to pass the two-part knowledge exam is presented in this manual.
Next, you can test your knowledge online by taking a sample knowledge exam at www.dmvNOW.com.
Pay special attention to Section I of the manual, describing the documents that you will need to prove your identity and Virginia residency.
If you have questions about which documents to present, contact DMV before you visit.
www.dmvNOW.com Toll Free: 1-866-DMV-LINE (368-5463) or 1-800-435-5137 TDD: 1-800-272-9268 As you prepare to obtain your driver's license, remember that driving is a privilege that requires you to operate your vehicle in a safe and lawful manner.
This manual will help you gain the knowledge necessary to fulfill that responsibility.
Don't forget ­ buckle up on every trip, make sure everyone in your vehicle is buckled-up, never drink and drive, and always obey the motor vehicle laws.
Mark R. Warner Governor
Demerst B. "D.B." Smit DMV Commissioner
Alternative Formats for Virginians With Special Needs The Department of Motor Vehicles (DMV) offers the Virginia Driver's Manual in alternate formats for Virginians with special needs in accordance with the Americans With Disabilities Act.
Contact DMV toll free at 1-866-DMV-LINE (368-5463).
A DMV-issued Personal Identification Number (PIN) A DMV-issued PIN allows you to access your records and conduct transactions on DMV 's web site, extraTeller and touchtone telephone system.
Apply for your PIN at www.dmvNOW.com or by telephone (1-888-337-4782) or at any extraTeller.
Section 1: The Driver Licensing Process...
And Obtaining a Photo ID Card
Th e Driver Li censing Process... and Obtaining a Photo lD Card The Department of Motor Vehicles wants to ensure your safety when operating a motor vehicle.
One way to keep Virginia's highways safe is through the careful licensing of drivers.
The following sections explain the steps that you will follow to obtain your Virginia driver 's license, learner's permit or photo ID card.
Qualifying for Your Virginia Driver's License First-time Drivers At least 16 years and 3 months You must be a resident of the Commonwealth of Virginia and at least 16 years and 3 months of age to obtain a Virginia driver's license.
To obtain a learner's permit, you must be at least 15 years and 6 months of age.
No exceptions will be made to these age requirements.
If you are under age 18, you must provide written consent from one of your parents or your legal guardian unless you are married or emancipated.
If you are under age 19, you must complete a state-approved driver education program.
If you are 19 years of age or older, and you have not previously held a driver 's license, you must show proof that If you are under age 18, your learner 's permit or driver 's license application must be signed by your father, mother or spouse over age 18.
If your parents are deceased or do not have legal custody of you, your application must be signed by your custodial parent, legal guardian or the judge of the juvenile and domestic relations court in your locality.
A court order showing that you are an emancipated minor is acceptable in lieu of written consent.
If you are a foreign exchange student, your host parents are not eligible to sign your application.
If you previously have been found not innocent of any offense by a juvenile and domestic relations court in Virginia or any other state, you must obtain approval to be licensed from that court or a court in the city or county where you live.
Under age 18
Under age 18
Under age 19 19 years of age or older
Juvenile and domestic relations court
· ·
you passed a state-approved driver education course, or, you held a learner's permit at least 30 days before taking the DMV road skills test.
Section 1
Qualifying for Your Virginia Driver's License -- Page 1
Section 1: The Driver Licensing Process...
And Obtaining a Photo ID Card
Learner's Permit 15 years and 6 months You may get your learner 's permit when you reach 15 years and 6 months of age.
It allows you to operate a motor vehicle when a licensed driver at least 21 years of age is seated beside you.
The driver accompanying you may be 18 years of age if he or she is your legal guardian, brother, sister, half-brother, half-sister, step-brother or step-sister.
The driver accompanying you must hold a valid driver's license, be alert and able to assist you and be legally permitted to drive.
When you apply for a learner 's permit, you will also complete the application process for your driver's license and pay the fees for both the permit and license.
You will be required to pass the two-part knowledge exam and a vision screening .
Under age 19 If you are under age 19, you must hold the permit for at least nine months or until you turn age 19 before you can receive a driver's license.
You will receive a certificate when you complete a required stateapproved driver education program.
Your parent/guardian must also certify that you have driven at least 40 hours.
Ten of the forty hours must be completed after sunset.
You will not be required to take a road skills test at DMV to get your driver 's license.
If you are a home schooler, refer to the "Home-Schooled In-Car Driver Education Information Sheet," HS -3, for the criteria you must satisfy to meet your driver 's education requirements.
This publication is available at www.dmvNOW.com or at any DMV customer service center.
If you are a Virginia resident 19 years of age or older, you must hold a learner 's permit for at least 30 days or show proof of completion of a state-approved driver education program.
19 years of age or older
Driver Driver education programs are available education statewide to students, adults and out- ofprograms are school youths.
Public and private school available programs are approved by the Department statewide of Education.
Commercial driver training schools follow the same course content and are licensed by DMV.
The program must present 36 classroom periods.
It must include components about alcohol safety, drug abuse awareness, aggressive driving , distracted driving , motorcycle awareness and organ and tissue donation awareness.
It must also include 14 in-car instruction periods--7 periods of driving and 7 periods of observation.
If you are a home schooler, the classroom and/or behind-the-wheel portions can be taught at home.
Visit the DMV web site for suppliers of approved courses.
Refer to the "Home-Schooled In-Car Driver Education Information Sheet," HS -3, for additional information.
You will receive a driver education completion certificate when you successfully complete a state -approved driver education program.
A copy of your certificate will be sent by your school instructor to DMV for issuance of a permanent driver's license.
If you are a home schooler, you must visit a DMV office and successfully complete the road skills test.
Refer to the "Home-Schooled In-Car Driver Education Information Sheet," HS -3, for additional information.
If you currently hold a valid out-of- state license but do not have proof of driver education, you may be issued a Virginia six-month temporary license.
This will give you time to obtain proof or to complete a state-approved driver education program.
Home schooler
Driver Education Requirements Under age 19 If you are a Virginia you must complete education program learner's permit for resident under age 19, a state-approved driver and hold your Virginia at least nine months.
Page 2 -- Qualifying for Your Virginia Driver's License
Section 1: The Driver Licensing Process...
And Obtaining a Photo ID Card
Getting your First License Your first license! If you are under 18 years of age, your parent or legal guardian must sign the certificate to verify your academic standing and to authorize issuance of your driver's license.
If you are between ages 16 years and 3 months and age 18, your driver education certificate (signed by your parent or legal guardian) and your valid learner's permit (held for at least nine months) allow you to drive without a licensed driver beside you.
After you have held your permit nine months, turned age 16 and 3 months and completed driver education, you will receive a notice that tells you when to appear in court for a licensing ceremony.
You will receive your permanent driver 's license at the licensing ceremony.
Generally, males under age 26 must register with the Selective Service.
If you are required by federal law to register with Selective Service, you must authorize DMV to send your personal information to Selective Service unless you have already registered.
If you are under age 18, your parent or guardian must sign your application authorizing the Selective Service to register you when you turn 18.
Law prohibits DMV from issuing any type of driver's license or photo ID card to an applicant who is required by federal law to register with the Selective Service but who refuses to authorize DMV to send his information to the Selective Service.
If you have questions about Selective Service registration, call 847-688-6888, TTY: 847688-2567.
Restrictions Special Restrictions If you have a mental or physical condition that may impair your ability to safely operate a motor vehicle, even temporarily, you must provide DMV with a medical statement from your doctor.
Some of these conditions include loss of consciousness, seizures, vision changes, impairment of judgement or loss of motor functions.
DMV will evaluate the medical information to determine if a driver 's license may be issued or restricted.
Mental or physical conditions
Licensing ceremony
Curfew Restrictions Virginia's curfew laws prohibit drivers under age 18 who hold a learner's permit or driver 's license from driving midnight to 4 AM.
If you hold a driver 's license you may drive during these hours: Midnight to 4 AM curfew
Selective Service registration
· · · ·
in case of an emergency; when traveling to and from work or a school-sponsored event; when accompanied by a parent or other adult acting in place of a parent; when responding to an emergency call by volunteer firefighter and rescue squad personnel.
Passenger Restrictions If you are under age 18, you may carry only one passenger during the first year that you hold your driver's license.
After you have held your license for one year, you may carry only three passengers until you reach age 18.
Learner 's permit holders may not carry more than one passenger under age 18.
Passenger restrictions do not apply to family members.
Violation of either the passenger or curfew restrictions can result in the suspension of your driver's license.
Restrictions -- Page 3
Section 1: The Driver Licensing Process...
And Obtaining a Photo ID Card
Cancellation of permit or license
While you are a minor and if you are unmarried or unemancipated, your father, mother, custodial parent, legal guardian or the judge of the juvenile and domestic relations court in your locality may ask DMV to cancel your permit or license.
If cancelled, you cannot reapply for six months.
DMV can deny or suspend driving privileges for persons under age 18 if the juvenile is found delinquent by a court, in need of supervision, involved in an alcohol or drug-related offense, or needs court-assigned services or programs such as counseling .
Out-of-State Students If you are enrolled as a full-time student in an accredited school in Virginia and not employed, you may drive in Virginia with a valid out-of- state (or another country) driver's license and valid out- of-state license plates on your vehicle.
If you are a full-time student and employed, you are considered a resident of Virginia for the purposes of motor vehicle laws only.
This does not necessarily qualify you for in-state tuition rates.
Therefore, you must apply for a Virginia driver 's license and register your your vehicle in Virginia.
You must register the vehicle in Virginia even if it is owned by someone else.
Enrolled as a full-time student
Deny or suspend driving privileges
New Residents Already have a license from someplace else? If you hold a valid driver 's license issued by a U.S. state, territory, jurisdiction, a Canadian province, France or Germany, you may not be required to take the two-part knowledge exam or the road skills test, but you must pass a vision screening .
Canadian or U.S. licenses must be surrendered when you apply for a Virginia driver 's license.
Be sure to photocopy your out-of-state driver's license--you may need it for insurance or licensing purposes.
If your license has been suspended or revoked by another state, a Virginia license may not be issued until your driving record in that state is cleared and you meet Virginia requirements.
Non-residents If you are a non-resident temporarily living in Virginia, you may drive with your home state or country driver 's license and license plates for no more than six months.
This does not apply to commercial vehicle drivers.
Contact your local DMV customer service center for more information or call toll free 1-866-DMV-LINE (1-866-3685463) or 1-800-435-5137.
Temporarily living in Virginia
Exchanging Your Out-of-State License (Juvenile Applicants Only) DMV may exchange your out-of- state license for a Virginia license if you meet the following conditions: Exchanging your license
Military Personnel Active-duty members of the Armed Forces If you are an active-duty member of the Armed Forces stationed in Virginia, you, your spouse and dependent children 16 years and 3 months of age or older may drive with a valid driver's license issued by your home state or country.
Vehicles registered in your name may be driven with valid out- of-state license plates if you are the sole owner.
If the vehicle is coowned, all co-owners must be active-duty members of the Armed Forces.
You may register your vehicle in Virginia without obtaining a Virginia driver 's license.
· ·
You are at least age 16 and three months but under age 19 and hold a valid license; and You have successfully completed a driver education program while residing in another state and the program meets the minimum of 30 classroom hours and six in-car instruction hours and; You can present proof of identity, Virginia residency, and your social security number.
After January 1, 2004, you will also need to show proof of legal presence.
·
Page 4 -- New Residents
Section 1: The Driver Licensing Process...
And Obtaining a Photo ID Card
If you hold a current out- of-state driver's license but do not have proof of driver education, you may be issued a Virginia six-month temporary license.
This will give you time to obtain proof or complete a state-approved driver education program.
New Virginia residents If you're a new Virginia resident, Within 60 days of moving here, you must obtain a Virginia driver's license.
Within 30 days of moving here, you must: · Title your vehicle in Virginia.
· Register your vehicle and obtain Virginia license plates.
Prior to registering your vehicle, you must: · Obtain a Virginia safety inspection sticker.
Your vehicle must pass a safety equipment state inspection and, in certain Virginia localities, your vehicle also must pass an emissions inspection.
· Insure your vehicle with a company authorized to do business in Virginia.
At a minimum, your insurance policy must provide the following liability insurance coverage: · $25,000 for injury or death of one person; · $50,000 for injury or death of two or more people; and · $20,000 for property damage.
· Insure your Virginia-registered vehicle during the entire registration period even if it is not driven or is inoperable.
If the vehicle is not insured, you must cancel the registration and return the license plates to DMV.
· If your vehicle is not insured, you must pay a $500 uninsured motor vehicle fee.
This does not provide insurance coverage, but allows you to register and operate the vehicle in Virginia for a one -year period.
·
You must also obtain a local sticker or decal if required by the city or county in which you live.
Contact the commissioner of the revenue, treasurer or director of finance for the city, county or town in which you live for more information.
Some localities partner with DMV and you will pay your local registration fee at the same time you obtain your state registration and license plates.
Local sticker or decal
Organ/Tissue Donation · When you apply for your driver's license, learner's permit or photo ID card, you will be asked if you wish to become an organ donor.
If you decide to become a donor, your choice will be noted on the front of your driver's license or photo ID card.
If you wish to change your decision later, you must notify DMV and pay a $10.00 fee.
You may also complete this transaction on the Internet with a DMV-issued PIN number.
Or, you may have the change made free of charge at your next renewal.
The decision to become an organ/tissue donor is yours.
Your decision will not affect your driving privileges.
If you wish to become an organ/ tissue donor, you must be at least 18 years of age.
If you are under age 18, you must obtain your parent's or legal guardian's written consent.
Need more information? Ask any DMV representative or call 1-800-847-7831.
Safety inspection
Insurance
! · · Organ/Tissue Donation -- Page 5
Section 1: The Driver Licensing Process...
And Obtaining a Photo ID Card
Voter registration or changing your voter registration mailing address
Applying to Register to Vote You may apply to register to vote or to change your voter registration mailing address at any DMV office.
Just fill out and sign the voter registration section of the driver's license application or ask your DMV representative for assistance.
To apply to register to vote in Virginia, you must be a United States citizen, a resident of Virginia, and be 18 years old by the next general election.
You must have had your voting rights restored if you have been convicted of a felony or if you have been declared mentally incompetent and had your competency declared restored by a circuit court.
However, you will need to take the commercial driver and school bus tests to obtain the school bus endorsement on your driver's license.
You will be restricted to driving a bus designed to carry 15 occupants (including the driver).
This restriction will be printed on your license.
For information about licensing requirements to operate larger school buses, refer to the Virginia Commercial Driver's Manual.
Motorcycle Driver's License If you wish to operate a motorcycle in Virginia, you must pass the driver 's license two-part knowledge exam, the motorcycle knowledge exam and the motorcycle road skills test.
If you already hold a driver 's license, you may add a Class M to your license.
If you do not hold a driver 's license, you may obtain a driver 's license with a class M that only allows you to operate a motorcycle.
For more information refer to the Virginia Motorcycle Operator Manual, available at any DMV customer service center or at www.dmvNOW.com.
Check your registration status online
To check your voter registration status, visit DMV's website at www.dmvNOW.com.
To protect your privacy, you must first obtain a DMV-issued Personal Identification Number (PIN).
You may also call your local registrar or contact the State Board of Elections at 1-800-552-9745 or TDD 1-800-260-3466.
Motorcycle Learner's Permit · You must pass the motorcycle knowledge exam.
If you do not currently hold a valid learner's permit or driver 's license, you must also pass the driver's license two-part knowledge exam.
If you are under age 19, you must hold the motorcycle learner's permit for at least nine months.
This learner 's permit allows you to operate a motorcycle between one half hour after sunrise and one half hour before sunset.
In other words, you may operate the motorcycle only during daylight hours.
You are not allowed on limited access highways, such as interstate highways.
You must wear an approved safety helmet.
Types of Virginia Driver's Licenses Commercial Driver's License In addition to the driver's license and photo ID card, Virginia issues a commercial driver's license (CDL) which allows you to operate tractor-trailers, passenger buses, tank vehicles, school buses for 16 or more occupants, or vehicles carrying hazardous materials.
For more information about obtaining a CDL, refer to the Virginia Commercial Driver's Manual, available at any DMV customer service center and at www.dmvNOW.com.
·
·
·
·
School Bus Driver's License If you wish to operate a school bus designed to carry 15 occupants (including the driver), you do not need to obtain a commercial driver 's license.
Page 6 -- Types of Virginia Licenses
·
Always wear an approved safety helmet
Section 1: The Driver Licensing Process...
And Obtaining a Photo ID Card
·
You must be supervised by a person at least 21 years of age who is licensed to operate a motorcycle; alert and able to assist you and supervising from a separate accompanying motorcycle.
Your parent, legal guardian or sibling may supervise if they are licensed to operate a motorcycle and are age 18 or older.
No one, other than the operator, can be on the motorcycle.
If you pass the Virginia Rider Training Program, the motorcycle skills test is waived.
Obtaining a Photo ID Card · · · You must be a resident of Virginia to obtain a photo ID card.
You cannot hold an ID card if you hold any type of driver's license.
ID cards have no age restrictions and are available for adults or children.
ID cards are valid for five years from the date of issuance.
Children's ID cards are valid for five years or until the child's 15th birthday, whichever occurs first.
An ID card costs $10.00.
You cannot hold an ID card if you hold any type of driver's license
· ·
·
International Driver's License Foreign translation An international driver's license is a foreign translation of your existing DMV driver's license for use when driving a vehicle outside the United States.
It is invalid alone and must be used along with your valid DMV license in order to operate vehicles when you are out of the country.
These licenses are issued by your local AAA but are not issued to persons whose driving privilege is under suspension or revoked.
If you are visiting in the U.S. from a foreign country, you may drive using your driver 's license issued by your home country.
This license should be accompanied by an international driver's license which pro vides a translation of your license.
International driver's licenses marketed by private sector businesses do not allow you to legally operate a motor vehicle.
·
Steps to Obtaining Your Driver's License or Photo ID Card Complete the Application Process When applying for an original learner 's permit, driver 's license or photo ID card, you must complete an application for a Virginia license (form DL 1M).
For a child ID card (under age 15) complete the DL 5, Identification Card for Minors Application.
You may complete these forms before or after coming to DMV. Use your full legal name.
Abbreviations and nicknames will not be accepted.
Application forms
You cannot hold a driver's You cannot hold any type of driver 's license license and a while simultaneously holding a photo ID photo ID card card.
If you hold a learner 's permit, driver's license, or commercial driver 's license (CDL), you may not hold a photo ID card.
Steps to Obtaining Your Learner's Permit or Driver's License -- Page 7
Section 1: The Driver Licensing Process...
And Obtaining a Photo ID Card
Learner's permit or driver's license
To apply for a learner 's permit or driver's license, you must show · Two proofs of identity; · One proof of Virginia residency plus a piece of postmarked mail addressed to you at the address on your DMV application; Proof of your social security number (SSN) or a letter from the Social Security Administration stating that you do not have an SSN; After January 1, 2004, you will also be required to show proof of legal presence.
ments.
If you are under age 19, you will need only one proof of identity but it must come from the primary list of identity documents.
A U.S. birth certificate or unexpired U.S. passport will serve as a primary proof of identity.
Effective January 1, 2004, these documents will also serve as proof of your legal presence in the U.S. Social security number: If you are applying for a learner's permit or driver's license, you will be required to provide proof of your social security number (SSN).
If you do not have an SSN, you will be required to provide a letter from the Social Security Administration stating this.
If you are applying for a photo ID card, you do not have to provide an SSN. DMV will immediately verify all SSNs with the Social Security Administration.
If the SSN you present does not match the SSN on file at the Social Security Administration, DMV will not issue you a driver's license or learner's permit.
DMV will assign you a customer number which will display on your driver's license or learner's permit.
If you wish to change your DMV-assigned number in the future, you may be required to present documentation from law enforcement or the courts indicating that you may be a victim of identity theft.
Proof of Virginia residency: You must provide one proof of Virginia residency and you must provide DMV with the street address of your principal Virginia residence.
You must also provide one piece of postmarked mail addressed to you at your principle Virginia residence.
If you are under age 19, your parent or legal guardian may certify your Virginia residency.
DMVassigned customer number Social security number
·
·
To apply for a photo ID card, you must show · Two proofs of identity; · One proof of Virginia residency plus a piece of postmarked mail adressed to you at the address on your DMV application; After January 1, 2004, you will also be required to show proof of legal presence.
·
Photocopies will not be accepted Acceptable documents
Photocopies will not be accepted.
All documents must be originals and all documents may be subject to verification with the issuing authority prior to acceptance.
Be sure to refer to "Acceptable Documents for Obtaining a Driver 's License or Photo ID Card" (DMV 141) for a list of acceptable documents.
Proof of Identity: Documents submitted as primary proof of identity must show your full legal name and date of birth.
Nicknames and abbreviations will not be accepted.
You must present at least one document from the primary list of documents.
The second proof of identity may come from either the primary list or the secondary list.
If two of your proofs of identity are issued by the same entity, such as the same state agency, DMV may require additional proof of identity docu-
Proof of Virginia residency
Proof of identity
Page 8 -- Steps to Obtaining Your Learner's Permit or Driver's License
Section 1: The Driver Licensing Process...
And Obtaining a Photo ID Card
Proof of legal presence
Proof of legal presence: Effective January 1, 2004, all applicants for a driver's license or photo ID card must show proof of legal presence in the United States.
A U.S. birth certificate or unexpired U.S. passport will serve as both proof of identity and proof of legal presence.
For a list of other documents that you can use to prove your legal presence in the United States, refer to "Acceptable Documents for Obtaining a Driver's License or Photo ID Card" (DMV 141).
This form is available at any DMV customer service center and also online at www.dmvNOW.com.
DMV with an alternate address in addition to your residence address.
This alternate address must also be in Virginia.
If you change your residence or alternate address to a location outside Virginia, your driver's license or photo ID card will be cancelled.
Exceptions may be made for some individuals such as active duty military personnel and Virginia residents employed outside the U.S. Refer to "Re-establishing Your Virginia Residency or Qualifying for a Virginia Address Requirement Exception," DMV 143, for information about the exception process.
This publication is available at www.dmvNOW.com or at any DMV office.
Outside of Virginia
Proof of Legal Presence Legal presence A proof of legal presence document shows that you are in the United States legally.
After January 1, 2004, all applicants for an original driver's license or photo ID card must show proof of legal presence, including individuals born in the United States.
Generally, if you were born in the U.S., you will prove your legal presence just once when you apply for your original driver 's license or photo ID card.
You can prove your legal presence with your U.S. birth certificate or your unexpired U.S. passport.
There may, however, be some situations where you will be asked to show proof of legal presence again.
People who were born outside of the U.S. and who are not U.S. citizens can prove their legal presence in the U.S. with a wide array of documents.
Refer to "Acceptable Documents for Obtaining a Driver 's License or Photo ID card," DMV-141, for additional information about the documents you can use to prove your legal presence.
This publication is available at www.dmvNOW.com and at any DMV customer service center.
Name and address All documents must show your name and the address of your principal residence as it appears on your application.
A post office box or business address is not acceptable.
However, if you do not want your residence address to appear on your driver's license or photo ID card, you may provide
Acceptable Documents Information about documents that DMV will accept as proof of identity, residency and social security number is presented in "Acceptable Documents for Obtaining a Driver's License or Photo ID Card" (DMV 141).
This form is available at any DMV customer service center and also online.
Photocopies will not be accepted.
All documents must be originals and all documents must be verified with the issuing authority.
DMV will not accept any document when there is reason to believe it has been altered, fraudulently obtained or is fake, forged, counterfeit or otherwise nongenuine or illegitimate.
DMV may require additional documents.
Falsifying information on a driver's license, learner's permit or photo identification card application is a criminal offense.
Altering or assisting a person with improperly or fraudulently obtaining a driver's license, learner 's permit or photo ID card are also criminal offenses.
Documents accepted by DMV as proof of identity, social security number and Virginia residency and legal presence (after January 1, 2004) may change without prior notice.
Be prepared.
Bring acceptable documents with you when you visit DMV
Steps to Obtaining Your Learner's Permit or Driver's License -- Page 9
Section 1: The Driver Licensing Process...
And Obtaining a Photo ID Card
Take the Required Tests Tests will include a vision screening and may include a two-part knowledge exam and a road skills test.
A DMV representative will tell you which tests you need to take.
Vision screening, two-part knowledge exam and road skills test Two-part knowledge exam To screen your vision, you will be asked to look into a machine and read the lines of letters or numbers to the DMV representative.
This screening determines whether your eyesight and peripheral vision meet Virginia's standards to safely operate a motor vehicle.
The two-part knowledge exam is given on a computer and tests your knowledge of traffic signs, motor vehicle laws, and safe driving techniques.
Exam questions are taken from information in this manual.
All ten traffic sign questions in Part One must be answered correctly before you can take the 25-question general knowledge exam in Part Two.
Part Two consists of 25 multiple choice questions.
You must score at least 80 percent on these questions to pass Part Two.
If you fail If you fail the exam and are under age 18, you must wait 15 days before you can retake the exam.
If you are age 18 or older, you must pay the $2.00 re-examination fee if you re-take the exam within 15 days.
The exam may be taken only once per business day.
If necessary, the knowledge exam may be taken using a translator provided by you.
Oral exams are given in all DMV customer service centers.
The exam is also offered in Spanish.
It is unlawful to · receive assistance or to assist anyone while taking the knowledge exam;
· ·
to attempt to secure or provide answers to any parts of the exam; to have unauthorized possession of an exam or exam answers; or to use a cell phone during the exam.
·
Go online at www.dmvNOW.com to take a sample knowledge exam.
You will need to take the road skills test if you do not hold a valid out-of-state, Canadian, German or French driver 's license.
You must provide a vehicle for the road skills test.
The vehicle must have a valid inspection sticker, license plates, registration card, and working brakes, safety belts, horn, lights, turn signals, mirrors and speedometer.
For applicants under 19, the road skills test will be given as part of the driver education course taken at a public, private or commercial driving school.
If you are a home schooler, refer to the "Home-Schooled InCar Driver Education Information Sheet," HS -3, for more information about taking the road skills test.
The road skills test will be administered by a DMV representative.
Only the applicant and the DMV representative are allowed in the vehicle during the road skills test.
The test may be taken only once per business day.
You may only take the road skills test three times during a three-month period.
Road skills test
Applicants under 19
Once per business day
Don't!
Once per business day
Page 10 -- Steps to Obtaining Your Learner's Permit or Driver's License
Section 1: The Driver Licensing Process...
And Obtaining a Photo ID Card
Vision Standards The vision screening determines if you meet Virginia's vision standards for operating a motor vehicle safely.
It is not a medical exam.
If you fail the vision screening , you may be asked to see an eye care professional.
If you need to wear glasses or contact lenses to pass the vision screening , you must wear them when you drive.
Your license will show this restriction.
To have this restriction removed after having laser surgery to correct your vision, you must visit a DMV customer service center and pass the vision screening without wearing glasses or contact lenses or submit a Vision Screening Report (MED4).
DMV 's vision screening is not an eye exam and is not intended to be an indicator of the health of your eyes.
We strongly encourage all drivers to visit their eye care professional on a regular basis.
Driver's license: · 20/40 or better vision in one or both eyes, and 100 degrees, or better, horizontal vision in one or both eyes.
Driving restricted to daylight hours only: · 20/70 or better vision in one or both eyes, and · 70 degrees, or better, horizontal vision.
If only one eye, 40 degrees or better temporal and 30 degrees or better nasal are required.
·
A restricted license permits you to drive only during the period of time beginning one-half hour after sunrise and ending onehalf hour before sunset.
Bioptic Telescopic Lenses: If you wear bioptic telescopic lenses, contact DMV tollfree at 1-866-368-5463 (DMV-LINE) to find out about vision requirements.
Make Your Payment Cash, money order, check or major credit card You may pay the licensing fee with cash, money order, check or major credit card.
Your Virginia driver 's license and learner's permit always expire on your birthday and generally will expire when you reach an age that is divisible by five ­ 20, 25, 30, 35, etc.
After January 1, 2004, the length of time that a driver's license is valid may be affected by your legal presence status.
The licensing fee is $4.00 per year; so, your fee will range from $12.00 to $28.00.
A learner's permit costs $3.00 plus the yearly cost of a driver's license.
Driver's license........................................................
$4.00 per year Motorcycle class .....................................................
$2.00 per year Learner 's permit .....................................................
$3.00 plus $4.00 per year Motorcycle learner's permit ....................................
$3.00 Replacement license..............................................
$10.00 90-day temporary driver's license...........................
$10.00 Re-examination fee..................................................
$2.00 (if taken within 15 days) For example, a five-year driver's license will cost $20.00.
You may pay your fees with cash, money order, check, or major credit card.
Steps to Obtaining Your Learner's Permit or Driver's License -- Page 11
Section 1: The Driver Licensing Process...
And Obtaining a Photo ID Card
Complete the Process You passed! Once you pass your required testing , a DMV representative will take your photograph and ask you to sign a signature pad.
In most circumstances, your photograph and information will be processed while you wait.
Your name will be called when your driver 's license or learner's permit is ready.
First-time driver's licenses All first-time driver's licenses issued to persons under age 18 are sent to the judge of your local juvenile and domestic relations court.
The court will notify you by mail about when and where you and your parent, custodial parent or legal guardian must appear to receive your license.
Replacing, Renewing or Updating Your Driver's License and Obtaining Your Driving Record Renewing Your Driver's License Your Virginia driver 's license and learner's permit always expire on your birthday and generally will expire when you reach an age that is divisible by five --20, 25, 30, 35, etc.
After January 1, 2004, the expiration date of your driver's license may be affected by your legal status in the United States.
Your first driver's license will be valid for three to seven years, depending on your age when the license is issued.
When you renew your license, it will generally be valid for five years.
You may renew your driver's license as early as two years prior to the expiration date on your license.
You may be able to renew your driver's license every other renewal cycle at www.dmvNOW.com, extraTeller, by telephone 1-888-337-4782, or mail.
Renew online, by mail or phone!
A vertical driver's license, learner 's permit or photo ID will be issued to persons under age 21.
Dates showing when the individual turns 18 and 21 are shown in red.
However, you must complete your driver's license renewal at a DMV customer service center if any of the following conditions exist: · you are required to take the twopart knowledge exam; · you have received two or more traffic violations (one or more if you are under age 21) since your last renewal; your license has been expired for more than one year your license is suspended or revoked; you hold a CDL; you are under medical review; or other conditions may apply.
A horizontal driver's license is issued to persons age 21 and above.
You may obtain a horizontal license when you turn age 21 for $10.00.
· · · · ·
Page 12 -- Replacing, Renewing or Updating Your Driver's License and Obtaining your Driving Record
Section 1: The Driver Licensing Process...
And Obtaining a Photo ID Card
SSN verification
You must also renew in person if your social security number (SSN), name or date of birth on file at DMV does not match your information on file with the Social Security Administration or if you do not have an SSN on file.
Your SSN, name and date of birth on file with DMV must match the information on file with the Social Security Administration before DMV will renew your driver 's license.
If you do not have an SSN, you must provide a letter from the Social Security Administration that verifies this.
You may also complete this transaction online at www.dmvNOW.com using a DMV-issued PIN, unless you are under age 18, your license is suspended or revoked, you hold a Commercial Driver's License (CDL), or you are under medical review.
Other conditions may affect your eligibility to replace your license online.
The cost is $10.00.
If you currently hold both a driver 's license and a photo ID card, you will be required to surrender your photo ID card before you can receive a replacement license.
For a complete list of eligibility requireEligibility requirements ments, including social security number requirements, refer to "Acceptable Documents for Obtaining a Driver's License or Photo ID Card" (DMV 141), available online, or call 1-866-DMV-LINE (3685463).
Your renewal notice will indicate if you are eligible to use an alternative renewal method.
You cannot hold a photo ID card if you hold any type of driver's license.
If you currently hold both a driver's license and a photo ID card, you will be required to surrender your photo ID card before you can renew your driver 's license.
Changing Your Address or Name You must notify DMV within 30 days if you change your address.
You must provide DMV with the street addres of your principal Virginia residence.
A post office box or business address is not acceptable and your principal address must be in Virginia.
However, if you do not want your residence address to appear on your driver 's license or photo ID card, you may provide DMV with an alternate address in addition to your residence address.
This alternate address must also be in Virginia.
If you change your residence address or alternate address to a location outside Virginia, your driver 's license or photo ID card will be cancelled.
Exceptions may be made for some individuals such as active duty military personnel and Virginia residents employed outside Virginia.
A ddress change: You may visit any DMV customer service center to change your address and obtain a new vehicle registration card.
You may purchase a new driver's license or photo ID card showing the address change for $10.00, or a free change of address card (for your driver 's license or photo ID card) will be mailed to you.
Replacing Your Driver's License To obtain a replacement driver's license you must present two forms of identification (one primary and one secondary or two primary documents).
Refer to "Acceptable Documents for Obtaining a Driver's License or Photo ID Card" (DMV 141) for a list of acceptable documents.
Photocopies will not be accepted.
DMV may verify any document with the issuing entity prior to replacing your driver 's license.
Replacing, Renewing or Updating Your Driver's License and Obtaining your Driving Record -- Page 13
Section 1: The Driver's Licensing Process...
And Obtaining a Photo ID Card
You may also change your address by calling DMV toll-free at 1-866-DMV-LINE (368-5463), 1-800-435-5137 or by using the Internet (www.dmvNOW.com).
Each time you change your address with DMV, you will have an opportunity to apply to register to vote or to change your voter registration address with the State Board of Elections.
Name change: You may change your name on your driver 's license or photo ID card at any DMV customer service center.
Bring the following documents, as applicable.
Photocopies will not be accepted.
· Marriage certificate.
· Divorce decree if the decree states the change from married name to maiden name.
Original or teste copy of the court order granting the name change.
addressed to you and your social security number in addition to one of the documents listed above for proof of your name change.
After January 1, 2004, you will also be required to show proof of legal presence.
If you are applying for a photo ID card, you must show two proofs of identification and one proof of residency plus one piece of postmarked mail addressed to you at your address on file at DMV.
After January 1, 2004, you will also be required to show legal presence.
If your name has changed and you currently hold a valid Virginia-issued driver 's license, learner's permit or photo ID card, you must present your Virginia driver 's license, learner's permit or photo ID card in addition to one of the name change documents for proof of your name change.
If you cannot present your Virginia driver 's license, learner's permit, or photo ID card, you must present one proof of identity from the primary document list (refer to "Acceptable Documents for Obtaining a Driver's License or Photo ID Card," (DMV 141) in addition to one of the name change documents listed above for proof of name change.
Photo ID card
·
Obtaining Your Driving Record With proper identification, you may obtain a copy of your driving record by mail, by Internet using a DMV-issued PIN number or in person.
Driving records cost $8.
A certified record costs $13.
If you are applying for a driver 's license or learner's permit for the first time and your name has changed, you must present two proofs of identification, one proof of residency plus a piece of postmarked mail The information on DMV records is maintained and released based on federal and state laws.
Law enforcement may obtain your complete driving record; employers receive seven years of data and insurance companies receive five years.
DMV will not release your license photograph without your signed release except to law enforcement.
Your driving record
Release of DMV information
Page 14 -- Replacing, Renewing or Updating Your Driver's License and Obtaining your Driving Record
Section 1: The Driver Licensing Process...
And Obtaining a Photo ID Card
Services for Drivers With Disabilities Customers with special needs Customers with special needs or who require special assistance with applications or testing should notify a DMV staff member or manager upon arrival at any DMV location.
DMV offers parking permits for citizens with temporary or permanent disabilities that limit or impair their mobility.
We also offer license plates for persons with permanent disabilities.
These permits and plates entitle the holder to park in special parking spaces reserved for individuals with disabilities.
Institutions and organizations who operate special vehicles equipped to carry persons with disabilities may also obtain parking permits entitling them to special parking privileges.
Parking permits, issued in the form of removable windshield placards and license plates, displaying the international symbol of access, provide authorization for special parking in all 50 states.
Temporary parking placards Temporar y parking placards are valid for up to six months.
Your physician must indicate the expected length of your disability.
This placard may be renewed if your physician certifies an extension of your disability.
Permanent placards are issued to citizens with a disability that limits or impairs movement from one place to another, the ability to walk or that creates a concern for safety while walking , as defined in Va.
Code §46.2-1240, and that has reached the maximum level of improvement and is not expected to change even with additional treatment.
These placards are valid for five years and may be renewed without a physician's certification by Internet (www.dmvNOW.com), mail or at a DMV customer service center.
Institutional and organizational placards are valid for five years and may be renewed.
No physician certification is required.
Placards should be hung from the rearview mirror while the vehicle is parked in spaces authorized for the disabled.
The side that shows the placard holder's identifying information must face the rear of the vehicle.
Placard holders may use removable tape to cover their name and date of birth on the placard.
The placard holder will have to remove the tape if requested by law enforcement for verification.
Placards must be removed from the rearview mirror while the vehicle is in motion.
License plates must bear the International Symbol of Access (ISA) in order to entitle the holder to special parking privileges.
When disabled parking plates are issued to a vehicle registered to multiple owners, the registration card for that vehicle will indicate which owner is disabled.
Disabled parking plates may be renewed without a physician's certification.
License plates for hearing impaired drivers are available from any DMV office.
No special privileges are given, but the plates help law enforcement officers recognize drivers who are hearing impaired.
Hearing impaired citizens may contact DMV by teletypewriter at 1-800-272-9268.
A driver's license indicator is available for drivers who are hearing and speech impaired or who are insulin-dependant.
One of these indicators is placed on the driver's license in order to identify the disability to law enforcement personnel.
Institutions and organizations Placards
License plates
License plates for hearing impaired drivers
Permanent placards
Driver's license indicator
Services for Drivers With Disabilities -- Page 15
Section 1: The Driver Licensing Process...
And Obtaining a Photo ID Card
Disabled Parking Privileges Disabled parking privileges entitle the holder to: · park in any parking space designated for a disabled person; · park for up to four hours without paying a fee in any time-restricted parking space during the hours allowed for general parking (unless prohibited by the locality).
· · ·
alter a disabled license plate or placard; use another person's disabled license plate or placard; make a false statement about a disability in order to obtain or assist someone else in obtaining a disabled license plate or placard.
Disabled parking privileges DO NOT entitle the holder to stop, stand or park in the following areas: · where parking is prohibited; · · in spaces reserved for other special types of vehicles; where it would clearly present a traffic hazard.
Convictions resulting from these offenses could result in fines up to $1,000, up to six months in jail, and revocation of disabled parking privileges.
To report expired placards, suspected misuse or alteration of placards or plates, call (804) 367-6602.
Your License and the Law Whenever you drive, you must carry your driver's license with you.
Any misuse of your driver 's license is a misdemeanor.
You could be fined, sentenced to jail, or your license may be suspended.
For your own protection, do not: · allow an unlicensed driver to operate your vehicle; · · · · lend anyone your driver 's license; use anyone else's driver's license; display or possess a fraudulent driver 's license; use a suspended or revoked driver 's license.
Misuse of your driver's license
Private parking facilities, such as parking lots at airports, may restrict the time and free parking provisions for vehicles displaying disabled parking permits or plates.
Disabled Placard and Plate Holders May Not: · allow a non-disabled individual to use his or her placard or plate unless they are transporting the disabled individual.
park in a space reserved for disabled individuals without displaying a placard or plate bearing the International Symbol of Access.
Persons convicted of these violations may be fined up to $500 and, in some cases, may have their disabled parking privileges revoked for up to six months.
It is also illegal to: · create or use a counterfeit replica of a disabled license plate or placard; ·
For your protection
License Suspension and Revocation If you are underage, it is against the law to use a falsified or non- genuine license to obtain alcoholic beverages or tobacco products.
Also, it is unlawful to knowingly allow anyone to get a driver's license in your name.
If you are underage
Page 16 -- Your License and the Law
Section 1: The Driver's License Process...
And Obtaining a Photo ID Card
When you receive a driver 's license, you accept responsibility for obeying Virginia's traffic and safety laws.
If you repeatedly violate them, DMV is authorized to suspend or revoke your driver 's license.
If you are convicted of any of the following offenses, your license will be revoked or suspended.
· Making a false statement to DMV
· · · · · ·
Failing to stop and identify yourself at the scene of a crash if someone has been injured or killed Operating a motor vehicle while under the influence of alcohol or drugs Voluntary or involuntary manslaughter Committing a drug offense, regardless of whether or not a motor vehicle is involved Committing a felony involving the use of a motor vehicle Taking a driver's license examination for another person, or appearing for another person to renew a license.
If convicted of this offense, your license will be revoked for ten years.
Eluding police
·
If you are convicted of a safety belt, child safety seat or demerit-point traffic violation committed when you were under age 18, you will be required to satisfactorily complete a driver improvement clinic.
No safe driving points will be awarded for attending the clinic.
If you do not satisfactorily complete the clinic within 90 days, DMV will suspend your permit or license until the clinic is completed.
After your second demerit point conviction, DMV will suspend your permit or license for 90 days.
The court may grant you restricted driving privileges so you can drive between your home and work place provided there is no other means of transportation.
After a third demerit point conviction, DMV will revoke your permit or license for one year or until you reach age 18, whichever is longer.
The court can not grant restricted driving privileges.
If you are 18 or 19, you will be required to complete a driver improvement clinic after your first demerit point conviction (including safety belt and child restraint violations).
If you are age 18 or older and you accumulate eight demerit points in 12 months (or 12 points in 24 months), you will receive an advisory letter that cautions you about the consequences of violating the law.
Third conviction
Your License and the Law -- Page 17
Section 1: The Driver Licensing Process...
And Obtaining a Photo ID Card
If you accumulate 12 demerit points in 12 months (or 18 points in 24 months), you will be required to complete a clinic.
You must enroll in and satisfactorily complete the driver improvement clinic within 90 days or your driver 's license will be suspended.
If you accumulate 18 demerit points in 12 months (or 24 points in 24 months), your driving privilege will be suspended for 90 days.
Additionally, you must complete a driver improvement clinic before your privilege will be restored.
Once your privilege is restored, you will be placed on a six month probation.
You will not be granted restricted driving privileges.
If you are under age 20, a computerbased driver improvement clinic will not satisfy a driver improvement requirement.
You must satisfactorily complete a clinic that provides classroom instruction.
Your license also may be suspended or revoked if you: · Become delinquent in your child support payments by 90 days or $5,000
·
Fail to pay court fines and costs for traffic or criminal convictions within 15 days Fail to satisfactorily complete a required driver improvement clinic within the specified time Are convicted of making a bomb threat Are convicted of failing to pay for gasoline purchases Become physically or mentally unable to drive safely Give false information on a driver's license application Receive 18 or more demerit points in a 12-month period or 24 demerit points in a 24-month period Register an uninsured motor vehicle without paying the uninsured motor vehicle fee Operate or permit operation of your uninsured vehicle
·
· · · · ·
·
·
If you are convicted of driving while your license is revoked or suspended, the court may revoke or suspend your license for the same amount of time for which it had previously been revoked or suspended.
This will be in addition to any other penalties, possibly including jail time.
If your license is suspended, your privilege to drive has been withdrawn temporarily.
You may pay the required fees and reinstate your license at the end of the suspension period unless your license expires during that period.
Revocation, on the other hand, means that your privilege to drive has been terminated.
Your driving privileges may be restored if you reapply for a driver 's license after the revocation period has passed.
You must successfully complete the vision screening , two-part knowledge exam and road skills tests and pay the required fees when you reapply.
Page 18 -- Your License and the Law
