Chapter XI Pet Facilitated Therapy 175 Animal Assisted Activities /Animal Assisted Therapy (Pet-Facilitated Therapy) History of AAA/AAT The earliest recorded use of animals in therapy was at the York Retreat in England, founded in 1792 by the Society of Friends as an alternative to conventional therapy at "lunatic asylums" of the period.
Patients were taught self-control as they were charged with the routine care of the animals in the program.
This program became a model for reform of other asylums.
The first use of animals in an organized program in the United States was at the Army Air Corps Convalescent Center in Pauling, New York near the end of World War II.
The Center was run by the American Red Cross and included a working farm as well as pet animals.
Boris Levinson, in the early 1960's, incorporated animals in his practice of psychology.
He advocated the use of animals in cases where affection and unconditional acceptance were indicated and introduced the term "pet-facilitated therapy."
Since that time, pet-facilitated therapy has been used successfully in a wide range of settings including coronary patients, hospitalized psychiatric patients, emotionally-disturbed youth, prison inmates and the elderly both in outpatient and institutional settings.(1) Today, The Delta Society (www.deltasociety.org) is the leading organization promoting the use of animals in therapy programs and prefers the use of the terms Animal Assisted Activities (AAA) and Animal Assisted Therapy (AAT) "which suggest that the animal is the motivating force that enhances treatment by a well-trained person."
Definitions Animal-Assisted Activities (AAA) "provides opportunities for motivational, educational, recreational, and/or therapeutic benefits to enhance quality of life.
AAA are delivered in a variety of environments by specially trained professionals, paraprofessionals, and/or volunteers, in association with animals that meet specific criteria."
(From Standards of Practice for Animal-Assisted Activities and Therapy) In application, AAA involves pets visiting people in "meet and greet" encounters.
The same activity can be repeated with many people, while a therapy program is tailored to a specific person or medical condition.
Animal-Assisted Therapy (AAT) "a goal directed intervention in which an animal that meets specific criteria is an integral part of the treatment process.
AAT is directed and/or delivered by a health/human service professional with specialized expertise, and within the scope of practice of his/her profession.
AAT is designed to promote improvement in human physical, social, emotional, and/or cognitive functioning.
AAT is provided in a variety of settings and may be group or individual in nature.
This process is documented and evaluated."
(From Standards of Practice for Animal-Assisted Activities and Therapy) For AAT, there are specified goals and objectives for the individual and progress is measured.
176 Examples of AAA and AAT: AAA:
Mental stimulation the presence of animals serves to brighten the atmosphere, increasing laughter and play and decreasing people's feelings of isolation.
The visit occurs as a large-group activity with some oversight provided by facility staff.
The volunteer group facilitator keeps an informal log about who was visited.
An individual brings her dog to a children's long-term care facility to "play" with the residents.
Although the staff is involved in the visits, there are no set treatment goals for the interactions.
Other than signing in and out, no formal records are kept.
AAT:
An occupational therapist is assisted by a dog and its handler in work to increase a person's range of motion in her shoulder.
The person has the specific goal of increasing her ability to reach toward one of her feet.
The dog understands specialized commands used during the sessions.
The progress made during each session is documented by the occupational therapist.
A mental health professional incorporates a rabbit in working with a small group of adults with developmental disabilities.
People in the group are working on improving their communication and social skills.
The professional documents the results of each session in each person's chart.
Goals of AAT Programs: Physical improve fine motor skills, wheelchair skills, and standing balance.
Mental health increase verbal interactions between group members, increase attention skills, develop leisure/recreation skills, increase self-esteem, reduce anxiety, and reduce loneliness.
Educational increase vocabulary, aid in long/short term memory, improve knowledge of concepts (size, colors, etc.).
Motivational improves willingness to participate in group activities, improve interactions with other residents and staff, increase exercise.
Potential Benefits of AAA/AAT Regardless of the exact nature of the program, AAA and AAT may provide a variety of benefits to residents in long-term care facilities including:
Outward focus animals can bring individuals out of themselves and help them focus on their environment.Rapport animals can open a channel of emotionally safe, non-threatening communication between clients and therapists or staff.Acceptance animals have a way of accepting in a non-judgmental and forgiving way.
Entertainment even people who don't like animals often find enjoyment watching the animals' antics and reactions
Socialization the presence of animals has been shown to encourage socialization between clients, between clients and staff, and between clients, staff and family or other visitors.
Mental stimulation the presence of animals serves to brighten the atmosphere, increasing laughter and play and decreasing people's feelings of isolation.
Physical contact or touch an animal to hold, hug and touch may provide safe, non-threatening and pleasant physical contact for residents who may find touch from another person unacceptable.
Physiological benefits holding an animal or watching aquarium fish may have a calming effect and dramatically reduce heart rate and blood pressure.
Potential Problems with AAA/AAT With all the positive aspects of AAA and AAT, there can be problems as well.
AAA and AAT may not be appropriate or beneficial in the following situations: When animals are a source of rivalry and competition in a group.
When someone becomes possessive and attempts to "adopt" a visiting animal for their own.
Injury may occur from inappropriate handling, animal selection, or lack of supervision.
People with brain injury, developmental disabilities, or senility may provoke an animal without realizing it.
People with unrealistic expectations may think an animal is rejecting them.
This may deepen feelings of low self-esteem.
Some residents may be allergic to animals and may suffer respiratory problems or other allergic manifestations.
Zoonotic diseases (diseases common to man and animals) may be transmitted, particularly if precautions are not taken.
People with open wounds or immunocompromised individuals may need special consideration.
Some people may be fearful of animals.
Some people may have cultural reservations against contact with animals.
AAA/AAT may also be inappropriate from the animal's perspective when: - injuries from rough handling or from other animals occur.
- basic animal welfare is not assured, to include veterinary care and access to water and exercise areas.
- the animal does not enjoy visiting.
While not all of the above problems can be anticipated (eliminated), many can be avoided by appropriate selection and screening programs for animals included in AAA/AAT programs.
Selection of Animals for AAA/AAT Selection of appropriate species While many species of animals have been used in AAA/AAT programs, there are some common sense considerations in selecting animals for use in long-term care facilities.
Dogs, cats and rabbits are familiar species to most people and are more likely to be widely accepted by residents.
In addition, the common diseases and parasites of these species are well understood by the veterinary medical community and the threat of zoonotic disease transmission can be more thoroughly addressed/limited.
More is known about the behavior of these species, so temperament/aggression testing is more reliable and behavior is more predictable.
178 Under most circumstances, exotic animal species (including but not limited to reptiles, amphibians, birds, non-human primates, and non-domestic mammals) are not appropriate for use in AAA/AAT.
In some settings, common domestic farm animals (horses, goats, sheep, etc.) may be employed but they are generally not well suited for indoor activities.
Temperament/Aggression testing Before any animal is employed in AAA/AAT programs in a long-term care facility, it should undergo temperament testing by an animal behaviorist, trainer or veterinarian experienced with AAA/AAT programs.
Such an evaluation may not only detect aggressive tendencies, but also can determine if the animal's level of socialization is appropriate for the intended setting.
An animal that is timid, aloof or uncomfortable in strange surroundings is not likely to be satisfactory for AAA/AAT programs.
At a minimum, an animal should be obedient, friendly, nonaggressive, and always behaviorally acceptable for the intended setting.
Health screening and certification An animal to be included in an AAA/AAT program should first undergo a health examination by a licensed veterinarian and should be issued a veterinary health certificate.
This health certificate examination should be repeated every six months as long as the animal continues in the program.
As part of this health certificate examination, the animal's routine immunizations should be verified as current and it should be determined to be free of endoparasites (roundworms, hookworms, whipworms, etc.) and ectoparasites (fleas, mites, tick, lice, etc.).
The animal should not have any current medical problems (diarrhea, dermatitis, lameness, chronic cough, oculo-nasal discharge, etc.) and teeth should be clean and gums healthy.
A health certification, however, is actually only valid at the exact moment it is performed by the veterinarian and disease conditions can occur at any time.
It is critical that the owner or handler retains primary responsibility of ensuring the animal is clean, groomed and in good health prior to visitation.
A table of potential zoonotic diseases associated with dogs, cats, and nonhuman primates can be found at Duncan, Susan L., RN APIC State-of-the-Art Report: The implications of service animals in health care settings, AJIC Am J Infect Control 2000;28:170-180.
As seen in the table, control measures for the zoonoses associated with dogs and cats are relatively simple.
This table also serves to demonstrate why nonhuman primates are not well-suited for AAA/AAT programs.
Service Animals and the American with Disabilities Act (ADA) of 1990 At this time, a consideration of service animals is appropriate.
While quite different from AAA/AAT programs, service animals in long-term care facilities will raise some of the same questions and concerns.
The ADA is a federal civil rights law that protects persons with disabilities from discrimination in the areas of employment, public services, public accommodations, services operated by private entities, and telecommunications.
Title III of the ADA mandates that persons with disabilities accompanied by service animals generally must be allowed access with their service animals into places of public accommodation, including restaurants, public transportation, schools, and health care facilities.
The ADA defines a service animal as any animal individually trained to do work or perform tasks for the benefit of a person with a disability.
Examples of service animals include guide dogs, hearing or signal dogs, seizure alert cats, mobility dogs, and emotional support cats.
Service animals should not be considered pets.
179 Because service animals meet disability-related needs, they could very well be found in various areas of the health care system, to include long-term care facilities, supporting employees, patients, visitors, volunteers or others.
There is no requirement for formal "certification" of service animals and certification is no guarantee of health status or predictability of behavior.
Service animals are not required to wear special equipment or tags and health care facilities should accept verbal reassurance that a person is disabled and that the animal is a service animal.
Furthermore, Title III of the ADA requires that health care facilities (and other places of public accommodation) modify their policies and practices to permit the use of a service animal by a person with a disability, unless doing so would create a fundamental alteration or a direct threat to the safety of others or to the facility.
Observation of the behavior of the service animal should help determine if the animal threatens the health or causes a fundamental alteration in the long-term care facility.
The risks associated with a service animal will be similar to those associated with AAA/AAT program animals, but without the assurances of health certification and temperament testing described herein.
As with AAA/AAT program animals, those risks will be affected by the animal's health and hygiene, its behavior, its contact with others, the ability of the handler to control its behavior and the use of simple preventive measures like handwashing.
Within the setting of the long-term care facility, it is important to distinguish between actual risks posed by a service animal and mere inconvenience.
The goal should be to make the goods and services of the facility available to all persons with service animals without isolating, segregating, or discriminating against those persons.
Reference: Duncan, Susan L., RN APIC State-of-the-Art Report: The implications of service animals in health care settings, AJIC Am J Infect Control 2000;28:170-180.
180
