October 2, 2003 MEMORANDUM TO: FROM: REGULATION: ACTION: Members, State Board of Social Services Maurice A. Jones, Commissioner 22 VAC 40-25-10 et seq., Auxiliary Grants Program: Levels of Care and Rate Setting Proposed Regulation
This action will amend the regulation 22 VAC 40-25-10 et seq., Auxiliary Grants Program: Levels of Care and Rate Setting.
The amended regulation updates the regulation and establishes guidelines regarding requirements to participate in the program, minimum services to be provided, reimburseable rates and reporting requirments.
The State Board approved a Notice of Intended Regulatory Action (NOIRA) for this action on April 16, 2003.
The NOIRA was published in The Virginia Register on June 16, 2003, and the public comment period ended on July 16, 2003.
I request that you approve the proposed regulatory package to amend 22 VAC 4025-10 et seq., Auxiliary Grants Program: Levels of Care and Rate Setting for publication in The Virginia Register subject to approval under the pr ovisions of Executive Order Number 21 (2002).
Additionally , I request that you approve the fiscal impact analysis for distribution to local boards of social services.
If you have questions concerning this requested regulatory action, please contact our Regulatory Coordinator, Richard Martin, by telephone at 804.692.1825 or by email at lrm2@dss.state.va.us. attachment
Form: TH-02 8/03
Virginia Regulatory Town Hall
townhall.state.va.us
Proposed Regulation Agency Background Document Agency name Virginia Administrative Code (VAC) citation Regulation title Action title Document preparation date State Board of Social Services 22 VAC 40-25- 10 et seq.
Auxiliary Gra nts Program Clarify Reimbursement Procedures October 22, 2003
This information is required for executive review (www.townhall.state.va.us/dpbpages/apaintro.htm#execreview) and the Virginia Registrar of Regulations (legis.state.va.us/codecomm/register/regindex.htm ), pursuant to the Virginia Administrative Process Act (www.townhall.state.va.us/dpbpages/dpb_apa.htm ), Executive Orders 21 (2002) and 58 (1999) (www.governor.state.va.us/Press_Policy/Executive_Orders/EOHome.html), and the Virginia Register Form, Style and Procedure Manual (http://legis.state.va.us/codecomm/register/download/styl8_95.rtf).
Brief summary In a short paragraph, please summarize all substantive changes that are being proposed in this regulatory action.
This regula tory action updates terminology and establishes guidelines and expectations relative to (1) the requirements to participate in the Auxiliary Grant s program, (2) minimum services to be provided, and (3) establishment of reimbursable rates and reporting requirements.
Changes include: only the recipient or representative is authorized to cash or deposit the Auxiliary Grant payment; providers must submit an annual audit report instead of the current annual cost report; and providers are prohibited from charging additional fees to recipients.
The term "adult care residence" is replaced with "adult living facility."
Town Hall Agency Background Document
Form: TH-02
Basis Please identify the state and/or federal source of legal authority to promulgate this proposed regulation, including (1) the most relevant law and/or regulation, including Code of Virginia citation and General Assembly bill and chapter numbers, if applicable, and (2) promulgating entity, i.e., the agency, board, or person.
Describe the legal authority and the extent to which the authority is mandatory or discretionary.
Federal authority is found in Title XX of the Social Security Act, Section 416.2001.
The State statute providing the mandate for this regulation is found in the Code of Virginia, § 63.2- 217 and § 63.2- 800.
Purpose Please explain the need for the new or amended regulation by (1) detailing the specific reasons why this regulatory action is essential to protect the health, safety, or welfare of citizens, and (2) discussing the goals of the proposal and the problems the proposal is intended to solve.
The amendment to this regulation is necessary to bring it into compliance with the Code of Virginia and to provide guidelines to protect the health, safety, or welfare of vulnerable adults who meet the criteria for the Auxiliary Grants program.
Substance Please briefly identify and explain the new substantive provisions, the substantive changes to existing sections, or both where appropriate.
(More detail about these changes is requested in the "Detail of changes" section.)
The major changes include la nguage changes to bring the regulation into compliance with current Code of Virginia, updating of terminology to provide consistency with other Department regulations , and the addition of requirements for an annual audit report and a provider agreement for assisted living facilities.
In addition, Code of Virginia references are updated in response to October 2002's recodification of the Social Services section of the Code where § 63.1 was repealed and replaced with § 63.2.
Issues Please identify the issues associated with the proposed regulatory action, including: 1) the primary advantages and disadvantages to the public, such as individual private citizens or businesses, of implementing the new or amended provisions; 2) the primary advantages and disadvantages to the agency or the Commonwealth; and 3) other pertinent matters of interest to the regulated community, government officials, and the public.
If the regulatory action poses no disadvantages to the public or the Commonwealth, please so indicate.
2
Town Hall Agency Background Document
Form: TH-02
The advantage to making these changes is to bring the regulation into compliance with previously promulgated changes.
This helps to ensure that Auxiliary Grants services are provided in a consistent manner across the state in the 120 local departments of social services.
Economic impact
Projected cost to the state to implement and enforce the proposed regulation, including (a) fund source / fund detail, and (b) a delineation of one -time versus on-going expenditures Projected cost of the regulation on localities Description of the individuals, businesses or , other entities likely to be affected by the regulation
Agency's best estimate of the number of su ch entities that will be affected
Projected cost of the regulation for affected individuals, businesses, or other entities
In FY 03, approximately $23.5 million was spent by the local departments of social services (LDSS) for Auxiliary Grants.
This includes 80 percent funding from the State General Fund and 20 pe rcent funding from the LDSS.
The LDSS match was approximately $4.7 million.
No additional costs are projected.
Persons aged 65 and over or adults aged 18 and over who have a disability and are on SSI or would be on SSI except for excess income are protected by this regulation.
Assisted living facilities and adult foster care providers receive funds from Auxiliary Grant recipients.
As of July 1, 2003, there are 626 licensed assisted living facilities with 33,528 beds.
In fiscal year 2003, approximately 6,572 recipients per month received Auxiliary Grant funds.
In addition, approximately 69 recipients resided in 61 adult foster care homes.
Providers that do not currently have an annual audit will have an additional expenditure for cost of the audit.
Based on a recent survey by the Department , this will range in cost from $1,000 to $1,500.
Alternatives Please describe any viable alternatives to the proposal considered and the rationale used by the agency to select the least burdensome or intrusive alternative that meets the essential purpose of the action.
This regulation was developed with the assistance of representatives of DSS Divisions of Finance and Benefit Programs , DSS Family Services Specialists, and other staff that have a working knowledge and expertise in Auxiliary Grants administration.
Adult Services' philosophy is that the least restrictive guidelines in administering the Auxiliary Grant s program is the most appropriate for the recipients.
No other alternatives have been considered.
3
Town Hall Agency Background Document
Form: TH-02
Public comment Please summarize all comments received during public comment period following the publication of the NOIRA, and provide the agency response.
No public comments were received during the 30- day period following t he publication of the NOIRA.
Family impact Please assess the impact of the proposed regulatory action on the institution of the family and family stability.
Appropriate services are provided to the recipients who meet the program criteria to ensure that they are able to maintain a standard of living that meets a basic level of need.
This regulation encourages self- sufficiency, self- pride, and the assumption of responsibility for vulnerable adults.
Detail of changes Please detail all changes that are being proposed and the consequences of the proposed changes.
Detail all new provisions and/or all changes to existing sections.
If the proposed regulation is intended to replace an emergency regulation, please list separately (1) all changes between the pre- emergency regulation and the proposed regulation, and (2) only changes made since the publication of the emergency regulation.
Current section number
Proposed new section number, if applicable
Current requirement
Proposed change and rationale
22 VAC 40- 25- 10
22 VAC 40- 25- 10 22 VAC 40- 25- 10
Added the term and definition for "adult foster care " to comply with other policy and regulatory changes.
Nationally, "adult foster care" is the accepted term for this type of care.
The term "nonoperating" Changed the term "nonoperating" to is used.
"other, " with regard to assisted living facilities, to bring consistency to documents.
The term "personal representative" and the definition are added.
The added definitio n is consistent with other
4
Town Hall Agency Background Document
Form: TH-02 Department policies and regulations.
The term "adult care residence" is deleted and replaced with "assisted living facility."
The definition is expanded for consistency wit h the definition in the Division of Licensing Programs regulation.
References to the Code of Virginia, § 63.1, are updated with the recodified Code of Virginia, § 63.2.
The change complies with previous Code changes.
The term "cost report" is deleted and "annual audit report" is added.
The change is to bring the regulation into compliance with the Code of Virginia, § 63.2- 800 (C).
The term "approved rate" is deleted and "established rate" is added.
The change is to bring the regulation into compliance with current practice.
Terms and definitions for "provider" and "provider agreement" are added to bring the regulation into compliance with other State a gency regulations.
Updated terminology to provide consistency with definitions.
Added prohibit ion of providers from charging the recipients additional costs or fees.
This change has been implied in the current regulation and brings the regulation into compliance with other Department policies and current practice.
Added a reference from the Division of Licensing Programs regulation (22 VAC 40- 71- 10) and expanded "care of funds" to prohibit providers from depositing a recipient's Auxiliary Grant check into the provider's bank account.
By federal law, only the person to whom a check is issued or his representative may cash or deposit the check.
22 VAC 40- 10
The term "adult care residence" is used.
Throughout
22 VAC 40- 10
The term "cost report" is used.
22 VAC 40- 10 22 VAC 40- 10 22 VAC 40- 25- 20
The term "approved rate" is used.
Outdated terminology is used.
22 VAC 40- 25- 30
5
Town Hall Agency Background Document
Form: TH-02 Expanded on the requirements that 1) the personal needs allowance is for the recipient's personal items, 2) the funds shall not be co- mingled with the facility's funds, and 3) that the provider is prohibited from charging the recipient an additional cost for any services.
Added the requirement for the provider to complete and submit a provider agreement to the Division of Licensing Programs at the time of application to be a licensed assisted living facility.
Updated the language to be consistent with d efinitions.
Added the term "adult foster care.
" Updated the regulation to include the requirement to submit an "annual audit report " and Division of Finance requirements.
Added wording that the Auxiliary Grant s payment is made payable to the recipient , and the recipient is obligated to pay the provider.
Updated the regulation with the appropriate procedures to follow when a facility is sold, closes, or moves and also if the recipient dies.
All financ ial information reported by an assisted living facility on the annual audit report shall be reconcilable to the provider 's general ledger or similar records.
This change is to bring the regulation into compliance with Federal and state regulations.
Additional guidance on records availability, audit, and retention is added.
22 VAC 40- 25- 40
22 VAC 4025- 45
22 VAC 40- 25- 50
22 VAC 40- 25- 60
22 VAC 40- 25- 70
6
Proposed Regulation Fiscal Analysis Pursuant to § 63.2-217 Agency Name: VAC Chapter Number:
State Board of Social Services
22 VAC 40- 25 Regulation Title: Auxiliary Grants Program Action Title: Clarify Reimbursement Procedures Date:
October 22, 2003
Summary This regula tory action updates terminology and establishes guidelines and expectations relative to (1) the requirements to participate in the Auxiliary Grant s program, (2) minimum services to be provided, and (3) establishment of reimbursable rates and reporting requirements.
Changes include: only the recipient or representative is authorized to cash or deposit the Auxiliary Grant payment; providers must submit an annual audit report instead of the current annual cost report; and providers are prohibited from charging additional fees to recipients.
The term "adult care residence" is replaced with "adult living facility."
Projected Costs to Local Boards of Social Services In FY 03, approximately $23.5 million was spent by the 120 local departments of social services (LDSS) for Auxiliary Grants.
This includes 80 percent of funding from the General Fund and 20 percent funding from the LDSS.
The LDSS match was approximately $4.7 million.
In FY 04 it is projected that these costs will not change.
Projected Savings to Local Board of Social Services There are no projected savings to local boards of social services by amending this regulation.
Source of Funds for Local Boards to Implement or Comply with Regulation Funds for the Auxiliary Grants program are allocated by the State with local- only and local match funds added.
Fiscal Impact
1
There is no additional fiscal impact to local departments of social services as a result of this amended language.
Approval Pursuant to § 63.2- 217 of the Code of Virginia, this fiscal analysis was approved by the State Board of Social Services on October 22, 2003.
__________________________________ Chairman State Board of Social Services
2
Date/Time Filed with Registrar of Regulations VA.R.
Document Number:
R____ - _______
Date of Publication in Virginia Register:
Commonwealth of Virginia
Transmittal Sheet: PROPOSED ACTION ON REGULATIONS Regulatory Coordinator: Richard Martin E- mail: lrm2@email1.dss.state.va.us Telephone: (804) 692- 1825 Promulgating Agency: State Board of Social Services Regulatory Action Title (if applicable): Clarify Reimburseme nt Procedures VAC No. (e.g., 4 VAC 20-490)
Name of Chapter
(e.g., Regulations Pertaining to Sharks)
§§ affected: Amended: 10- 80 Added: 45 Repealed:
22 VAC 40- 25
Auxiliary Grants Program
Statutory Authority: Sections 63.2- 217 and 63.2- 800 of the Code of Virginia.
Federal authority is found in Title XX of the Social Security Act, Section 416.2001.
Public Hearing Dates and Times, if any: N/A Public co mments may be submitted until: Agency Contact for Further Information: Name: Richard Pyle Title: Auxiliary Grants Family Services Specialist Address: Va.
Dept. of Social Services, 730 E. Broad St., 2nd Floor, Richmond, VA 23219 Telephone: (804) 692- 1160 Fax: (804 ) 786- 8372 Toll Free: 1E- mail: rwp900@dss.state.va.us NOIRA appeared in Virginia Register in: Vol. 19 Issue 20 [or] none required Emergency action appeared in Virginia Register in: Vol.
Issue [or] none required Is this a REPROPOSED action? Yes No Proposed action appeared in Virginia Register in: Vol.
Forms: Yes No Issue No
Documents Incorporated By Reference: Yes
Transmittal By Authorized Officer: This regulatory action is being adopted in accordance with the Administrative Process Act.
[or] This regulatory action is exempt from the Ad ministrative Process Act pursuant to § of the Code of Virginia (letter from legal counsel attached).
Name of Authorized Officer: Richard Martin, Regulatory Coordinator Signature of Authorized Officer: Telephone: (804) 692- 1825 E-Mail: lrm2@email1.dss.state.va.us Date Submitted: Revised 7/02 Virginia Code Commission - Registrar of Regulations - 910 Capitol St., 2nd Fl. - Richmond, VA 23219
Form RR03
Date/Time Filed with Registrar of Regulations VA.R.
Document Number:
R____ - _______
Date of Publication in Virginia Register:
Commonwealth of Virginia
NOTICE OF PUBLIC COMMENT PERIOD The promulgating agency identified below is accepting public comments on the following rulemaking action pursuant to § 2.2- 4007 of the Code of Virginia.
Regulatory Coordinator: Richard Martin Telephone: (804) 692- 1825 E- mail: lrm2@email1.dss.state.va.us Promulgating Agency: State Board of Social Services Chapters affected: VAC No.: 22 VAC 40- 25 Chapter Title: Auxiliary Grants Program Agency intends to: adopt new regulations amend e xisting regulations repeal existing regulations
Regulatory Action Title (if applicable): Clarify Reimbursement Procedures Date and time of public hearing(s): N/A Location of public hearing: [OR] The agency does not intend to hold a public hearing on the proposed action.
The purpose of the proposed action is to update the regulation and establish guidelines regarding requirements to participate in the Auxiliary Grants program, minimum services to be provided, reimburseable rates and reporting requirements.
Statutory Authority: Sections 63.2- 217 and 63.2- 800 of the Code of Virginia.
Title XX of the Social Security Act, Section 416.2001.
Public comments may be submitted until insert comment deadline to insert contact person, title, and address for receiving comments (leave blank if same as contact person identified below).
Agency Contact for Further Information: Name: Richard Pyle Title: Auxiliary Grant Family Services Specialist Address: Va.
Dept. of Social Services, 730 E. Broad St., 2nd Fl., Richmond, VA 23219 Telephone: (804) 692- 1160 Fax: (804 ) 786- 8372 Toll Free: 1E- mail: rwp900@dss.state.va.us
Revised 3/02
Virginia Code Commission - Registrar of Regulations - 910 Capitol St., 2nd Fl. - Richmond, VA 23219
Form RR02
STATE BOARD OF SOCIAL SERVICES
Page 1 of 16
AUXILIARY GRANTS PROGRAM: LEVELS OF CARE AND RATE SETTING CHAPTER 25.
AUXILIARY GRANTS PROGRAM: LEVELS OF CARE AND RATE SETTING.
Part I. Definitions .
22 VAC 40-25-10.
Definitions.
The following words and terms, when used in this chapter, shall have the following meanings unless the context clearly indicates otherwise: "Adult foster care (AFC)" means room and board, supervision, and special services to an adult who has a physical or mental condition.
Adult foster care may be provided by a single provider for up to three adults.
"Adult care residence" means , any place, establishment, or institution, public or private, operated or maintained for the maintenance or care of four or more adults who are aged, infirm, or disabled and who are cared for in a primarily residential setting, except (i) a facility or porti on of a facility licensed by the State Board of Health or the Department of Mental Health, Mental Retardation and Substance Abuse Services, but including any portion of such facility not so licensed; , and (ii) the home or residence of an individual who cares for or maintains only persons related to him by blood or marriage;, and (iii) a facility or any portion of a facility serving infirm or disabled persons between the ages of 18 and 21, or 22 if enrolled in an educational program for the handicapped pursuant to §22.1 -214 of the Code of Virginia, when such facility is licensed by the Virginia Department of Social Services as a child -caring institution under Chapter 10 (§63.1 -195 et seq.) of Title 63.1 of the Code of Virginia, but including any
STATE BOARD OF SOCIAL SERVICES
Page 2 of 16
AUXILIARY GRANTS PROGRAM: LEVELS OF CARE AND RATE SETTING portion of the facility not so licensed.
Included in this definition are any two or more places, establishments, or institutions owned or operated by a single entity and providing maintenance or care to a combined total of four or more aged, infirm or disabled adults.
"Applicant" means an adult currently residing or planning to reside in an adult care residence assisted living facility or in adult foster care who has applied for financial assistance under the Auxiliary Grants Program.
"Approved rate" means a rate established by the Department of Social Services' Division of Financial Management for use by eligibility workers in local departments in determining Auxiliary Grants Program payments for eligible recipients.
"Assisted living" means a level of service provided by an adult care residence assisted living facility for adults who may have physical or mental impairments and require at least moderate assistance with the activities of daily living.
Included in this level of service are individuals who are dependent in behavior pattern (i.e., abusive, aggressive, disruptive) as documented on the uniform assessment instrument.
"Assisted living facility (ALF)" means any congregate residential setting that provides or coordinates personal and health care services, 24 - hour supervision, and assistance (scheduled and unscheduled) for the maintenance or care of four or more adults who are aged, infirm or disabled and who are cared for in a primarily residential setting, except (i) a facility or portion of a facility licensed by the State Board of Health or the Department of Mental Health, Mental Retardation and Substance Abuse Services, but including any portion of such facility not so licensed; (ii) the home or residence of an
STATE BOARD OF SOCIAL SERVICES
Page 3 of 16
AUXILIARY GRANTS PROGRAM: LEVELS OF CARE AND RATE SETTING individual who cares for or maintains only persons related to him by blood or marriage; (iii) a facility or portion of a facility serving infirm or disabled persons between the ages of 18 and 21, or 22 if enrolled in an educational program for the handicapped pursuant to § 22.1 -214, when such facility is licensed by the Department as a children's residential facility under Chapter 17 (§ 63.2 -1700 et seq.) of this title, but including any portion of the facility not so licensed; and (iv) any housing project for persons 62 years of age or older or the disabled that provides no more than basic coordination of care services and is funded by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development, by the U.S. Department of Agriculture, or by the Virginia Housing Development Authority.
Included in this definition are any two or more places, establishments or institutions owned or operated by a single entity and providing maintenance or care to a combined total of four or more aged, infirm or disabled adults.
Maintenance or care means the protection, general supervision and oversight of the physical and mental well-being of an aged, infirm o r disabled individual.
"Audit report" is an annual report prepared by the assisted living facility's private auditor.
The auditor shall determine that the financial statements of the auditee are presented fairly and in conformity with generally accepte d accounting principles.
"Auxiliary Grants Program" means a state and locally funded assistance program to supplement income of a Supplemental Security Income (SSI) recipient or adult who
STATE BOARD OF SOCIAL SERVICES
Page 4 of 16
AUXILIARY GRANTS PROGRAM: LEVELS OF CARE AND RATE SETTING would be eligible for SSI except for excess income, who resides i n an adult care residence assisted living facility or in adult foster care with an approved rate.
"Case manager" means an employee of a public human services agency having a contract with the Department of Medical Assistance Services to provide case management services and who is qualified to perform case management activities.
"Cost report" means Adult Care Residences Cost Report.
"Department" or "DSS" means the Virginia Department of Social Services.
"Established rate" means the lesser of the calculated rate or the maximum rate as set forth in the Appropriations Act.
"Minimum rate" means the rate used to determine eligible auxiliary grant Auxiliary Grants recipients reimbursement prior to the establishment of the residence's provider's approved established rate.
"Newly licensed adult care residence assisted living facility" means a residence facility that has been licensed for 12 months or less and is submitting a cost report an audit report for the first time for the establishment of a rate in excess of the minimum rate.
"Nonoperating Other operating expense" means expenses incurred by the residence provider for activities other than those that are not directly related to the care of residents.
"Nonoperating Other operating revenue" means income earned by the residence provider for activities other than those which are not directly related to the care of residents.
STATE BOARD OF SOCIAL SERVICES
Page 5 of 16
AUXILIARY GRANTS PROGRAM: LEVELS OF CARE AND RATE SETTING "Operating costs" means the allowable expenses incurred by an adult care residence assisted living facility or adult foste r care provider for activities directly related to the care of residents.
"Personal needs allowance" means an amount of money reserved for meeting the adult's minimal personal needs when computing the amount of the auxiliary grant Auxiliary Grants.
"Personal representative" means the person representing or standing in the place of the recipient for the conduct of his affairs.
This may include a guardian, conservator, attorney-in-fact under durable power of attorney, next of kin, descendent, trustee, or other person expressly named by the recipient as his agent.
"Provider" means an assisted living facility that is licensed by the Department of Social Services or an adult foster care provider that is approved by a local department of social services.
"Provider agreement" means a document that the assisted living facility must complete and submit to the Department when requesting to be licensed or approved for the Auxiliary Grants Program.
This document lists the requirements for program participation.
"Qualified assessor" means an entity contracting with the Department of Medical Assistance Services (DMAS) to perform nursing facility preadmission screening or to complete the uniform assessment instrument for a home and community-based waiver program including an independent physician contracting with DMAS to complete the uniform assessment instrument for residents of the adult care residence, or any hospital
STATE BOARD OF SOCIAL SERVICES
Page 6 of 16
AUXILIARY GRANTS PROGRAM: LEVELS OF CARE AND RATE SETTING which has contracted with DMAS to perform nursing facility preadmission screening.
individual who is authorized to perform an assessment, reassessment, or change in level of care for an applicant to or resident of an assisted living facility.
"Rate" means approved rate.
"Recipient" means an adult approved to receive financial assistance under the Auxiliary Grants Program when residing in a adult care residence licensed assisted living facility or by an approved adult foster care provider.
"Residence" means an adult care residence.
"Residential living" means a level of service provided by an adult care residence assisted living facility for adults who may have physical or mental impairments and require only minimal assistance with the activities of daily living.
Included in this level of service are individuals who are dependent in medication admini stration as documented on the uniform assessment instrument .
This definition includes independent living facilities that voluntarily become licensed.
"Uniform assessment instrument" means the department-designated assessment form.
It is used to record a ssessment information for determining the level of service that is needed.
"Virginia Department of Medical Assistance Services (DMAS)" means the single state agency designated to administer the Medical Assistance Program in Virginia.
Part II.
Assessments .
STATE BOARD OF SOCIAL SERVICES
Page 7 of 16
AUXILIARY GRANTS PROGRAM: LEVELS OF CARE AND RATE SETTING 22VAC40-25-20.
Assessment.
A.
In order to receive payment from the Auxiliary Grants Program for care in an adult care residence assisted living facility or in adult foster care, applicants shall have been assessed by a case manager or other qualified assessor using the uniform assessment instrument and determined to need residential living care or or assisted living care or adult foster care.
B.
In order to continue receiving payment from the Auxiliary Grants Program, recipients residing in adult care assisted living facilities on February 1, 1996, shall have been assessed by a case manager or other qualified assessor no later than 12 months from February 1, 1996, and determined to need residential care or assisted living care in an adult care residence assisted living facility or an adult foster care home.
Provisions shall be made by the department in Auxiliary Grants Program policy for grandfathering in those recipients who do not meet the criteria for residential care.
C. B.
As a condition of eligibility for the Auxiliary Grants Program, a uniform assessment instrument shall be completed on a recipient prior to admission, at least once every 12 months annually, and whenever there is a significant change in the individual's level of care, and a determination is made that the individual needs residential or assisted living care in an adult care residence assisted living facility or adult foster care.
D. C.
The assisted living facility or adult foster care provider are prohibited from charging a security deposit or any other form of compensation for providing a room and services to the recipient.
The collection or receipt of money, gift, donation or other consideration from or on behalf of a recipient for any services provided is prohibited.
STATE BOARD OF SOCIAL SERVICES
Page 8 of 16
AUXILIARY GRANTS PROGRAM: LEVELS OF CARE AND RATE SETTING
Part III.
Levels of Care.
22 VAC 40-25-30.
Basic services.
The rate established by the Department for an adult care residence assisted living facility or adult foster care providing residential living care or assisted living care under the Auxiliary Grants Program s hall cover the following services: 1.
Room and board.
a.
Provision of a furnished room; b. Housekeeping services based on the needs of the recipient; c. Meals and snacks required by licensing regulations , including extra portions of food at mealtime and special diets; and d. Clean bed linens and towels as needed by the recipient and at least once a week.
2.
Maintenance and care. a.
Minimal assistance with personal hygiene including bathing, dressing, oral hygiene, hair grooming and shampooing, care of clothing, shaving, care of toenails and fingernails, arranging for haircuts as needed, and care of needs associated with menstruation or occasional bladder or bowel incontinence; b. Medication administration as required by licensing regulations including insulin injections;
STATE BOARD OF SOCIAL SERVICES
Page 9 of 16
AUXILIARY GRANTS PROGRAM: LEVELS OF CARE AND RATE SETTING c. Provision of generic personal toiletries including soap and toilet paper; d. Minimal assistance with the following: (1) Care of personal possessions; (2) Care of funds if requested by the recipient and residence provider policy allows this practice, excluding the deposit of the recipient's Auxiliary G rants payment into the provider's financial account.
The recipient or his personal representative is responsible for cashing or depositing the recipient's check; (3) Use of the tele phone (not to include long -distance calls ) ; (4) Arranging transportation; (5) Obtaining necessary personal items and clothing; (6) Making and keeping appointments; (7) Correspondence Assisting with correspondence; e. Securing health care and transportation when needed for medical treatment; f. Providing appropriate social and recreational activities as required by licensing regulations ; and g. General supervision for safety.
22 VAC 40-25-40.
Personal needs allowance.
A.
The personal needs allowanc e is included in the monthly Auxiliary Grants payment and must be used by the Auxiliary Grants recipient for personal items.
These funds shall not be co -mingled with the funds of the assisted living facility or adult foster care provider.
The personal ne eds allowance for the recipient shall not be charged by the
STATE BOARD OF SOCIAL SERVICES
Page 10 of 16
AUXILIARY GRANTS PROGRAM: LEVELS OF CARE AND RATE SETTING residence assisted living facility or adult foster care provider for any item or service not requested by the resident recipient.
The residence assisted living facility or adult foster care provider shall not require a resident an Auxiliary Grants recipient or his personal representative to request any item or service as a condition of admission or continued stay.
The residence assisted living facility or adult foster care provider must inform the resident recipient or his personal representative requesting an item or service for which a charge will be made that there will be a charge for the item or service and what the charge will be. of a charge for any requested item or service and the amount o f the charge.
The personal needs allowance is expected to cover the cost of the following categories of items and services: 1.
Clothing; 2.
Personal toiletries not included in those to be provided by the adult care residence assisted living facility or a dult foster care provider or if the recipient requests a specific type or brand of toiletries; 3.
Personal comfort items including tobacco products, sodas, and snacks beyond those required by licensing regulations ; 4.
Barber and beauty shop Hair salon services; 5.
Over -the -counter medication, medical co-payments and deductibles, insurance premiums; 6.
Other needs such as postage stamps, dry cleaning, laundry, direct bank charges, personal transportation, and long -distance telephone calls; 7.
Personal telephone, television, or radio;
STATE BOARD OF SOCIAL SERVICES
Page 11 of 16
AUXILIARY GRANTS PROGRAM: LEVELS OF CARE AND RATE SETTING 8.
Social events and entertainment offered outside the scope of the activities program ; and 9.
Other items agreed upon by both parties except those listed in subsection B of this regulation section.
B.
The perso nal needs allowance shall not be encumbered by the following: 1.
Recreational activities required by licensing regulations (including any transportation costs of those activities); 2.
Administration of accounts (bookkeeping, account statements); 3.
Debts owed the residence assisted living facility or adult foster care provider for basic services as outlined by regulations ; or 4.
Charges for laundry by the adult care residence which exceed Assisted living facility or adult foster care provider laundry cha rges in excess of $10 per month.
Part IV .
Rate Setting .
22 VAC 40-25-45 Provider agreement.
A. As a condition of participati on in the Auxiliary Grants Program, the assisted living facility provider is required to complete and submit to the Department's Division of Licensing Programs a signed provider agreement.
The agreement is to be sent in at the time of application to be a licensed assisted living facility.
STATE BOARD OF SOCIAL SERVICES
Page 12 of 16
AUXILIARY GRANTS PROGRAM: LEVELS OF CARE AND RATE SETTING B.
As a condition of participati on in the Auxiliary Grants Program, the adult foster care provider is required to be approved by a local department of social services and comply with the requirements set forth in 22 VAC 40-770-10 et seq.
22VAC40-25-50.
Establishment of rate.
A. Submission of a cost report an audit report to the Department's Division of Financial Management, Bureau of Cost Accounting Department is required to establish a rate in excess of the minimum rate . establish the Auxiliary Grants rate for assisted living facilities.
B.
The For assisted living facilities, t he rate shall be calculated based on operating cost data reported on the cost audit report .
Total operating costs shall be reduced by any nonoperating revenue, less nonoperating expenses.
If nonoperating expenses exceed nonoperating revenue, no adjustment is made.
These costs are then adjusted in accordance with department policy to recognize operation changes, growth, and inflation.
Based on the greater of actual filled bed days or 85% of bed capacity, a monthly rate per resident shall be calculated.
C.
The established rate shall be the lesser of the calculated rate or the maximum authorized established monthly Auxiliary Grants rate established authorized by state regulations as set forth in the Appropriations Act.
D. Rates The rate shall be valid for 12 months unless the residence assisted living facility is required to submit a new cost audit report as a result of (i) significant operational changes as defined by department policy, or (ii) the residence assisted
STATE BOARD OF SOCIAL SERVICES
Page 13 of 16
AUXILIARY GRANTS PROGRAM: LEVELS OF CARE AND RATE SETTING living facility changes ownership, or (iii) the residence assisted living facility changes location.
E. Newly licensed adult care residences assisted living facilities shall operate for a minimum of 90 days prior to the submission of a n cost audit report for the purpose of establishing an Auxiliary Grants rate.
During the first 90 days of operation, the adult care residence's assisted living facility's rate shall be the authorized minimum rate.
When cost audit reports are submitted no later than 60 days after the end of the first 90 days of operation, 150 days after licensure, the effective date of the rate shall be made retroactive to the residence's facility's date of licensure.
When cost reports are submitted more than 150 days after licensure, the effective date of the rate shall be no later than the first day of the second month following receipt of the cost report by the department's Division of Financial Management.
Until an audit report is received by the Department, the recipient will continue to receive the authorized minimum Auxiliary Grants rate.
F.
The Auxiliary Grants rate for recipients authorized to reside in adult foster care is the authorized maximum rate, plus the personal needs allowance minus the recipient's countable income.
The effective date is the date of the individual's approval by the local department of social services for an Auxiliary Grant .
G. Adult care residences Assisted living facilities that have been in licensed operation in excess of 12 months shall establish an initial approved rate by submitting a cost report for the preceding calendar year.
s ubmit an annual audit report for the preceding calendar year.
The cost audit report shall be reviewed by the department's Division of
STATE BOARD OF SOCIAL SERVICES
Page 14 of 16
AUXILIARY GRANTS PROGRAM: LEVELS OF CARE AND RATE SETTING Financial Management and the approved rate established.
Department to validate and set an approved A uxiliary Grants rate for recipients that reside in the facility.
The approved rate shall be the lesser of the calculated rate , as documented on the annual audit report, or the maximum authorized established rate established by state regulations as set forth in the Appropriations Act.
The approved rate shall become effective no later than the first day of the second month following the month the cost report is received by the department's Division of Financial Management.
The approved rate will be retroactive to the first month of the calendar year.
If a provider had a previously established rate , but fails to submit an annual audit report for a new calendar year, the rate for the recipients who reside in the facility shall become the minimum Auxiliary G rants rate as set forth by the General Assembly.
G. After the initial approved rate is established, cost reports shall be submitted annually to the department's Division of Financial Management.
If a provider that has previously established a rate fails to submit a cost report, the rate for residential living care shall become the minimum rate at the end of the twelfth month from the date the last rate was set.
22VAC40-25-60.
Reimbursement.
A.
Any moneys in excess of the provider's established rate contributed toward the cost of care pending public pay eligibility determination shall be reimbursed to the recipient or contributing party by the adult care residence assisted living facility or adult foster care provider once eligibility fo r public pay is established and that payment received.
STATE BOARD OF SOCIAL SERVICES
Page 15 of 16
AUXILIARY GRANTS PROGRAM: LEVELS OF CARE AND RATE SETTING The Auxiliary Grants payment is made payable to the recipient, who will then reimburse the provider for care .
If the recipient is not capable of managing his finances, his personal representative is responsible for reimbursing the provider.
B.
In the event an assisted living facility is closed or sold, the facility shall provide verification that all recipient funds, including Auxiliary Grants funds, have been transferred and shall obtain a signed receipt from the new owner or new facility.
In the event of a recipient's death or discharge, the provider shall give to the resident's personal representative a final accounting of the recipient's funds within 30 calendar days of the event.
All Auxiliary Grants funds received after the death or discharge date shall be returned to the Department as soon as practicable.
Providers who do not comply with the requirements of this regulation may be subject to adverse action.
22VAC40-25-70.
Audits.
A.
All fi nancial information reported by an adult care residence assisted living facility on the cost report annual audit report shall be reconcilable to the residence's assisted living facility's general ledger system or similar records.
All cost reports are subje ct to audit by the Department of Social Services.
Financial information that is not reconcilable to the
residence's provider's general ledger or similar records could result in retroactive adjustment of the rate and establishment of a liability to the provider.
Records shall be retained for three years after the end of the reporting period or until audited by the Department, whichever is first.
STATE BOARD OF SOCIAL SERVICES
Page 16 of 16
AUXILIARY GRANTS PROGRAM: LEVELS OF CARE AND RATE SETTING B.
All records maintained by an adult foster care provider, as required by 22 VAC 40770-10 et seq., shall be made available to the Department or the approving local department of social services upon request.
All records are subject to audit by the Department.
Financial information that is not reconcilable to the provi der's records
could result in retroactive adjustment of the rate and establishment of a liability to the provider.
Records shall be retained for three years after the end of the reporting period or until audited by the Department , whichever is first.
