F ROM SENATE MAJORITY L EADER D AVID NELSON...
CAPITOL U May 25, 2001
PDATE TO
OREGON SENATE SENDS WOMEN'S PAY EQUITY BILL
GOVERNOR
Quote of the Week Senators passed a bill this week empowering citizens to protect themselves and their families from cougars and bears posing a threat to safety.
Senator Ken Messerle (R-Coos Bay) carried the bill, stating: "It is time we provide clear guidance on the kind of actions citizens may take when these dangerous animals exhibit menacing behavior, while ensuring that both humans and animals are protected."
"Pay equity affects not only women, but also our families and communities."
This week the Senate voted unanimously to pass House Bill 3376, which creates the Task Force on Promotional and Career Opportunities for Women in Oregon.
The task force will examine the number and type of women-owned businesses, the accessibility of childcare options, the impacts of domestic violence in the workplace and the business resources available to women in our state.
The legislation is part of the Republican-backed "Oregon Women's Initiative," a package of legislation advocating for women, children and families.
At the heart of the HB 3376 is the issue of pay equity.
Pay equity is recognized as a means of eliminating sex and race discrimination in the wage-setting system.
Twenty-four states have conducted studies to determine if sex is a wage determinant.
In the last 2-3 years, bills relating to pay equity have been introduced in more then 25 legislatures.
There are currently two primary federal laws that protect workers against wage discrimination.
The Equal Pay Act of 1963 requires equal pay for equal work performed by men and women.
The other law pertaining to wage discrimination is Title VII of the Civil Rights Act of 1964, which prohibits wage discrimination on the basis of race, color, sex, religion, or national origin.
Twenty-four states, including Washington D.C, have conducted studies to determine if sex was a wage determinant.
In the last 2-3 years, bills relating to pay equity have been introduced in more then 25 legislatures.
"In today's economy, most families like mine have two wage earners, and if one of them is paid too little, the whole family suffers," said Senator Atkinson.
"Pay equity ensures that every worker in the family is earning what they should based on the requirements of their job.
Pay equity affects not only women, but also our families and communities."
The Task Force on Promotional and Career Opportunities for Women in Oregon would be commissioned to investigate statistics relative to our state, including the earnings of Oregon women broken down by occupation, education, length of employment, age, race and ethnicity.
Proponents say the task force will allow Oregon to join other states that are taking a closer look at the extent of wage inequities in their area.
The bill will now go to Governor Kitzhaber's desk for his signature.
Executive Appointments Rita Thomas of Turner is being considered for the Employment Relations Board.
Please contact our office if you have input to be considered during Senate confirmation.
REMINDER: All Capitol offices will be closed on Monday for Memorial Day.
The National Committee on Pay Equity recently released the following statistics: Senate Majority Office 900 Court St. NE, S-223 Salem, Oregon 97301 Phone: 503-986-1950 Fax: 503-986-1958 senate.republican@state.or.us
· · · ·
Women make up 46% of the U.S. Workforce.
1999 Median Annual Earnings of year-round, full time workers show men earning $36,476 and women earning $26,324.
Women currently earn 76.4 cents to every dollar a man earns.
Among all businesses launched since 1990, women formed 18.5%.
