Reducing the Burden of Ovarian Cancer WHAT IS THE PUBLIC HEALTH PROBLEM? # # # # # Ovarian cancer is the fifth leading cause of cancer death in women.
The American Cancer Society predicts that in 2003 there will be about 25,400 new cases of ovarian cancer in this country and that 14,300 women will die of the disease.
Currently, half the women diagnosed with ovarian cancer die from it within 5 years.
Only about 25% of ovarian cancers are diagnosed at an early stage.
Approximately 60% of cases are diagnosed after the cancer has spread, when the 5-year survival rate is close to 30%.
When detected early, the 5-year survival rate increases to 95%.
A reliable screening test, which is an important tool for improving early diagnosis rates, does not exist for ovarian cancer.
WHAT HAS CDC ACCOMPLISHED? Since 2000, Congressional funding has allowed CDC to develop public health activities aimed at reducing ovarian cancer morbidity and mortality.
To identify unmet public health needs, CDC convened a workshop, Identifying Public Health Opportunities to Reduce the Burden of Ovarian Cancer, during November 2000.
Participants, including leaders from state health departments and ovarian cancer advocacy groups, as well as physicians and scientists from federal agencies, medical centers, and cancer treatment programs, identified potential mechanisms and partners for addressing prevention, early detection, treatment, and surveillance needs.
The report is available at http://www.cdc.gov/cancer/ovarian/workshop.htm.
CDC is funding collaborative research efforts to study factors associated with diagnosing ovarian cancer at an early stage when treatment is most likely to be effective and to evaluate treatment patterns and outcomes of patients diagnosed with ovarian cancer.
Example of program in action: Several studies are already underway at CDC-funded Prevention Research Centers.
These include multi-year research projects at the Center for Health Promotion and Prevention Research at the University of Texas in Houston and the University of Alabama in Birmingham.
The primary objective of these studies is to identify factors that distinguish women in whom ovarian cancer is diagnosed at stages 1 and 2 from those diagnosed at a later stage.
Identification of factors that can lead to earlier diagnosis is crucial in the development of programs to increase long-term survival rates.
WHAT ARE THE NEXT STEPS? In 2003, CDC funded several state health departments to implement ovarian cancer activities that were identified and prioritized in their comprehensive cancer control plans.
CDC will assist states in creating effective ovarian cancer prevention activities, support research efforts to better understand which populations are most affected by ovarian cancer and why, and evaluate access to and capacity of providers who treat ovarian cancer.
CDC will develop health communication messages to provide appropriate education and information about ovarian cancer to physicians and health care providers.
For information on this and other CDC programs, visit http://www.cdc.gov/programs
February 2003
