ent of Com rtm rce-Office me Office of the Assistant General Counsel for Finance 
Upjohn Co. v. United States, 449 U.S. 383 (1981).
This article is written in response to remarks The privilege applies if "(1) the asserted holder of made by a beleaguered procurement office faced the privilege is or sought to become a client; (2) the with the task of assisting the Contract Law Diviperson to whom the communication was made (a) sion in that litigation phase known as discovery.
is a member of the bar of a court or his subordinate The purpose of this article is to provide procureand (b) in connection with this communication is ment personnel with some guidance on when to acting as a lawyer; (3) the communication relates seek protection under the available doctrines of to a fact of which the attorney was informed (a) by privilege from those pesky contractor attorneys his client, (b) without the presence of strangers, (c) who demand to see every single piece of paper ever for the purpose of securing primarily either (i) an produced by the procurement office.
In particular, opinion on law or (ii) legal services or (iii) assisI am referring to those instances when the contance in some legal proceeding, and not for the purtracting officer believes that certain documents pose of committing a crime or tort; and (4) the privand answers, whether in the form of answers to inilege has been (a) claimed and (b) not terrogatories or depositions, should not be waived by the client."
United States v. Unitprovided to personnel outside the Government.
That instinct is what privilege is Privilege ed Shoe Machinery Corp., 89 F.Supp.
357, 358-59 (D. Mass. 1950). grounded on--confidentiality.
When the 
Discove torney-client privilege to those communica- the answer was obviously sought in confitions made with the intent that they remain dence.
This article will focus on the role of confidential and with the reasonable expecprivilege and its application in the discovery protation of protection of that confidentiality.
Amdahl cess.
Corporation, 85-2 BCA ¶18,054 (1985).
This means that if the communication took place in public, it There are basically three recognized privileges will be difficult to assert the privilege at a later which allow a party, in this case, the Government, time. to withhold certain documents and answers in response to discovery requests.
Discovery being that Further, the GSBCA follows the rule that comstage of the litigation where each side gets to go on munications from the attorney to the client are a fishing expedition--to discover the relevant eviprivileged only to the extent that they would redence in a case.
Don't worry, the Government gets veal a confidential communication from the client to fish as well.
The General Services Board of Conor when such communications are inextricably intract Appeals and the General Accounting Office, tertwined with the legal advice.
In Re Sealed Case, our two most frequented tribunals, follow the fed737 F.2d 94, 99 (D.C.Cir.1984); B.D. Click, 83-1 eral practice of requiring parties to produce those BCA at 81,174 (citing, In Re Ampicillin Antitrust materials that might reasonably lead to the discovLitigation, 81 F.R.D. 377, 389 (D.D.C.1978)). ery of relevant evidence.
This very broad standard, So for instance, if you, as the contracting offihowever, means that opposing counsel will seek cer, are asked in a deposition: What did you say or any document that has the possibility of leading to write to your attorney? The answer contains obvimatters having a probative quality.
Privilege is one of the means by which a party can thwart the From the Editor Lisa Obayashi is an attorney in discovery request which seeks everything you have the Contract Law Division who advises various Bureaus ever seen, written about, or heard about a particuin the Department.
lar contract.
A Lawyer's View is a monthly publication of the Attorney-Client Privilege Contract Law Division designed to give practical advice The attorney-client privilege is the oldest of the to the Department's procurement officers.
Comments, common law privileges for confidential communicacriticisms, and suggestions for future topics are weltions.
It has been recognized from the times of earcome.--Call Jerry Walz at FTS 202-482-1122, or via ly Elizabethan England where an attorney refused e--mail to Jerry Walz@OGCMAC@OSEC to turn informer against his client.
The purpose of
A Lawyer's View of Privilege and the Discovery Process
on ati
Ass i
A Lawyer's View of Privilege and Discovery
nt General sta
CONTRACT LAW DIVISION
unsel for Fi Co
General Co of
nce 
sel Depa un
ent of Com rtm
rce-Office me
Office of the Assistant General Counsel for Finance 
Page Two
ously contains confidential communications.
SimiAttorney Work Product Privilege larly, if you are asked: What advice were you givThe work product privilege is a broader privien? The advice is inextricably intertwined with lelege and designed "to promote the adversary sysgal advice and is therefore privileged.
tem by safeguarding the fruits of counsel's trial The privilege is asserted in all contexts of dispreparation from the discovery requests of opposcovery.
The contracting officer faced with the task ing parties."
In re Subpoenas Duces Tecum, 738 of going through his or her voluminous contract F.2d 1367, 1371 (D.C.
Cir. 1984).
It grew out of the files finds a document addressed to legal counsel need to provide an attorney with a "certain degree seeking advice on whether a particular contract of privacy, free from unnecessary intrusion by opclaim warrants a denial.
The document obviously posing parties and their counsel."
Hickman v. Tayfits the description outlined above and can be withlor, 329 U.S. 495, 510 (1947).
The key to this priviheld on the basis of the attorney-client privilege.
lege is a showing that the information sought was The same would apply to telephone notes in which prepared or obtained because of the prospect of litiyou have documented your attorney's advice.
gation.
Fed.
R.Civ.
P. 26(b)(3) (Advisory committee note, 1970).
It is intended to aid the lawyer in trial Another context in which the privilege is raised preparation.
Common examples are the lawyer's is during depositions.
Opposing counsel asks what research, analysis and mental impressions all peryou did after receiving his client's claim.
formed because of the prospect of litigation.
You can answer that you consulted with your attorney.
The line of questioning reIn Harrington Associates, Inc., 85-2 BCA Privilege garding your actions should usually stop ¶18,109 (1985), appellant based its claims 
What you asked, what you were told, for damages on the review of corporate files etc. are all privileged under the guidelines Discove made by its project manager.
Appellant set forth above.
sought to shield the project manager's notes and analysis-- some of which detailed events There is a major exception to the attorthat occurred during contract performance--from ney-client privilege--when the substance of those discovery, on the basis that the material was attorcommunications is put in issue, the privilege usuney work product developed in anticipation of litially falls.
B.G.W.
Limited Partnership v. General gation.
The GSBCA disagreed.
Ordering producServices Administration, GSBCA, 10501(6/23/92). tion of the project manager's notes and analyses, The situation often arises in the context of a conthe board held that the submission of claims "is a tract interpretation case under the Contract Dispart of the normal day-to-day routine of performpute Act.
As the GSBCA explained in Tera Ading a government contract.
. . . " such that these vanced Services Corp. , 84-1 BCA ¶16,936 (1983), it records, "prepared in the regular course of busiis unfair to allow an appellant to advance a conness" did not qualify as attorney work product.
tract interpretation--sponsored and developed by Only documents that implicate counsel's labors in-house counsel--while resisting inquiry into that and preparation for litigation will be shielded from view because of the sensitive nature of attorneyfull disclosure under the attorney work product client communications: rule.
Having raised the issue of its officers' underDeliberative Process or Executive Privilege standing of what they were signing when they executed the lease agreement, having indeed built its The deliberative process privilege, aka the exentire case upon its course of dealing with the Govecutive privilege, protects secret and other highly ernment in consultation with, and with the particisensitive communications within the government pation of, its attorney, appellant now invokes the from disclosure.
The deliberative process privilege attorney-client privilege to prevent the Governis the privilege recognized by the courts to "prement from inquiring into one of the principal elevent injury to the quality of agency decisions."
ments to that understanding.
What we have here, NLRB v. Sears, Roebuck 
In such a situation, maker will receive the unimpeded advice of his asthe privilege must yield.
sociates."
Federal Open Market Committee v. Merrill, 443 U.S. 340, 359-360.
The privilege is foundId. at 84,250.
ed on the public policy that, in order for
on ati
Ass i
A Lawyer's View of Privilege and Discovery
nt General sta
CONTRACT LAW DIVISION
unsel for Fi Co
General Co of
nce 
sel Depa un
ent of Com rtm
rce-Office me
Office of the Assistant General Counsel for Finance 
Page Three
The burden of proving that a particular docugovernment to function effectively, government dement is exempt from discovery based on this parcision makers must be able to obtain frank opinticular privilege is on the government.
Also, that ions and recommendations from their subordiburden once met, may be overturned by an appelnates.
If those opinions of the subordinates were to lant making a compelling showing that the need be spread upon the public record, decision makers for the documents outweighs the public interest in would find it more difficult to obtain the necessary preserving the privilege.
The court will usually input to their decision making.
There are two rehold an in camera review of the documents in quesquirements to this privilege: that it be predecisiontion to determine whether the privilege applies.
al (i.e. does not express a policy already adopted by the agency) and it must be deliberative, i.e. (opinAssisting Agency Counsel ion and not fact).
A direct part of the deliberative Here are a few tips which can assist agency process is that it makes recommendations or excounsel and your own office get through the discovpresses opinions on legal or policy matters.
ery process while still withholding privileged docuBefore you get carried away in thinking that a ments: First, seek out all files, not just your own majority of the documents found in your files are contract files, i.e. program office files.
Second, err predecisional and deliberative, keep in mind that on the side of producing the document or answerthis privilege is rarely invoked.
This is because of ing the interrogatory.
Point out documents the procedural hurdles and the showing which you believe are privileged and let the atwhich the Government must make to prove Privilege torney assigned to the case make the call.
This that a document is truly deliberative.
First way, both your attorney and opposing counsel "[t]here must be a formal claim of privilege, 
Discove er date, findsduring depositions when opposing has control over the matter, after actual percounsel out about a document which had sonal consideration by that officer."
United not yet been produced or objected to on the States v. Reynolds, 345 U.S. 1, 7-8 (1953). grounds of privilege.
Third, ask your attorney Second, the claim must be accompanied by an affiwhether there may be other grounds for withholddavit in support of the privilege executed by the ing the information.
Although a document may not head of the agency which has control over the matbe privileged, it may also be irrelevant or objectionter, after personal consideration of the documents able on some other ground.
at issue.
The Boards of Contract Appeals allow this authority to be delegated by the head of the agency, but only to a subordinate with high authority.
Editor's Postscript Automar IV Corporation, 88-2 ¶20,821 (1988).
Don't let the possibility of your files being "disThird, the agency must provide `precise and cercovered" serve as a reason or an excuse for not doctain' reasons for preserving the confidentiality of umenting your actions, decisions, phone calls and the requested information."
Mobil Oil Corp. v. Deother matters.
All other things being equal, the partment of Energy, 520 F.Supp.
414, 416 (N.D. party with the best set of records has the definite N.Y. 1981). advantage if a matter goes to litigation.
Examples of documents which are often the subject of the deliberative process privilege are recommendations, drafts, proposals, suggestions and other subjective documents which reflect the personal opinions of the writer rather than the policy of the agency.
Coastal States Gas Corp. v. Dept, of Energy, 617 F.2d 854, 866 (D.C.
Cir. 1980).
Purely factual information, albeit in a deliberative intragovernmental memorandum, is not protected by the privilege, to the extent that it can be separated from expressions of opinion or recommendations without compromising that privileged material in those documents.
In re Franklin National Bank Securities Litigation, 478 F.Supp.
577 (E.D. N.Y. 1979).
on ati
Ass i
A Lawyer's View of Privilege and Discovery
nt General sta
CONTRACT LAW DIVISION
unsel for Fi Co
General Co of
nce 
sel Depa un
