Occupational Definitions by Title 13-2011 Accountants 
Install or advise on systems of recording costs or other financial and budgetary data.
Examples: Certified Public Accountant; Tax Accountant; Bursar
Appendix A assemblies, such as hydraulic and pneumatic systems.
Include helicopter and aircraft engine specialists.
39-2021 Animal Caretakers, Nonfarm Feed, water, groom, bathe, exercise, or otherwise care for pets and other nonfarm animals, such as dogs, cats, ornamental fish or birds, zoo animals, and mice.
Work in settings such as kennels, animal shelters, zoos, circuses, and aquariums.
May keep records of feedings, treatments, and animals received or discharged.
May clean, disinfect, and repair cages, pens, or fish tanks.
Examples: Groomer; Dog Groomer; Kennel Worker; Stable Attendant
49-3021 Automotive Body 
Examples: Auto Body Customizer; Collision Mechanic; Frame Straightener
15-2011 Actuaries Analyze statistical data, such as mortatility, accident, sickness, disability and retirement rates and construct probability tables and forecast risk and liability for payment of future benefits.
43-3031 Accounting, Bookkeeping, 
Perform any combination of routine calculating, posting, and verifying duties to obtain primary financial data for use in maintaining accounting records.
May also check the accuracy of figures, calculations, and postings pertaining to business transactions recorded by other workers.
Examples: Accounts Receivable Clerk; Ledger Clerk; Voucher Examiner
49-3023 Automotive Service Technicians 
Examples: Auto Brake Mechanic; Fuel Injection Servicer; Auto Transmission Specialist
51-3011 Bakers Mix and bake ingredients according to recipes to produce breads, rolls, cookies, cakes, pies, pastries, or other baked goods.
Examples: Cake Maker; Head Baker; Pastry Finisher
27-1014 Artists, Multi-Media 
Examples: Computer Artist; Computer Graphics Illustrator; Special Effects Specialist
35-3011 Bartenders Mix and serve drinks to patrons, directly or through waitstaff.
Examples: Barkeeper; Taproom Attendant
43-6011 Administrative Assistants 
May also train and supervise lower-level clerical staff.
Example: Administrative Aide
49-3011 Aircraft Mechanics 
27-4011 Audio 
May also set up and operate associated spotlights and other custom lighting systems.
Examples: Video Control Operator; Audio Visual Production Specialist
43-3011 Bill 
Duties include receiving payment and posting amount to customer's account; preparing statements to credit department if customer fails to respond; initiating repossession proceedings or service disconnection; keeping records of collection and status of accounts.
Examples: Payment Collector; Collection Clerk; Installment Agent
43-3021 Billing 
Prepare billing invoices for services rendered or for delivery
or shipment of goods.
Examples: Calculating Machine Operator; Invoice Control Clerk; Rating Clerk
accounting reports for the purpose of maintaining expenditure controls.
Examples: Budget Examiner; Fiscal Agent; Fiscal Officer
examine bills of lading to determine shipping charges and tariffs.
Examples: Routing Agent; Shipping Agent
51-5011 Bindery Workers Set up or operate binding machines that produce books and other printed materials.
Include hand bindery workers.
Examples: Hand Bindery Worker; Book Coverer; Stitching Machine Operator; Bookbinding Machine Operator
53-3022 Bus Drivers, School Transport students or special clients, such as the elderly or persons with disabilities.
Ensure adherence to safety rules.
May assist passengers in boarding or exiting.
51-3021 Butchers 
Examples: Carver; Meat Department Manager; Cleaver
19-4021 Biological Technicians Assist biological and medical scientists in laboratories.
Set up, operate, and maintain laboratory instruments and equipment, monitor experiments, make observations, and calculate and record results.
May analyze organic substances, such as blood, food, and drugs.
Examples: Biotechnologist; Wildlife Technician; Specimen Technician
47-2021 Brickmasons 
Examples: Adobe Layer; Chimney Builder; Furnace Liner
13-1022 Buyers, Wholesale 
Analyze past buying trends, sales records, price, and quality of merchandise to determine value and yield.
Select, order, and authorize payment for merchandise according to contractual agreements.
May conduct meetings with sales personnel and introduce new products.
Examples: Importer; Merchandiser; Wholesale Jobber
47-2031 Carpenters Construct, erect, install, or repair structures and fixtures made of wood, such as concrete forms; building frameworks, including partitions, joists, studding, and rafters; wood stairways, window and door frames, and hardwood floors.
May also install cabinets, siding, drywall and batt or roll insulation.
Include brattice builders who build doors or brattices (ventilation walls or partitions) in underground passageways to control the proper circulation of air through the passageways and to the working places.
Examples: Shipwright; Cabinetmaker; Wood Floor Layer
41-2011 Cashiers Receive and disburse money in establishments other than financial institutions.
Usually involves use of electronic scanners, cash registers, or related equipment.
Often involved in processing credit or debit card transactions and validating checks.
Examples: Toll Collector; Auction Clerk; Disbursement Clerk
43-4011 Brokerage Clerks Perform clerical duties involving the purchase or sale of securities.
Duties include writing orders for stock purchases and sales, computing transfer taxes, verifying stock transactions, accepting and delivering securities, tracking stock price fluctuations, computing equity, distributing dividends, and keeping records of daily transactions and holdings.
Examples: Portfolio Assistant; Dividend Clerk; Telephone Quotation Clerk
51-7011 Cabinetmakers 
Examples: Marquetry Worker; Antique Furniture Repairer; Wood Machinist
47-2051 Cement Masons and Concrete Finishers Smooth and finish surfaces of poured concrete, such as floors, walks, sidewalks, roads, or curbs using a variety of hand and power tools.
Align forms for sidewalks, curbs, or gutters; patch voids; use saws to cut expansion joints.
Examples: Curb Builder; Concrete Floor Installer
13-2031 Budget Analysts Examine budget estimates completeness, accuracy, conformance with procedures regulations.
Analyze budgeting
for and and and
43-5011 Cargo 
Take orders from customers and arrange pickup of freight and cargo for delivery to loading platform.
Prepare and
35-1011 Chefs 
May plan and price menu items, order supplies, and keep records and accounts.
May participate in cooking.
Examples: Executive Chef; Pastry Chef; Sous Chef
51-8091 Chemical Plant 
Examples: Denitrator; Nitrogen Operator; Wash Operator
19-4031 Chemical Technicians Conduct chemical and physical laboratory tests to assist scientists in making qualitative and quantitative analyses of solids, liquids, and gaseous materials for purposes, such as research and development of new products or processes, quality control, maintenance of environmental standards, and other work involving experimental, theoretical, or practical application of chemistry and related sciences.
Examples: Assayer; Fiber Analyst; Paint Tester
have been made in accordance with company practices and procedures, ensuring that proper methods have been followed.
Report overpayments, underpayments, and other irregularities.
Confer with legal counsel on claims requiring litigation.
Examples: Insurance Appraiser; Health Insurance Adjuster; Arson Investigator; Claims Agent
pension programs.
Examples: Occupational Analyst; Relocation Director; Wage Conciliator
15-1011 Computer 
Solve or develop solutions to problems in the field of computer hardware and software.
49-2011 Computer, Automated Teller, 
Examples: Cash Register Servicer; ATM Specialist; Computer Installer
53-7061 Cleaners of Vehicles 
Use such materials as water, cleaning agents, brushes, cloths, and hoses.
Exclude "Janitors and Cleaners, Except Maids and Housekeeping Cleaners" (372011).
Examples: Detailer; Barrel Washer; Auto Detailer; Machine Cleaner
19-2031 Chemists Conduct qualitative and quantitative chemical analyses or chemical experiments in laboratories for quality or process control or to develop new products or knowledge.
Examples: Inorganic Chemist; Chemical Analyst
39-9011 Child Care Workers Attend to children at schools, businesses, private households, and child care institutions.
Perform a variety of tasks, such as dressing, feeding, bathing, and overseeing play.
Examples: Bus Monitor; Baby Sitter; Governess; Nanny
51-9121 Coating, Painting, 
Examples: Electrostatic Paint Operator; Silvering Applicator; Supercalender Operator
17-3022 Civil Engineering Technicians Apply theory and principles of civil engineering in planning, designing, and overseeing construction and maintenance of structures and facilities under the direction of engineering staff or physical scientists.
Example: Highway Technician
27-1021 Commercial 
Combine artistic talent with research on product use, marketing, and materials to create the most functional and appealing product design.
Examples: Body Stylist; Color Consultant; Jewelry Designer
15-1071 Computer Network 
Maintain network hardware and software.
Monitor network to ensure network availability to all system users and perform necessary maintenance to support network availability.
May supervise other network support and client server specialists and plan, coordinate, and implement network security measures.
Examples: LAN/WAN Administrator; Network Control Operator; Network Security Administrator
13-1031 Claims Adjusters, Examiners, 
13-1072 Compensation, Benefits, 
May specialize in specific areas, such as position classification and
15-1081 Computer Network Systems 
Perform network modeling, analysis, and planning.
Research and recommend network and data communications hardware and software.
Include telecommunications specialists
who deal with the interfacing of computer and communications equipment.
May supervise computer programmers.
Examples: Internet Developer; Webmaster; Systems Integrator
43-9011 Computer Operators Monitor and control electronic computer and peripheral electronic data processing equipment to process business, scientific, engineering, and other data according to operating instructions.
May enter commands at a computer terminal and set controls on computer and peripheral devices.
Monitor and respond to operating and error messages.
Examples: Peripheral Equipment Operator; Console Operator; Data Processing Clerk
computer system users.
Answer questions or resolve computer problems for clients in person, via telephone or from remote location.
May provide assistance concerning the use of computer hardware and software, including printing, installation, word processing, electronic mail, and operating systems.
Examples: Customer Support Analyst; Help Desk Technician; Work Station Support Specialist
equipment, and a variety of other equipment and instruments.
May clean and prepare sites, dig trenches, set braces to support the sides of excavations, erect scaffolding, clean up rubble and debris, and remove asbestos, lead, and other hazardous waste materials.
May assist other craft workers.
Examples: Air Hammer Operator; Asphalt Patcher; Construction Craft Laborer
15-1021 Computer Programmers Convert project specifications and statements of problems and procedures to detailed logical flow charts for coding into computer language.
Develop and write computer programs to store, locate, and retrieve specific documents, data, and information.
May program web sites.
Examples: Computer Programmer Aide; Mainframe Programmer; Systems Programmer
15-1051 Computer Systems Analysts Analyze science, engineering, business, and all other data processing problems for application to electronic data processing systems.
Analyze user requirements, procedures, and problems to automate or improve existing systems and review computer system capabilities, workflow, and scheduling limitations.
May analyze or recommend commercially available software.
May supervise computer programmers.
Examples: Health Systems Computer Analyst; Data Processing Systems Project Planner; Information Systems Consultant
49-9012 Control 
Examples: Electric Meter Installer; Gas Meter Prover; Thermostat Repairer
15-1031 Computer Software Engineers, Applications Develop, create, and modify general computer applications software or specialized utility programs.
Analyze user needs and develop software solutions.
Design software or customize software for client use with the aim of optimizing operational efficiency.
May analyze and design databases within an application area, working individually or coordinating database development as part of a team.
Examples: Applications Developer; Programmer Analyst; Software Designer
47-4011 Construction 
Inspections may be general in nature or may be limited to a specific area, such as electrical systems or plumbing.
Examples: Highway Inspector; Electrical Inspector; Architectural Inspector
35-2011 Cooks, Fast Food Prepare and cook food in a fast food restaurant with a limited menu.
Duties of the cooks are limited to preparation of a few basic items and normally involve operating large-volume singlepurpose cooking equipment.
Examples: Fry Cook; Pizza Maker
35-2012 Cooks, Institution 
Examples: Camp Cook; Mess Cook; Galley Cook
15-1041 Computer Support Specialists Provide technical assistance to
47-2061 Construction Laborers Perform tasks involving physical labor at building, highway, and heavy construction projects, tunnel and shaft excavations, and demolition sites.
May operate hand and power tools of all types: air hammers, earth tampers, cement mixers, small mechanical hoists, surveying and measuring
35-2014 Cooks, Restaurant Prepare, season, and cook soups, meats, vegetables, desserts, or other foodstuffs in restaurants.
May order supplies, keep records and accounts, price items on menu, or plan menu.
Examples: Broiler Cook; Specialty Foreign Food Cook; Garde-manger
35-2015 Cooks, Short Order Prepare and cook to order a variety of foods that require only a short preparation time.
May take orders from customers and serve patrons
at counters or tables.
Examples: Barbecue Cook; Griddle Cook
Examples: Airplane-Charter Clerk; Car Rental Agent; Skate Shop Attendant
33-3012 Correctional Officers 
May guard prisoners in transit between jail, courtroom, prison, or other point.
Include deputy sheriffs and police who spend the majority of their time guarding prisoners in correctional institutions.
Examples: Convict Guard; Custodial Officer; Prison Guard
35-3022 Counter Attendants, Cafeteria, Food Concession, 
Examples: Canteen Operator; Snack Bar Attendant; Hot Dog Attendant
determine credit worthiness; process applications; and notify customers of acceptance or rejection of credit.
Examples: Loan Adjuster; Credit Interviewer; Credit Rating Inspector
39-5012 Cosmetologists, Hairdressers, 
May also apply makeup, dress wigs, perform hair removal, and provide nail and skin care services.
Examples: Beautician; Wig Stylist; Electrologist
43-5021 Couriers 
Examples: Message Delivery Clerk; Telegraph Messenger
33-9091 Crossing Guards Guide or control vehicular or pedestrian traffic at such places as streets, schools, railroad crossings, or construction sites.
Examples: Flagger; Gate Operator; School Patrol
51-9021 Crushing, Grinding, and Polishing Machine Operators Set up, operate, or tend machines to crush, grind, or polish materials, such as coal, glass, grain, stone, food, or rubber.
Examples: Sand Blast Operator; Beveling and Edging Machine Operator; Pulverizer Operator
13-1051 Cost Estimators Prepare cost estimates for product manufacturing, construction projects, or services to aid management in bidding on or determining price of product or service.
May specialize according to particular service performed or type of product manufactured.
Examples: Construction Estimator; Crating 
43-4031 Court, Municipal, 
May prepare docket of cases to be called; secure information for judges and court; prepare draft agendas or bylaws for town or city council; answer official correspondence; keep fiscal records and accounts; issue licenses or permits; record data, administer tests, or collect fees.
Examples: Register of Deeds; Circuit Court Clerk; Warrant Clerk
43-4051 Customer Service Representatives Interact with customers to provide information in response to inquiries about products and services and to handle and resolve complaints.
Exclude individuals whose duties are primarily sales or repair.
Examples: Complaint Adjuster; Passenger Relations Representative; Telephone Service Adviser
21-1012 Counselors, Educational, Vocational, 
Examples: Guidance Counselor; Curriculum Counselor; Educational Adviser
13-2041 Credit Analysts Analyze current credit data and financial statements of individuals or firms to determine the degree of risk involved in extending credit or lending money.
Prepare reports with this credit information for use in decision-making.
Examples: Credit Negotiator; Escrow Representative; Factorer
51-9032 Cutting 
Examples: Shear Operator; Bias Machine Operator; Slate Trimmer
41-2021 Counter 
May describe available options, compute cost, and accept payment.
43-4041 Credit Authorizers, Checkers, 
Investigate history and credit standing of individuals or business establishments applying for credit.
May interview applicants to obtain personal and financial data;
51-4031 Cutting, Punching, 
Examples: Perforator Operator; Crimping Machine Operator; Four Slide Machine Setter
43-9021 Data Entry Keyers Operate data entry device, such as keyboard or photo composing perforator.
Duties may include verifying data and preparing
materials for printing.
Examples: Keypunch Operator; Data Typist
types of diesel engines.
Include mechanics working primarily with automobile diesel engines.
Examples: Tractor Trailer Mechanic; Diesel Mechanic; Farm Equipment Engine Mechanic
15-1061 Database Administrators Coordinate changes to computer databases, test and implement the database applying knowledge of database management systems.
May plan, coordinate, and implement security measures to safeguard computer databases.
Examples: Automatic Data Processing Planner; Database Design Analyst; Database Security Administrator
complaint to investigate.
Operate radio, telephone, or computer equipment to receive reports of fires and medical emergencies and relay information or orders to proper officials.
Examples: Emergency Operator; 911 Operator; Public Safety Dispatcher
29-1031 Dietitians 
May supervise activities of a department providing quantity food services, counsel individuals, or conduct nutritional research.
Examples: Public Health Dietitian; Nutrition Director; Research Dietitian
41-9011 Demonstrators 
May sell demonstrated merchandise.
Examples: Home Demonstrator; Exhibit-Display Representative
31-9091 Dental Assistants Assist dentist, set up patient and equipment, and keep records.
29-2021 Dental Hygienists Clean teeth and examine oral areas, head, and neck for signs of oral disease.
May educate patients on oral hygiene, take and develop X-rays, or apply fluoride or sealants.
Example: Oral Hygienist
35-9011 Dining Room, Cafeteria Attendants 
Clean tables, carry dirty dishes, replace soiled table linens; set tables; replenish supply of clean linens, silverware, glassware, and dishes; supply service bar with food, and serve water, butter, and coffee to patrons.
Examples: Busser; Lunchroom Attendant; Tray Setter
17-3012 Drafters, Electrical 
17-3013 Drafters, Mechanical Prepare detailed working diagrams of machinery and mechanical devices, including dimensions, fastening methods, and other engineering information.
Examples: Die Designer; Aeronautical Drafter
35-9021 Dishwashers Clean dishes, kitchen, food preparation equipment, or utensils.
Examples: Kitchen Cleaner; Glass Washer; Pot Washer
47-5011 Derrick Operators, Oil 
Examples: Rotary Derrick Operator; Well Service Derrick Worker
33-3021 Detectives and Criminal Investigators Conduct investigations related to suspected violations of Federal, State, or local laws to prevent or solve crimes.
Examples: Police Inspector; Deputy United States Marshal; Narcotics Agent
43-5032 Dispatchers, Except Police, Fire, and Ambulance Schedule and dispatch workers, work crews, equipment, or service vehicles for conveyance of materials, freight, or passengers, or for normal installation, service, or emergency repairs rendered outside the place of business.
Duties may include using radio, telephone, or computer to transmit assignments and compiling statistics and reports on work progress.
Examples: Security Dispatcher; Repair Service Dispatcher; Taxicab Dispatcher
53-3031 Driver/Sales Workers Drive truck or other vehicle over established routes or within an established territory and sell goods, such as food products, including restaurant take-out items, or pick up and deliver items, such as laundry.
May also take orders and collect payments.
Include newspaper delivery drivers.
Examples: Bakery Delivery Person; Milk Delivery Person; Bread Distributor
49-3031 Diesel Engine Mechanics Diagnose, adjust, repair, or overhaul trucks, buses, and all
43-5031 Dispatchers, Police, Fire, 
Broadcast orders to police patrol units in vicinity of
47-2081 Drywall 
Apply or mount acoustical tiles or blocks, strips, or sheets of shock-absorbing materials to ceilings and walls of buildings to reduce or reflect sound.
Materials may be of decorative quality.
Include lathers who fasten wooden, metal, or rockboard lath to walls, ceilings or partitions of buildings to provide support base for plaster, fireproofing, or acoustical material.
Examples: Lather; Acoustical Carpenter; Sheet Rock Hanger
47-5021 Earth Drillers, Except Oil 
May use explosives.
Examples: Auger Operator; Earth Boring Machine Operator; Tunneling Machine Operator
Equipment Repair, test, adjust, or install electronic equipment, such as industrial controls, transmitters, and antennas.
Examples: Radar Technician; Missile Pad Mechanic; Amplifier Mechanic
Examples: Employment Interviewer; Personnel Recruiter; Placement Assistant
49-2092 Electric Motor, Power Tool, 
Examples: Armature Winder; Generator Mechanic; Electric Golf Cart Repairer
47-2111 Electricians Install, maintain, and repair electrical wiring, equipment, and fixtures.
Ensure that work is in accordance with relevant codes.
May install or service street lights, intercom systems, or electrical control systems.
Exclude "Security and Fire Alarm Systems Installers" (49-2098).
Examples: Electrical Sign Servicer; House Wirer; Chief Electrician
17-2011 Engineers, Aerospace Perform a variety of engineering work in designing, constructing, and testing aircraft, missiles, and spacecraft.
May conduct basic and applied research to evaluate adaptability of materials and equipment to aircraft design and manufacture.
May recommend improvements in testing equipment and techniques.
Examples: Aerodynamicist; Flight Test Engineer; Aeronautical Engineer 17-2041 Engineers, Chemical Design chemical plant equipment and devise processes for manufacturing chemicals and products, such as gasoline, synthetic rubber, plastics, detergents, cement, paper, and pulp, by applying principles and technology of chemistry, physics, and engineering.
Examples: Fuels Engineer; Absorption 
Include architectural, structural, traffic, ocean, and geo-technical engineers.
Examples: Municipal Engineer; Bridge Engineer; Construction Engineer; Concrete Engineer 17-2061 Engineers, Computer Hardware Research, design, develop, and test computer or computer-related equipment for commercial, industrial, military, or scientific use.
May supervise the manufacturing and installation of computer or
17-3023 Electrical 
Examples: Calibration Laboratory Technician; Semiconductor Development Technician; Instrumentation Technician
17-3024 Electro-Mechanical Technicians Operate, test, and maintain unmanned, automated, servomechanical, or electromechanical equipment.
May operate unmanned submarines, aircraft, or other equipment at worksites, such as oil rigs, deep ocean exploration, or hazardous waste removal.
May assist engineers in testing and designing robotics equipment.
51-2023 Electromechanical Equipment Assemblers Assemble or modify electromechanical equipment or devices, such as servomechanisms, gyros, dynamometers, magnetic drums, tape drives, brakes, control linkage, actuators, and appliances.
Examples: Appliance Assembler; Vending Machine Assembler
51-2022 Electrical 
Examples: Anode Builder; Battery Builder; Industrial Equipment Wirer
49-9051 Electrical Power-Line Installers 
May erect poles and light or heavy duty transmission towers.
Examples: Pole Climber; High Tension Tester; Electric Utility Wire Stretcher
29-2041 Emergency Medical Technicians 
Transport injured or sick persons to medical facilities.
Example: E.M.T.
49-2094 Electrical Commercial 
Repairers, Industrial
13-1071 Employment, Recruitment, 
computer-related equipment and components.
17-2071 Engineers, Electrical Design, develop, test, or supervise the manufacturing and installation of electrical equipment, components, or systems for commercial, industrial, military, or scientific use.
Examples: Power Distribution Engineer; Illuminating Engineer; Relay Engineer
17-2072 Engineers, Electronics, Except Computer Research, design, develop, and test electronic components and systems for commercial, industrial, military, or scientific use utilizing knowledge of electronic theory and materials properties.
Design electronic circuits and components for use in fields such as telecommunications, aerospace guidance and propulsion control, acoustics, or instruments and controls.
Examples: Communications Engineer; Circuit Design Engineer; Guidance 
17-2131 Engineers, Materials Evaluate materials and develop machinery and processes to manufacture materials for use in products that must meet specialized design and performance specifications.
Develop new uses for known materials.
Include those working with composite materials or specializing in one type of material, such as graphite, metal and metal alloys, ceramics and glass, plastics and polymers, and naturally occurring materials.
Include metallurgists and metallurgical engineers, ceramic engineers, and welding engineers.
Examples: Ceramic Engineer; Metallurgical Engineer; Corrosion Engineer
Devise methods to improve oil and gas well production and determine the need for new or modified tool designs.
Oversee drilling and offer technical advice to achieve economical and satisfactory progress.
Examples: Drilling Engineer; Natural Gas Engineer; Oil Well Surveying Engineer 17-3025 Environmental Engineering Technicians Apply theory and principles of environmental engineering to modify, test, and operate equipment and devices used in the prevention, control, and remediation of environmental pollution, including waste treatment and site remediation.
May assist in the development of environmental pollution remediation devices under direction of engineer.
Examples: Air Analysis Technician; Soil Technician
17-2081 Engineers, Environmental Design, plan, or perform engineering duties in the prevention, control, and remediation of environmental health hazards utilizing various engineering disciplines.
Work may include waste treatment, site remediation, or pollution control technology.
Examples: Public Health Engineer; Soil Engineer; Industrial Hygiene Engineer; Pollution Control Engineer
17-2141 Engineers, Mechanical Perform engineering duties in planning and designing tools, engines, machines, and other mechanically functioning equipment.
Oversee installation, operation, maintenance, and repair of such equipment as centralized heat, gas, water, and steam systems.
Examples: Combustion Engineer; Plant Equipment Engineer; Hydraulic Engineer
17-2112 Engineers, Industrial Design, develop, test, and evaluate integrated systems for managing industrial production processes including human work factors, quality control, inventory control, logistics and material flow, cost analysis, and production coordination.
Examples: Industrial Quality Control Engineer; Packaging Engineer; Time Study Engineer; Plant Engineer
17-2151 Engineers, Mining
Work involves conducting preliminary surveys of deposits or undeveloped mines and planning their development; examining deposits or mines to determine whether they can be worked at a profit; making geological and topographical surveys; evolving methods of mining best suited to character, type, and size of deposits; and supervising mining operations.
Examples: Exploration Engineer; Mineral Engineer; Mine Equipment Design Engineer
19-2041 Environmental Scientists 
Utilizing knowledge of various scientific disciplines may collect, synthesize, study, report, and take action based on data derived from measurements or observations of air, food, soil, water, and other sources.
Examples: Environmental Analyst; Water Pollution Specialist
53-7032 Excavating 
Examples: Back Hoe Operator; Payloader Operator; Shovel Operator
17-2171 Engineers, Petroleum
51-4021 Extruding 
hoses, wire, bars, or structural shapes.
Examples: Draw Bench Operator; Tube Drawer; Wire Drawing Setter
system used.
Locate and remove material from file when requested.
Examples: Computer Tape Librarian; Document Clerk; Records Custodian
Examples: Cafeteria Manager; Caterer; Bar Manager
51-9041 Extruding, Forming, Pressing, 
Examples: Brick or Block Maker; Briquette Maker; Cigarette Machine Operator; Rubber Laminating Machine Operator
13-2051 Financial Analysts Conduct quantitative analyses of information affecting investment programs of public or private institutions.
Examples: Bond Analyst; Investment Analyst; Securities Consultant
53-1021 First-Line Supv./Mgrs. of Helpers 
Examples: Cargo Supervisor; Yard Supervisor; Warehouse Supervisor
29-1062 Family 
49-3041 Farm Equipment Mechanics Diagnose, adjust, repair, or overhaul farm machinery and vehicles, such as tractors, harvesters, dairy equipment, and irrigation systems.
Examples: Irrigation Equipment Mechanic; Dairy Equipment Installer
13-2061 Financial Examiners Enforce or ensure compliance with laws and regulations governing financial and securities institutions and financial and real estate transactions.
May examine, verify correctness of, or establish authenticity of records.
Examples: Bank Examiner; Payroll Examiner; Pension Examiner
37-1011 First-Line Supv./Mgrs. of Housekeeping 
Examples: Building Superintendent; Household Manager; Housekeeping Supervisor 37-1012 First-Line Supv./Mgrs. of Landscaping, Lawn Service, 
May also coordinate activities of workers engaged in terracing hillsides, building retaining walls, constructing pathways, installing patios, and similar activitie.
Examples: Landscape Contractor; Golf Course Superintendent; Nursery Supervisor
33-2011 Fire Fighters Control and extinguish fires or respond to emergency situations where life, property, or the environment is at risk.
Duties may include fire prevention, emergency medical service, hazardous material response, search and rescue, and disaster management.
Examples: Explosive Ordnance Disposal Technician; Fireboat Operator; Smoke Jumper
35-3021 Fast Food, Combined Food Preparation 
Examples: Caterers Aide; Deli Clerk; Mess Attendant
47-1011 First-Line Supv./Mgrs. of Const.
Trades 
Examples: Quarry Boss; Cement Contractor
51-2091 Fiberglass Laminators 
Examples: Fiberglass Ski Maker; Fiberglass Boat Builder; Golf Cart Maker
33-1021 First-Line Supv./Mgrs. of Fire Fighting 
Examples: Fire Chief; Fire Captain; Fire Marshal
49-1011 First-Line Supv./Mgrs. of Mechanics, Installers, 
Exclude team or work leaders.
Examples: Marine Service Manager; Ground Crew Chief; Engine Repair Supervisor
43-4071 File Clerks File correspondence, cards, invoices, receipts, and other records in alphabetical or numerical order or according to the filing
35-1012 First-Line Supv./Mgrs. of Food Preparation 
41-1012 First-Line Supv./Mgrs. of Non-Retail Sales Workers Directly supervise and coordinate activities of sales workers other than retail sales workers.
May
perform duties, such as budgeting, accounting, and personnel work, in addition to supervisory duties.
Examples: District Sales Manager; Dry Cleaning Manager; Blood-Donor Recruiter Supervisor
43-1011 First-Line Supv./Mgrs. of Office 
Support Workers Supervise and coordinate the activities of clerical and administrative support workers.
Examples: Claims Supervisor; Stock Room Manager; Teller Supervisor
Moving Machine 
Examples: Dockmaster; Gas Station Manager; Roadmaster 39-9031 Fitness Trainers 
Demonstrate techniques and methods of participation.
Observe participants and inform them of corrective measures necessary to improve their skills.
Those required to hold teaching degrees should be reported in the appropriate teaching category.
Examples: Personal Trainer; Exercise Teacher; Yoga Teacher
Shape, finish, and refinish damaged, worn, or used furniture or new high-grade furniture to specified color or finish.
Examples: Furniture Polisher; Refinisher; Wood Grainer
39-1021 First-Line Supv./Mgrs. of Personal Service Workers Supervise and coordinate activities of personal service workers, such as supervisors of flight attendants, hairdressers, or caddies.
Examples: Caddymaster; Barber Shop Manager; Health Club Manager
43-9061 General Office Clerks Perform duties too varied and diverse to be classified in any specific office clerical occupation, requiring limited knowledge of office management systems and procedures.
Clerical duties may be assigned in accordance with the office procedures of individual establishments and may include a combination of answering telephones, bookkeeping, typing or word processing, stenography, office machine operation, and filing.
Examples: Administrative Clerk; Office Assistant; Real Estate Clerk
33-1012 First-Line Supv./Mgrs. of Police 
Examples: Police Chief; Precinct Captain
27-1023 Floral Designers Design, cut, and arrange live, dried, or artificial flowers and foliage.
Examples: Florist; Corsage Maker; Flower Arranger
51-1011 First-Line Supv./Mgrs. of Production 
Examples: Laundromat Manager; Station Chief; Assembly Line Supervisor
51-3092 Food Batchmakers Set up and operate equipment that mixes or blends ingredients used in the manufacturing of food products.
Include candy makers and cheese makers.
Examples: Candy Maker; Honey Blender; Peanut Butter Maker
19-4041 Geological 
Analyze mud and drill cuttings.
Chart pressure, temperature, and other characteristics of wells or bore holes.
Investigate and collect information leading to the possible discovery of new oil fields.
Examples: Field Scout; Crude Tester; Seismic Observer
41-1011 First-Line Supv./Mgrs. of Retail Sales Workers Directly supervise sales workers in a retail establishment or department.
Duties may include management functions, such as purchasing, budgeting, accounting, and personnel work, in addition to supervisory duties.
Examples: Department Manager; Flower Shop Manager; Supervisor of Cashiers
35-2021 Food Preparation Workers Perform a variety of food preparation duties other than cooking, such as preparing cold foods and shellfish, slicing meat, and brewing coffee or tea.
Examples: Kitchen Helper; Coffee Maker; Sandwich Maker
45-2041 Graders 
Examples: Chicken Grader; Cotton Classer; Fruit Sorter
35-3041 Food Servers, Nonrestaurant Serve food to patrons outside of a restaurant environment, such as in hotels, hospital rooms, or cars.
Examples: Tray-Service Worker; Curb Attendant; Hospital Tray-Service Worker; Room Service Clerk
53-1031 First-Line Supv./Mgrs. of Transportation 
27-1024 Graphic Designers Design or create graphics to meet specific commercial or promotional needs, such as packaging, displays, or logos.
May use a variety of mediums to achieve artistic or decorative effects.
Examples: Graphic Artist; Catalogue Illustrator; Layout Artist
51-7021 Furniture Finishers
51-9022 Grinding 
Include chippers, buffers, and finishers.
Examples: Glass Finisher, Chipper; Metal Sander; Gun Barrel Finisher; Hand Buffer
materials or tools, and cleaning work area and equipment.
Examples: Utilities Ground Worker; Electrician's Assistant
Duties include supplying or holding materials or tools, and cleaning work area and equipment.
Examples: Welder's Assistant; Tailor's Aide; Millwright's Helper
51-4033 Grinding, Lapping, Polishing, 
Examples: Barrel Polisher; Jewel Bearing Facer; Metal Filer
47-5081 Helpers, Extraction Workers Help extraction craft workers, such as earth drillers, blasters and explosives workers, derrick operators, and mining machine operators, by performing duties of lesser skill.
Duties include supplying equipment or cleaning work area.
Examples: Blaster's Helper; Tunnel Mucker; Mining Helper
47-3016 Helpers, Roofers Help roofers by performing duties of lesser skill.
Duties include using, supplying or holding materials or tools, and cleaning work area and equipment.
Example: Roofer's Assistant
49-9021 Heating, Air Conditioning, 
Examples: Furnace Converter; Gas Furnace Installer; Oil Burner Repairer
49-9098 Helpers, Installation, Maintenance, 
Perform duties, such as furnishing tools, materials, and supplies to other workers; cleaning work area, machines, and tools; and holding materials or tools for other workers.
Examples: Mechanic's Helper; Diver's Helper; Blacksmith's Helper
47-4051 Highway Maintenance Workers Maintain highways, municipal and rural roads, airport runways, and rights-of-way.
Duties include patching broken or eroded pavement, repairing guard rails, highway markers, and snow fences.
May also mow or clear brush from along road or plow snow from roadway.
Examples: Snow Plow Operator; Road Patcher; Road Sign Installer
47-3011 Helpers, Brickmasons, Blockmasons, Stonemasons, 
Duties include using, supplying or holding materials or tools, and cleaning work area and equipment.
Examples: Brick Carrier; Brick Washer; Tile Layers Helper
47-3014 Helpers, Painters, Paperhangers, Plasterers, 
Duties include using, supplying or holding materials or tools, and cleaning work area and equipment.
Example: Plaster Tender
31-1011 Home Health Aides Provide routine, personal healthcare, such as bathing, dressing, or grooming, to elderly, convalescent, or disabled persons in the home of patients or in a residential care facility.
Example: Home Attendant
47-3012 Helpers, Carpenters Help carpenters by performing duties of lesser skill.
Duties include using, supplying or holding materials or tools, and cleaning work area and equipment.
Examples: Carpenter's Mate; Joiner's Helper; Cabinetmaker's Helper
47-3015 Helpers, Pipelayers, Plumbers, Pipefitters, 
Duties include using, supplying or holding materials or tools, and cleaning work area and equipment.
Examples: Pipe Cutter; Plumber's Assistant; Water Main Installer's Helper
35-9031 Hosts 
Examples: Maitre D'; Dining Room Host
47-3013 Helpers, Electricians Help electricians by performing duties of lesser skill.
Duties include using, supplying or holding
51-9198 Helpers, Production Workers Help production workers by performing duties of lesser skill.
43-4081 Hotel, Motel, 
Examples: Register Clerk; Room Clerk
21-1093 Human 
May assist clients in identifying available benefits and social and community services and help clients obtain them.
May assist social workers with developing, organizing, and conducting programs to prevent and resolve problems relevant to substance abuse, human relationships, rehabilitation, or adult daycare.
Examples: Case Aide; Home Visitor; Human Services Worker
processing machinery or refinery and pipeline distribution systems.
Examples: Conveyor Belt Installer; Turbine Mechanic; Hydroelectric Machinery Mechanic
Examples: Admitting Clerk; Census Taker; Market Research Interviewer; Out-patient Admitting Clerk
53-7051 Industrial Truck 
Examples: Fork Lift Driver; Skidder Operator; Stacker Operator
43-4161 Human Resources Assistants, Except Payroll 
Record data for each employee, such as address, weekly earnings, absences, amount of sales or production, supervisory reports on ability, and date of and reason for termination.
Compile and type reports from employment records.
File employment records.
Search employee files and furnish information to authorized persons.
17-3026 Industrial Engineering Technicians Apply engineering theory and principles to problems of industrial layout or manufacturing production, usually under the direction of engineering staff.
May study and record time, motion, method, and speed involved in performance of production, maintenance, clerical, and other worker operations for such purposes as establishing standard production rates or improving efficiency.
Examples: Methods Study Analyst; Quality Control Technician; Time Study Analyst
51-9061 Inspectors, Testers, Sorters, Samplers, 
May use precision measuring instruments and complex test equipment.
Examples: Quality Checker; Bearing Inspector; Testing and Regulating Technician
37-2011 Janitors 
Perform heavy cleaning duties, such as cleaning floors, shampooing rugs, washing walls and glass, and removing rubbish.
Duties may include tending furnace and boiler, performing routine maintenance activities, notifying management of need for repairs, and cleaning snow or debris from sidewalk.
Examples: Floor Cleaner; Building Custodian; Window Washer
43-9041 Insurance Claims 
Obtain information from policyholders to verify the accuracy and completeness of information on claims forms, applications and related documents, and company records.
Update existing policies and company records to reflect changes requested by policyholders and insurance company representatives.
Examples: Claim Taker; Policy Issue Clerk; Underwriting Clerk
51-5021 Job Printers Set type according to copy; operate press to print job order; and read proof for errors and clarity of impression, and correct imperfections.
Job printers are often found in small establishments where work combines several job skills.
Examples: Job Press Operator; Apprentice Job Printer
53-7062 Laborers 
Include all unskilled manual laborers not elsewhere classified.
Examples: Cargo Handler; Stevedore; Truck Loader and Unloader
49-9041 Industrial Machinery Mechanics Repair, install, adjust, or maintain industrial production and
43-4111 Interviewers, Except Eligibility 
Ask specific questions, record answers, and assist persons with completing form.
May sort, classify, and file forms.
37-3011 Landscaping 
Workers typically perform a variety of tasks, which may include any combination of the following: sod laying, mowing, trimming, planting, watering, fertilizing, digging, raking, sprinkler installation, and installation of mortarless segmental concrete masonry wall units.
Examples: Greenskeeper; Sprinkler Installer; Landscape Gardener; Outdoor Sprinkler Installer
51-6011 Laundry 
Include spotters and dyers of these articles.
Examples: Laundry Carpet Cleaner; Silk Spotter; Washing Machine Operator
services in mobile libraries.
29-2061 Licensed Practical 
May work under the supervision of a registered nurse.
Licensing required.
Examples: Maternity Nurse; Licensed Attendant
Cleaners Perform any combination of light cleaning duties to maintain private households or commercial establishments, such as hotels, restaurants, and hospitals, in a clean and orderly manner.
Duties include making beds, replenishing linens, cleaning rooms and halls, and vacuuming.
Examples: Bed Maker; Chamber Maid; Housekeeper
25-4021 Librarians Administer libraries and perform related library services.
Work in a variety of settings, including public libraries, schools, colleges and universities, museums, corporations, government agencies, law firms, non-profit organizations, and healthcare providers.
Tasks may include selecting, acquiring, cataloguing, classifying, circulating, and maintaining library materials; and furnishing reference, bibliographical, and readers' advisory services.
May perform indepth, strategic research, and synthesize, analyze, edit, and filter information.
May set up or work with databases and information systems to catalogue and access information.
Examples: School Library Media Specialist; Circulation Manager
43-4131 Loan Interviewers and Clerks Interview loan applicants to elicit information; investigate applicants' backgrounds and verify references; prepare loan request papers; and forward findings, reports, and documents to appraisal department.
Review loan papers to ensure completeness, and complete transactions between loan establishment, borrowers, and sellers upon approval of loan.
Examples: Mortgage Clerk; Loan Closer; Loan Processor
43-9051 Mail Clerks 
Use hand or mail handling machines to time stamp, open, read, sort, and route incoming mail; and address, seal, stamp, fold, stuff, and affix postage to outgoing mail or packages.
Duties may also include keeping necessary records and completed forms.
Examples: Addressing Machine Operator; Mail Distributor; Mail Opener
25-4031 Library Technicians (Assistant Librarian, Bookmobile Driver) Assist librarians by helping readers in the use of library catalogs, databases, and indexes to locate books and other materials; and by answering questions that require only brief consultation of standard reference.
Compile records; sort and shelve books; remove or repair damaged books; register patrons; check materials in and out of the circulation process.
Replace materials in shelving area (stacks) or files.
Include bookmobile drivers who operate bookmobiles or light trucks that pull trailers to specific locations on a predetermined schedule and assist with providing
13-2072 Loan Officers Evaluate, authorize, or recommend approval of commercial, real estate, or credit loans.
Advise borrowers on financial status and methods of payments.
Include mortgage loan officers and agents, collection analysts, loan servicing officers, and loan underwriters.
Examples: Loan Examiner; Loan Reviewer; Escrow Officer; Mortgage Consultant
51-4041 Machinists Set up and operate a variety of machine tools to produce precision parts and instruments.
Include precision instrument makers who fabricate, modify, or repair mechanical instruments.
May also fabricate and modify parts to make or repair machine tools or maintain industrial machines, applying knowledge of mechanics, shop mathematics, metal properties, layout, and machining procedures.
Examples: Electrical Instrument Maker; Machine Fitter
49-9042 Maintenance 
Duties may involve pipe fitting; boiler making; insulating; welding; machining; carpentry; repairing electrical or mechanical equipment; installing, aligning, and balancing new equipment; and repairing buildings, floors, or stairs.
Examples: Maintenance Mechanic; Building Maintenance Repairer; Trouble Shooting Mechanic; Mechanical Adjuster
49-9043 Maintenance Workers, Machinery Lubricate machinery, change parts, or perform other routine machinery maintenance.
Examples: Belt Repairer; Grease Packer; Machine Oiler
37-2012 Maids 
13-1111 Management Analysts Conduct organizational studies and evaluations, design systems and procedures, conduct work
simplifications and measurement studies, and prepare operations and procedures manuals to assist management in operating more efficiently and effectively.
Include program analysts and management consultants.
Examples: Business Consultant; Program Analyst; Industrial Analyst; Price Analyst
construction fields, such as carpentry or plumbing.
Include general superintendents, project managers, and constructors who manage, coordinate, and supervise the construction process.
Examples: General Contractor; Masonry Contractor Administrator; Developer
any one functional area of management or administration, such as personnel, purchasing, or administrative services.
Examples: Industrial Organization Manager; District Manager; Department Store General Manager 11-3051 Managers, Industrial Production Plan, direct, or coordinate the work activities and resources necessary for manufacturing products in accordance with cost, quality, and quantity specifications.
Examples: Factory Superintendent; Plant Manager
11-3011 Managers, Administrative Services Plan, direct, or coordinate supportive services of an organization, such as recordkeeping, mail distribution, telephone operator/receptionist, and other office support services.
May oversee facilities planning and maintenance and custodial operations.
Example: Space Officer
11-9032 Managers, Education Administrators, Elementary 
Examples: School Principal; Director of Physical Education; Curriculum Director
11-2011 Managers, Advertising 
Examples: Campaign Director; Circulation Director
11-9041 Managers, Engineering Plan, direct, or coordinate activities in such fields as architecture and engineering or research and development in these fields.
Examples: Engineering Research Manager; Safety Director; Technical Director
11-9081 Managers, Lodging Plan, direct, or coordinate activities of an organization or department that provides lodging and other accommodations.
Examples: Hotel Manager; Director of Housing; Innkeeper
11-3031 Managers, Financial Plan, direct, and coordinate accounting, investing, banking, insurance, securities, and other financial activities of a branch, office, or department of an establishment.
Examples: Bank Director; Comptroller; Budget Director
11-3021 Managers, Computer 
Examples: Computer Programming Manager; Data Systems Manager
11-2021 Managers, Marketing Determine the demand for products and services offered by a firm and its competitors and identify potential customers.
Develop pricing strategies with the goal of maximizing the firm's profits or share of the market while ensuring the firm's customers are satisfied.
Oversee product development or monitor trends that indicate the need for new products and services.
Examples: Fashion Coordinator; Marketing Director
11-9051 Managers, Food Service Plan, direct, or coordinate activities of an organization or department that serves food and beverages.
Examples: Banquet Director; Restaurant Manager; Catering Manager
11-9021 Managers, Construction Plan, direct, coordinate, or budget, usually through subordinate supervisory personnel, activities concerned with the construction and maintenance of structures, facilities, and systems.
Participate in the conceptual development of a construction project and oversee its organization, scheduling, and implementation.
Include specialized
11-1021 Managers, General 
Duties and responsibilities include formulating policies, managing daily operations, and planning the use of materials and human resources, but are too diverse and general in nature to be classified in
11-9111 Managers, Medical 
Examples: Director of Occupational Therapy; Medical Records Administrator; Public Health Administrator 11-9121 Managers, Natural Sciences Plan, direct, or coordinate activities in such fields as life sciences, physical sciences, mathematics,
statistics, and research development in these fields.
Examples: Geophysical Manager; Research 
and
Examples: Airport Manager; Schedule Planning Manager; Warehouse Manager
11-3061 Managers, Purchasing Plan, direct, or coordinate the activities of buyers, purchasing officers, and related workers involved in purchasing materials, products, and services.
Include wholesale or retail trade merchandising managers and procurement managers.
Examples: Director of Purchasing; Merchandise Manager
19-3021 Market Research Analysts Research market conditions in local, regional, or national areas to determine potential sales of a product or service.
May gather information on competitors, prices, sales, and methods of marketing and distribution.
May use survey results to create a marketing campaign based on regional preferences and buying habits.
Examples: Advertising Analyst; Marketing Consultant; Marketing Forecaster
Compile, process, and maintain medical records of hospital and clinic patients in a manner consistent with medical, administrative, ethical, legal, and regulatory requirements of the health care system.
Process, maintain, compile, and report patient information for health requirements and standards.
Examples: Medical Records Librarian; Disability Rater; Medical Records Specialist; Medical Library Historian
11-2022 Managers, Sales Direct the actual distribution or movement of a product or service to the customer.
Coordinate sales distribution by establishing sales territories, quotas, and goals and establish training programs for sales representatives.
Analyze sales statistics gathered by staff to determine sales potential and inventory requirements and monitor the preferences of customers.
Examples: Director of Sales; Export Manager; Regional Sales Manager
17-3027 Mechanical Engineering Technicians Apply theory and principles of mechanical engineering to modify, develop, and test machinery and equipment under direction of engineering staff or physical scientists.
Examples: Heat Transfer Technician; Optomechanical Technician; Tool Analyst
11-9151 Managers, Social 
Oversee the program or organization's budget and policies regarding participant involvement, program requirements, and benefits.
Work may involve directing social workers, counselors, or probation officers.
Examples: Public Welfare Director; Volunteer Services Manager; Child Welfare Director; Youth Program Director; Director of Casework Services
29-2011 Medical 
May train or supervise staff.
Examples: Blood Bank Technologist; Cytotechnologist; Immunohematologist
31-9094 Medical Transcriptionists Use transcribing machines with headset and foot pedal to listen to recordings by physicians and other healthcare professionals dictating a variety of medical reports, such as emergency room visits, diagnostic imaging studies, operations, chart reviews, and final summaries.
Transcribe dictated reports and translate medical jargon and abbreviations into their expanded forms.
Edit as necessary and return reports in either printed or electronic form to the dictator for review and signature, or correction.
Example: Medical Stenographer
13-1121 Meeting 
Examples: Conference Planner; Conference Service Coordinator; Convention Manager
11-3071 Managers, Transportation, Storage, 
Include logistics managers.
31-9092 Medical Assistants Perform administrative and certain clinical duties under the direction of physician.
Administrative duties may include scheduling appointments, maintaining medical records, billing, and coding for insurance purposes.
Clinical duties may include taking and recording vital signs and medical histories, preparing patients for examination, drawing blood, and administering medications as directed by physician.
Examples: Physician's Aide; Morgue Attendant; Ophthalmic Aide
27-1026 Merchandise Displayers 
Examples: Mannequin Decorator; Display Artist; Model Dresser
43-5041 Meter Readers, Utilities Read meter and record consumption of electricity, gas, water, or steam.
Examples: Electric Meter Reader; Meter Record Clerk; Water Meter Reader
29-2071 Medical Records 
51-9023 Mixing 
Examples: Grain Mixer; Batch Maker; Clay Mixer; Tumbler Tender
Orderlies, and Attendants Provide basic patient care under direction of nursing staff.
Perform duties, such as feed, bathe, dress, groom, or move patients, or change linens.
Examples: Hospital Aide; Certified Nursing Assistant; Infirmary Attendant
Examples: Cannery Worker, Bottler; Bottle Caser; Wrapper Layer; Strapping Machine Operator
53-7064 Packers 
Examples: Gift Wrapper; Bagger; Boxer
49-3042 Mobile Heavy Equipment Mechanics, Except Engines Diagnose, adjust, repair, or overhaul mobile mechanical, hydraulic, and pneumatic equipment, such as cranes, bulldozers, graders, and conveyors, used in construction, logging, and surface mining.
Exclude "Rail Car Repairers" (493043) and "Bus and Truck Mechanics and Diesel Engine Specialists" (49-3031).
Examples: Construction Equipment Mechanic; Fork Lift Mechanic; Bulldozer Mechanic
43-9071 Office Machine Operators, Except Computer Operate one or more of a variety of office machines, such as photocopying, photographic, and duplicating machines, or other office machines.
Examples: Check Embosser; Coin Wrapping Machine Operator; Copy Machine Operator
47-2141 Painters, Construction 
May remove old paint to prepare surface prior to painting.
May mix colors or oils to obtain desired color or consistency.
Examples: Bridge Painter; Traffic Line Painter; House Painter
51-9195 Molders, Shapers, 
Examples: Cigar Roller; Glass Blower; Marble Finisher
47-2073 Operating Engineers , Construction Equipment Operate one or several types of power construction equipment, such as motor graders, bulldozers, scrapers, compressors, pumps, derricks, shovels, tractors, or frontend loaders to excavate, move, and grade earth, erect structures, or pour concrete or other hard surface pavement.
May repair and maintain equipment in addition to other duties.
Examples: Bulldozer Operator; Power Grader Operator; Steam Shovel Operator
51-9123 Painting, Coating, 
Examples: Stenciler; Candy Dipper; Mirror Silverer
51-4072 Molding, Coremaking, Casting Machine Operators Set up, operate, or tend metal plastic molding, casting, coremaking machines to mold cast metal or thermoplastic parts products.
&
Examples: Centrifugal Casting Machine Operator; Injection Molding Machine Setter; Core Mounter
43-4151 Order Clerks Receive and process incoming orders for materials, merchandise, classified ads, or services such as repairs, installations, or rental of facilities.
Duties include informing customers of receipt, prices, shipping dates, and delays; preparing contracts; and handling complaints.
Examples: Catalogue Clerk; Subscription Clerk; Classified Advertisement Clerk
51-9196 Paper Goods Machine Operators Set up, operate, or tend paper goods machines that perform a variety of functions, such as converting, sawing, corrugating, banding, wrapping, boxing, stitching, forming, or sealing paper or paperboard sheets into products.
Examples: Bag Machine Operator; Box Fabricator; Carton Forming Machine Operator
51-4081 Multiple Machine Tool Operators Set up, operate, or tend more than one type of cutting or forming machine tool or robot.
Examples: Machine Tool Operator; Combination Machine Tool Setter; Metal and Plastic Transfer Machine Operator
51-9111 Packaging 
Include cannery workers who pack food products.
23-2011 Paralegals 
Conduct research to support a legal proceeding, to formulate a defense, or to initiate legal action.
Examples: Legal Assistant; Legal Investigator
31-1012
Nursing
Aides,
53-6021 Parking Lot Attendants Park automobiles or issue tickets for customers in a parking lot or garage.
May collect fee.
Examples: Valet Parker; Car Hop; Car Runner
financial objectives to establish investment strategies.
Examples: Estate Planner; Budget Counselor; Financial Planner
47-2071 Paving, Surfacing, 
Include concrete and asphalt paving machine operators, form tampers, tamping machine operators, and stone spreader operators.
Examples: Asphalt Spreader Operator; Black Top Machine Operator; Road Grader
29-1051 Pharmacists Dispense drugs prescribed by physicians and other health practitioners and provide information to patients about medications and their use.
May advise physicians and other health practitioners on the selection, dosage, interactions, and side effects of medications.
Examples: Apothecary; Druggist; Industrial Pharmacist
treatments and procedures.
May, in accordance with State laws, assist in the development of treatment plans, carry out routine functions, document the progress of treatment, and modify specific treatments in accordance with patient status and within the scope of treatment plans established by a physical therapist.
Generally requires formal training.
Example: Corrective Therapy Assistant
43-3051 Payroll 
May compute employees' time worked, production, and commission.
May compute and post wages and deductions.
May prepare paychecks.
Examples: Attendance Clerk; Payroll Bookkeeper; Timekeeper
31-9095 Pharmacy Aides Record drugs delivered to the pharmacy, store incoming merchandise, and inform the supervisor of stock needs.
May operate cash register and accept prescriptions for filling.
Examples: Dispensary Attendant; Prescription Clerk
31-2022 Physical Therapist Aides Under close supervision of a physical therapist or physical therapy assistant, perform only delegated, selected, or routine tasks in specific situations.
These duties include preparing the patient and the treatment area.
Example: Physiotherapy Aide
39-9021 Personal 
Duties performed at a place of residence may include keeping house (making beds, doing laundry, washing dishes) and preparing meals.
May provide meals and supervised activities at non-residential care facilities.
May advise families, the elderly, and disabled on such things as nutrition, cleanliness, and household utilities.
Examples: Blind Escort; Caregiver; Geriatric Aide
29-2052 Pharmacy Technicians Prepare medications under the direction of a pharmacist.
May measure, mix, count out, label, and record amounts and dosages of medications.
51-9131 Photographic Process Workers Perform precision work involved in photographic processing, such as editing photographic negatives and prints, using photo-mechanical, chemical, or computerized methods.
Examples: Photo Finisher; Photographic Colorist; Darkroom Technician
29-1123 Physical Therapists Assess, plan, organize, and participate in rehabilitative programs that improve mobility, relieve pain, increase strength, and decrease or prevent deformity of patients suffering from disease or injury.
Examples: Physiotherapist; Pulmonary Physical Therapist
29-1071 Physician Assistants Provide healthcare services typically performed by a physician, under the supervision of a physician.
Conduct complete physicals, provide treatment, and counsel patients.
May, in some cases, prescribe medication.
Must graduate from an accredited educational program for physician assistants.
Example: Anesthesiologist Assistant
13-2052 Personal Financial Advisors Advise clients on financial plans utilizing knowledge of tax and investment strategies, securities, insurance, pension plans, and real estate.
Duties include assessing clients' assets, liabilities, cash flow, insurance coverage, tax status, and
51-9132 Photographic Processing Machine Operators Operate photographic processing machines, such as photographic printing machines, film developing machines, and mounting presses.
Examples: Film Processor; Film Printer; Reproduction Machine Loader
47-2151 Pipelayers Lay pipe for storm or sanitation sewers, drains, and water mains.
Perform any combination of the following tasks: grade trenches or culverts, position pipe, or seal joints.
Examples: Trench Pipe Layer; Pipe Liner; Sewer Connector
31-2021 Physical Therapist Assistants Assist physical therapists in providing physical therapy
47-2161 Plasterers 
cement, stucco, or similar materials.
May also set ornamental plaster.
Examples: Dry Plasterer; Stucco Worker; Ornamental Plasterer
Sort mail for delivery.
Deliver mail on established route by vehicle or on foot.
Examples: Letter Carrier; Mail Deliverer; Route Carrier
Examples: Assignment Agent; Production Dispatcher; Expediter
51-4193 Plating 
Include electrolytic processes.
Examples: Anodizer; Electroplater; Galvanizer
51-5022 Prepress Technicians 
Include prepress functions, such as compositing, typesetting, layout, paste-up, camera operating, scanning, film stripping, and photoengraving.
Examples: Compositor; Lithographer; Photoengraving Etcher
19-3031 Psychologists, Clinical, Counseling, and School Diagnose and treat mental disorders; learning disabilities; and cognitive, behavioral, and emotional problems using individual, child, family, and group therapies.
May design and implement behavior modification programs.
Examples: Vocational Psychologist; Child Psychologist
47-2152 Plumbers 
May install heating and cooling equipment and mechanical control systems.
Examples: Gas Line Installer; Hot Water Heater Installer; Sprinkling System Installer
51-6021 Pressers, Textile, Garment, 
Examples: Clothes Ironer; Garment Steamer; Steam Operator
33-3051 Police and Sheriff's Patrol Officers Maintain order, enforce laws and ordinances, and protect life and property in an assigned patrol district.
Perform combination of following duties: patrol a specific area on foot or in a vehicle; direct traffic; issue traffic summonses; investigate accidents; apprehend and arrest suspects, or serve legal processes of courts.
Examples: Border Guard; Campus Police; City Constable
51-5023 Printing Machine Operators Set up or operate various types of printing machines, such as offset, letterset, intaglio, or gravure presses or screen printers to produce print on paper or other materials.
Examples: Silk Screen Printer; Embosser; Bag Printer; Offset Press Operator; Lithoplate Maker 43-3061 Procurement Clerks Compile information and records to draw up purchase orders for procurement of materials and services.
Examples: Property 
27-3031 Public Relations Specialists Engage in promoting or creating good will for individuals, groups, or organizations by writing or selecting favorable publicity material and releasing it through various communications media.
May prepare and arrange displays, and make speeches.
Examples: Publicist; Lobbyist; Press Secretary
13-1023 Purchasing Agents, Except Wholesale, Retail, 
Purchase raw or semi-finished materials for manufacturing.
Include contract specialists, field contractors, purchasers, price analysts, tooling coordinators, and media buyers.
Examples: Fuel Buyer; Lumber Buyer; Radio Time Buyer
43-5051 Postal Service Clerks Perform any combination of tasks in a post office, such as receive letters and parcels; sell postage and revenue stamps, postal cards, and stamped envelopes; fill out and sell money orders; place mail in pigeon holes of mail rack or in bags according to State, address, or other scheme; and examine mail for correct postage.
Examples: Parcel Post Clerk; Special Delivery Clerk; Stamp Clerk
43-5052 Carriers
Postal
Service
Mail
43-5061 Production, Planning, 
Duties include reviewing and distributing production, work, and shipment schedules; conferring with department supervisors to determine progress of work and completion dates; and compiling reports on progress of work, inventory levels, costs, and production problems.
29-2034 Radiologic Technologists 
Include technologists who specialize in other modalities, such as computed tomography and magnetic resonance.
Include workers whose primary duties are to demonstrate portions of the human body on Xray film or fluoroscopic screen.
Examples: X-Ray Technician; CAT Scan Operator; Skiagrapher
43-4171 Receptionists 
Provide information regarding activities conducted at establishment; location of departments, offices, and employees within organization.
Examples: Appointment Clerk; Front Desk Clerk; Referral 
39-9032 Recreation Workers Conduct recreation activities with groups in public, private, or volunteer agencies or recreation facilities.
Organize and promote activities, such as arts and crafts, sports, games, music, dramatics, social recreation, camping, and hobbies, taking into account the needs and interests of individual members.
Examples: Camp Counselor; Playground Director; Activities Director
43-4181 Reservation 
May check baggage and direct passengers to designated concourse, pier, or track; make reservations, deliver tickets, arrange for visas, contact individuals and groups to inform them of package tours, or provide tourists with travel information, such as points of interest, restaurants, rates, and emergency service.
Examples: Gate Agent; Ticket Clerk; Hotel Reservationist
May obtain leases for outdoor advertising sites or persuade retailer to use sales promotion display items.
Examples: Radio Time Salesperson; Yellow Pages Salesperson; Leasing Agent Outdoor Advertising
41-2031 Sales Clerk, Retail Sell merchandise, such as furniture, motor vehicles, appliances, or apparel in a retail establishment.
Examples: Car Dealer; Haberdasher; Wallpaper Salesperson
47-5061 Roof Bolters, Mining Operate machinery to install roof support bolts in underground mine.
47-2181 Roofers Cover roofs of structures with shingles, slate, asphalt, aluminum, wood, and related materials.
May spray roofs, sidings, and walls with material to bind, seal, insulate, or soundproof sections of structures.
Examples: Slater; Hot Tar Roofer; Terra Cotta Roofer
41-4011 Sales Representatives, Technical Sell goods for wholesalers or manufacturers where technical or scientific knowledge is required in such areas as biology, engineering, chemistry, and electronics, normally obtained from at least 2 years of post-secondary education.
Examples: Electronics Sales Representative; Oilfield Equipment Sales Representative; Pharmaceutical Representative
53-7081 Refuse 
May drive truck.
Examples: Trash Collector; Garbage Collector; Scrap Metal Collector
29-1111 Registered Nurses Assess patient health problems and needs, develop and implement nursing care plans, and maintain medical records.
Administer nursing care to ill, injured, convalescent, or disabled patients.
May advise patients on health maintenance and disease prevention or provide case management.
Licensing or registration required.
Include advance practice nurses such as: nurse practitioners, clinical nurse specialists, certified nurse midwives, and certified registered nurse anesthetists.
Advanced practice nursing is practiced by RNs who have specialized formal, post-basic education and who function in highly autonomous and specialized roles.
Examples: Nurse Practitioner; Nurse Midwife; Nursing Supervisor
47-5012 Rotary Drill Operators, Oil 
Examples: Cable Tool Operator; Core Driller; Well Driller
41-4012 Sales Representatives, Non-Technical Sell goods for wholesalers or manufacturers to businesses or groups of individuals.
Work requires substantial knowledge of items sold.
Examples: Diamond Broker; Oil Distributor; Wool Merchant
41-2022 Salespersons, Parts Sell spare and replacement parts and equipment in repair shop or parts store.
Examples: Parts Clerk; Auto Parts Salesperson; Electronic Parts Salesperson
47-5071 Roustabouts, Oil 
Perform other tasks as needed.
Examples: Connection Worker; Oil Field Laborer
51-7041 Sawing Machine Operators, Wood Set up, operate, or tend wood sawing machines.
Include head sawyers.
Examples: Head Sawyer; Crozer Operator; Sawyer; Wood Cutter
41-3011 Sales Agents, Advertising Sell or solicit advertising, including graphic art, advertising space in publications, custom made signs, or TV and radio advertising time.
43-6014 Secretaries, Except Legal, Medical, 
scheduling appointments, organizing and maintaining paper and electronic files, or providing information to callers.
Examples: Personal Secretary; Office Secretary; Receptionist Secretary
burred surfaces.
Include sheet metal duct installers who install prefabricated sheet metal ducts used for heating, air conditioning, or other purposes.
Examples: Tinsmith; Duct Installer, Metal
43-6012 Secretaries, Legal Perform secretarial duties utilizing legal terminology, procedures, and documents.
Prepare legal papers and correspondence, such as summonses, complaints, motions, and subpoenas.
May also assist with legal research.
43-6013 Secretaries, Medical Perform secretarial duties utilizing specific knowledge of medical terminology and hospital, clinic, or laboratory procedures.
Duties include scheduling appointments, billing patients, and compiling and recording medical charts, reports, and correspondence.
Examples: Psychiatric Secretary; Dental Secretary
43-5071 Shipping, Receiving, 
Prepare items for shipment.
Duties include assembling, addressing, stamping, and shipping merchandise or material; receiving, unpacking, verifying and recording incoming merchandise or material; and arranging for the transportation of products.
Examples: Freight Clerk; Receiver; Garment Sorter; Freight Separator
vulnerable populations with the psychosocial support needed to cope with chronic, acute, or terminal illnesses, such as Alzheimer's, cancer, or AIDS.
Services include advising family care givers, providing patient education and counseling, and making necessary referrals for other social services.
Examples: Bereavement Counselor; Hospice Social Worker; Medical Caseworker
33-9032 Security Guards Guard, patrol, or monitor premises to prevent theft, violence, or infractions of rules.
Examples: Bouncer; Bodyguard; Watchguard
51-6031 Sewing Machine Operators Operate or tend sewing machines to join, reinforce, decorate, or perform related sewing operations in the manufacture of garment or nongarment products.
Examples: Blind Stitch Machine Operator; Loop Tacker; Hemmer
21-1021 Social Workers, Child, Family, 
May assist single parents, arrange adoptions, and find foster homes for abandoned or abused children.
In schools, they address such problems as teenage pregnancy, misbehavior, and truancy.
May also advise teachers on how to deal with problem children.
Examples: Foster Care Worker; Adoption Agent; Child Abuse Worker
43-5081 Stock Clerks 
May mark prices on merchandise and set up sales displays.
Examples: Tool-Crib Attendant; Inventory Control Clerk; Warehouse Clerk
47-2221 Structural Iron 
May erect metal storage tanks and assemble prefabricated metal buildings.
Examples: Bolter; Guard Rail Installer; Construction Ironworker
47-2211 Sheet Metal Workers Fabricate, assemble, install, and repair sheet metal products and equipment, such as ducts, control boxes, drainpipes, and furnace casings.
Work may involve any of the following: setting up and operating fabricating machines to cut, bend, and straighten sheet metal; shaping metal over anvils, blocks, or forms using hammer; operating soldering and welding equipment to join sheet metal parts; inspecting, assembling, and smoothing seams and joints of
21-1023 Social Workers, Mental Health 
Activities may include individual and group therapy, crisis intervention, case management, client advocacy, prevention, and education.
Examples: Community Mental Health Worker; Psychiatric Social Worker
51-2041 Structural Metal Fabricators 
Examples: Manufacturing Ornamental Metal Worker; Metal Box Maker; Protector Plate Attacher
21-1022 Social Workers, Medical 
29-2055 Surgical Technologists Assist in operations, under the supervision of surgeons, registered nurses, or other surgical personnel.
May help set up operating room, prepare and transport patients for surgery, adjust lights and equipment, pass instruments and other supplies to surgeons and surgeon's assistants, hold retractors, cut sutures, and help
count sponges, needles, supplies, and instruments.
Examples: Surgical Orderly; Operating Room Technician; Scrub Technician
17-3031 Surveying 
May calculate mapmaking information and create maps from source data, such as surveying notes, aerial photography, satellite data, or other maps to show topographical features, political boundaries, and other features.
May verify accuracy and completeness of topographical maps.
Examples: Cartographic Technician; Map Drafter; Stereo Map Plotter Operator 43-2011 Switchboard Operators, Including Answering Service Operate telephone business systems equipment or switchboards to relay incoming, outgoing, and interoffice calls.
May supply information to callers and record messages.
Examples: Communication Center Operator; Exchange Operator; Telephone Answering Service Operator
School, Except Special Education Teach pupils in public or private schools at the elementary level basic academic, social, and other formative skills.
25-2022 Teachers, Middle School, Except Special and Vocational Education (Junior High School Teacher) Teach students in public or private schools in one or more subjects at the middle, intermediate, or junior high level, which falls between elementary and senior high school as defined by applicable State laws and regulations.
25-2011 Teachers, Preschool, Except Special Education Instruct children (normally up to 5 years of age) in activities designed to promote social, physical, and intellectual growth needed for primary school in preschool, day care center, or other child development facility.
May be required to hold State certification.
Examples: Nursery School Teacher; Day Care Teacher; Head Start Teacher; Childhood Development Teacher
management decisions affecting the work.
Team leaders who work as part of the team should be included.
27-3042 Technical Writers Write technical materials, such as equipment manuals, appendices, or operating and maintenance instructions.
May assist in layout work.
Examples: Documentation Writer; Assembly Instructions Writer; Specifications Writer
49-2022 Telecomm.
Equipment Installers 
Service or repair telephones and other communication equipment on customers' property.
May install equipment in new locations or install wiring and telephone jacks in buildings under construction.
Examples: Central Office Equipment Installer; Electronics Installer; Exchange Mechanic
47-2082 Tapers Seal joints between plasterboard or other wallboard to prepare wall surface for painting or papering.
Examples: Sheet Rock Taper; Wall Taper
25-9041 Teacher Assistants Perform duties that are instructional in nature or deliver direct services to students or parents.
Serve in a position for which a teacher or another professional has ultimate responsibility for the design and implementation of educational programs and services.
Examples: Teacher Aide; Examination Proctor; Paper Grader; Paraprofessional Teacher Aide
25-2031 Teachers, Secondary School, Except Special and Vocational Education (High School Teacher) Instruct students in secondary public or private schools in one or more subjects at the secondary level, such as English, mathematics, or social studies.
May be designated according to subject matter specialty, such as typing instructors, commercial teachers, or English teachers.
51-2092 Team Assemblers Work as part of a team having responsibility for assembling an entire product or component of a product.
Team assemblers can perform all tasks conducted by the team in the assembly process and rotate through all or most of them rather than being assigned to a specific task on a permanent basis.
May participate in making
49-9052 Telecomm.
Line Installers 
Examples: Telecommunications Cable Splicer; Telecommunications Wire Stretcher; Cable Television Installer
41-9041 Telemarketers Solicit orders for goods or services over the telephone.
Examples: Telephone Salesperson; Telephone Solicitor
43-3071 Tellers Receive and pay out money.
Keep records of money and negotiable instruments involved in a financial institution's various transactions.
Examples: Foreign Exchange Clerk; Money Order Clerk; Securities Teller
25-2021
Teachers,
Elementary
49-3093 Tire Repairers 
Examples: Tire Balancer; Tire Fixer
51-4111 Tool and Die Makers Analyze specifications, lay out metal stock, set up and operate machine tools, and fit and assemble parts to make and repair dies, cutting tools, jigs, fixtures, gauges, and machinists' hand tools.
Examples: Die Sinker; Die Finisher; Sawsmith
passes from patrons, assisting in finding seats, searching for lost articles, and locating such facilities as rest rooms and telephones.
Examples: Door Attendant; Ticket Collector
35-3031 Waiters 
Examples: Cocktail Waiter; Wine Steward; Head Waitress
43-9022 Word Processors 
May perform other clerical duties as assigned.
Include composing data keyers.
Examples: Composing Data Keyer; Clerk Typist; Dictaphone Typist
39-6021 Tour Guides Escort individuals or groups on sightseeing tours or through places of interest, such as industrial establishments, public buildings, and art galleries.
Examples: Page; Sightseeing Guide
13-1073 Training 
Examples: Training Coordinator; Workforce Development Specialist; Supervisor, Training Personnel
51-8031 Water 
Examples: Disposal Operator; Filtration Plant Operator; Sewage Plant Operator
53-3032 Truck Drivers, Heavy 
May be required to unload truck.
May require use of automated routing equipment.
Requires commercial drivers' license.
Examples: Auto Carrier Driver; Cement Truck Driver; Moving Van Driver
51-4121 Welders, Cutters, Solderers, 
Examples: Acetylene Burner; Arc Welder; Blow Torch Operator
53-3033 Truck Drivers, Light or Delivery Services Drive a truck or van with a capacity of under 26,000 GVW, primarily to deliver or pick up merchandise or to deliver packages within a specified area.
May require use of automatic routing or location software.
May load and unload truck.
Example: Parcel Post Truck Driver
51-4122 Welding, Soldering, 
Include workers who operate laser cutters or laser-beam machines.
Examples: Laser Cutter Machine Operator; Electron Beam Welder Setter; Laser-Beam Machine Operator; Ultrasonic Welding Machine Operator
39-3031 Ushers, Lobby Attendants, 
51-7042 Woodworking Machine Operators, Except Sawing Set up, operate, or tend woodworking machines, such as drill presses, lathes, shapers, routers, sanders, planers, and wood nailing machines.
Examples: Frazer; Molding Sander
