Development Brief #2 (Senior Housing) Ohio Department of Aging Reverse Mortgages: Helping People Keep their Homes Older adults who have limited income but substantial equity in their homes can turn that home equity into cash while remaining in their homes - through a reverse mortgage.
That cash can enable them to afford to stay in their home: fix the roof, install a ramp, retire debts, hire a housekeeper, or provide vital regular income for everyday costs of living.
In a standard mortgage, you ­ the borrower ­ start out with a lot of debt and little equity, and over time, as you pay the lender, you decrease your debt and increase your equity.
In a reverse mortgage, the borrower starts out with lots of equity and little or no debt, and over time as the lender pays you, your equity decreases and your debt increases.
As of last year, approximately 55,000 older Americans have taken advantage of this financing tool.
About two-thirds of them used federally-insured Home Equity Conversion Mortgages (HECMs).
Homeowners 62 and older are eligible to participate in U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development's (HUD) HECM program.
Borrowing against the equity in their homes, homeowners can receive payments in a number of ways: they can get a lump sum or only use the money as needed, through a line of credit.
Or, they can opt to receive a monthly amount, either for a fixed term or for as long as they live in the home.
Homeowners whose circumstances change can restructure these payment options.
A HUD-insured reverse mortgage does not require repayment as long as the borrower lives in the home.
When the homeowner dies or chooses to sell their home, lenders recover their principal, plus interest.
The remaining value of the home goes to the homeowner or to his or her heirs.
1 The size of reverse mortgage loans ­ the amount you can borrow - is determined by the borrower's age, the interest rate, and the home's value.
The older a borrower, the larger the percentage of the home's value that can be borrowed.
This is because lenders calculate the length of time they will have to wait to be repaid based on the life expectancy of the borrower, and interest will accrue throughout that time.
For example, based on a loan at today's interest rates of approximately 9 percent, a 65-year-old could borrow up to 26 percent of the home's value, a 75-year-old could borrow up to 39 percent of the home's value, and an 85-year-old could borrow up to 56 percent of the home's value.
There are no income limits for borrowers receiving HUD's reverse mortgages; the income of borrowers is irrelevant since they are not making mortgage payments.
There are also no limits on the value of homes qualifying for a HUD reverse mortgage.
However, the amount that may be borrowed is capped by the maximum FHA mortgage limit for the area, which varies from $81,548 to $160,950, based on local housing costs.
So, owners of higher-priced homes can't borrow any more than owners of homes valued at the FHA limit.
The Federal Housing Administration (FHA), part of HUD, insures the loan; so if the proceeds of the sale are insufficient to pay the amount owed (e.g., if the homeowner stays in the home longer than expected or property values decline), FHA will pay the lender the amount of the shortfall.
The FHA collects a premium to provide mortgage insurance coverage.
Borrowers are charged 2 percent of the home's value as an upfront payment, plus one-half percent on the loan balance each year.
These amounts are usually paid by the lender and charged to the borrower's principal balance.
Still, FHA's reverse mortgage
insurance makes HUD's program less expensive to borrowers than the smaller reverse mortgage programs run by private lenders without FHA insurance.
If you are interested in a reverse mortgage, beware of scam artists who charge thousands of dollars for information that is free from HUD or from other agencies.
To report fraud and abuse in the reverse mortgage program, call toll-free 1-888-466-3467.
For good, reliable information on reverse mortgages, visit the website for The National Center for Home Equity Conversion at http://www.reverse.org.
Funded by the American Association of Retired Persons (AARP), the Center is a widely respected nonprofit clearinghouse of information on reverse mortgage products, lenders and counseling agencies.
The web site includes an online calculator where you can key a homeowner's age and the amount of equity in the home, and get a general idea how much money could be borrowed against that equity.
The calculator compares the FHA insured HECM product with another popular reverse mortgage product called the Homekeeper, offered by Fannie Mae.
A videotape from AARP Foundation can help consumers decide if reverse mortgages are for them.
It can also be used by counselors or lenders to provide clients with independent information on this financial tool.
The package contains two 15-minute video programs on one tape, and a resource guide.
Videos are closecaptioned for the hearing impaired.
The only cost is $5 per package for Shipping and handling.
For more information call the AARP Foundation at 202/434-6042.
Contact Information: National Center for Home Equity Conversion 360 N Robert #403 Saint Paul MN 55101 (phone) 651-222-6775 (fax) 651-222-6797 http://www.reverse.org U.S. Dept of Housing 
HUD-approved Lenders: http://www.hud.gov/ll/code/liplcrit.html Fannie Mae Consumer Information: 1-800-732-6643
http://www.fanniemae.com/singlefamily/products/mar kets/emg_reverse.html
Author: Janet Hofmann, Housing Administrator, Planning, Development and Evaluation Unit, Ohio Department of Aging.
(4/00) More About Development Briefs: ODA's Planning Development and Evaluation has initiated a new series of on-line publications titled Development Briefs.
This series provide aging network providers and practitioners with best practices and information that they can use to serve Ohio's older population.
For a complete listing of Development Briefs readers can visit ODA's website at www.state.oh.us/age/ or call 614-466-5390.
Aging Network providers and practitioners are invited to submit best practices for consideration as Development Brief topics.
For more information contact Marc Molea at 614-7529167.
2
3
