Appendix G ­ Cultural Resource Site Types in Arizona Prehistoric Archeological Sites Village (Rancheria) Temporary Camp Farm Camp Trail Camp Hunting/Gathering Camp Rock Shelter Cleared Circle Usually a permanent habitation area for several families over an extended period of time.
A temporary habitation area.
Temporary camp occupied during planting or harvesting times; usually found along the Colorado River.
Very temporary camp used for a night or two during migrations.
Temporary camp used for a few weeks as a base camp for hunting and gathering activities.
A temporary camp found within a natural rock shelter.
Also known as "Sleeping Circles," a cleared and/or smoothed depression area on desert pavement terraces, usually used for sleeping.
Usually a cleared area with rocks around the edge, thought to have served as anchors for temporary brush huts.
A source area for raw lithic materials used for tool manufacture, or for minerals used for paints.
A concentration of thermally affected rocks usually with ash in the soil.
These may occasionally be cremation sites.
A trail marker, monument, or "shrine" resulting from stones placed in a pile or cluster.
A refuse area usually associated with permanent or semi-permanent annually occupied villages or camps.
A food preparation area where one or more grinding stones (metates, mortars, or pestles) are present.
An area where cores or raw lithic materials were reduced to blanks, performs, or tools, evidenced by concentrations of large chunks or flakes of the same material.
A location used to manufacture a lithic tools, as evidenced by a scatter of lithic flakes or cores.
A location with scattered broken pottery sherds, possibly the result of the breakage of a single vessel.
A semi-walled locality, usually on hilly or mountainous slopes, used to hunt primarily bighorn sheep and deer.
A location where large animals (such as bison or mammoth) have been killed and/or butchered.
Evidence or human burial or cremation, the latter usually containing ash and pieces of human bone.
Rock Circles Quarry/Lithic Source Roasting Pit Rock Cairn Midden Milling Station Knapping Station Lithic Scatter Ceramic Scatter Hunting Blind Kill Site Burial/Cremation
Appendix G-1
Trail Aboriginal Art Petroglyphs Pictographs Intaglios Rock Alignments Isolated Artifacts
An aboriginal footpath used to travel from area to area.
Trails are primarily identified by association with artifacts and/or features.
Geometric, zoomorphic, or anthropomorphic design created by aboriginal peoples.
Designs pecked, rubbed, or scratched onto rock.
Designs painted on rock.
Large designs created on desert pavement by removal of surface gravel..
Large designs created by the alignment of rocks and gravel.
Artifacts, such as pottery sherds, lithic tools, etc., found without association to an identifiable site.
Historic Archeological Sites Mine Mill Town Home or Cabin Historic Campsite Road or Trail Military Trash Dump Grave Evidence of ore removal for mineral extraction, i.e., pits, holes, shafts, adits, tailings, etc.
Structures (or the remains of structures) associated with processing minerals.
Aggregation of structures and other physical remains of a multifamily occupation in historic periods.
Single structure and associated physical remains of a single person or family occupancy.
Evidence of temporary occupation by one or more families.
Usually associated with temporary mining or river-related activities.
Evidence of historic use as a wagon or pack train route.
Site of a military camp or other activities.
Primarily remnants of General Patton's World War II maneuvers.
Historic refuse associated with any of the above.
One or more historical burials.
Traditional Cultural/Religious Sites Ceremonial Site A prehistoric or historic area of sacred character.
Physical evidence of ceremonial activities are usually present in the form of dance patterns, vision quest circles, intaglios, rock cairns, etc.
A prehistoric or historic area of sacred character.
Evidence of physical activities is not always present.
Certain mountaintops, power places and vision quest locations are examples of sacred areas.
An area of traditional use for hunting, gathering (of food or medicinal plants), fishing, or traveling.
Sacred Area
Traditional Use Area
________________________________________________________________________________________________ Adapted from Lower Gila South RMP (Appendix 17) and Final Yuma District RMP (Table 3-1)
Appendix G-2
Appendix G ­ Arizona Chronology* Paleoindian Period 11,500 BC ­ 5,000 BC Earliest known human occupation of North America, Paleoindians were small (20-30 individuals), nomadic groups which, utilizing distinctive Clovis technology, hunted mammoth and other megafauna.
Many of the large game animals became extinct before the later phases of the Paleoindian Period (Folsom, Plano), although exploitation of resources such as Bison antiquis continued.
In the Early Archaic, small family groups of hunter-gatherers ranging over large territories, often using caves and rockshelters for base camps.
Greater reliance on plants for food.
Increasingly marginal environmental conditions necessitated improvements in technology.
Use of baskets, milling stones, and a variety of different types of points and ground stone tools.
The introduction of ceramics and horticulture (beans, corn, and squash) from Mesoamerica towards the end of the Archaic contributed to the development of more permanent settlements along the river valleys.
Use of storage pits and other techniques for food preservation.
Considered ancestral to modern Pueblo Indians, the Anasazi culture occupied the Four Corners region, including northeastern Arizona.
Agriculture became an important component of Anasazi culture around 500 AD, and by 700 AD, pit houses were replaced by pueblo architecture.
It is believed that climatic changes and/or social conflict beginning around 900 AD caused the Anasazi to abandon their settlements by 1300 AD. Predominant in south-central Arizona.
Increased importance of agriculture and a settled lifestyle; advanced irrigation techniques.
Settlement patterns became more sophisticated over time: early pithouse clusters gave way to rock and adobe construction in the Classic Period.
Settlements also exhibited similarities to Mesoamerican sites, with courtyard spaces and ceremonial ball courts.
The ruins of Casa Grande, a four-story structure build in the mid1300s with apparent ceremonial/astronomical significance reflect the sophistication of the Hohokam Classic Period.
Centered in southern New Mexico and West Texas (Rio Grande Valley), the Mogollon culture also extended into southeastern Arizona, and was generally contemporary with the Hohokam.
Transition from pithouse to pueblo-style villages of up to 100 dwellings surrounding central plazas.
Characteristic black-on-white pottery during the Mimbres Classic period.
The abandonment of the Mimbres region occurred after AD 1300, although cultural elements are found as far west as the Salado Region (Tonto Basin).
The Salado Indians occupied the Tonto Basin area, generally in the region between the middle Salt River and Tonto Creek, and in the rugged upper Sonoran Desert near the edge of the Mollogon Rim.
The Salado practiced simple irrigation of crops (corn and beans) and utilized native plants such as yucca and agave.
Food was stored in large beehive shaped granaries made of baskets lined with adobe and placed on low rock pedestals.
Polychrome pottery made from red clay is characteristic of the Salado.
Structures were typically cobble and adobe (similar to Hohokam masonry) and were organized into protected compounds around a central plaza.
Platform mounds (ex. Cline Terrace Mound) began to be constructed around 1280 AD.
The Salado abandoned these villages for cliff dwellings during the late 1300s, ultimately abandoning the Tonto Basin by 1450 AD. Considered descendants of the Hohokam, the Piman occupy the Sonoran desert.
They are agriculturalists, utilizing irrigation canals along the Gila and Salt Rivers and cultivating corn, beans and squash.
Characteristic coiled basketry.
Nomadic hunters and warriors, the Apache, a southern branch of the Athabascan linguistic stock, began moving into the southeastern portion of present-day Arizona in the mid-1500s as a result of pressures from Comanches in Texas and New Mexico.
In 1539 the Spanish explorer Fray Marcos de Niza traveled through Arizona, followed by a larger expedition under Coronado a year later.
Settlement by the Spanish brought disease (smallpox in 1520 and measles in 1729) and general disruption and decline to the native populations.
Establishment of numerous forts (presidios) and missions.
Spanish rule was followed by incorporation of the area into the Mexican Republic after 1824.
The loss of most of Northern Mexico (including present-day Arizona) to the United States during the Mexican-American War (18461848) and the subsequent Gadsden Purchase in 1854, encompassing southern Arizona and the southernmost portion of New Mexico, marked the end of Hispanic control.
After the Mexican-American War, present-day Arizona was included in the New Mexico territory.
In August 1861 the Territory of Arizona was created and seceded from the Union; in 1863, the United States Government recognized the Territory of Arizona and established the present boundaries.
Influx of Anglo-American settlers from 1865 to 1900.
Arizona attained statehood in 1912.
Archaic Period 8,000 BC ­ 1 AD
Anasazi Period 1 AD ­ 1300 AD
Hohokam Period 150 AD ­ 1450 AD
Mogollon/Mimbres Period 200 AD ­ 1450 AD
Salado Period 1150 AD ­ 1450 AD
Piman (O'odham) Period 1500 AD - Present
Apache Period Mid 1500s - Present
Spanish-Mexican Period 1540 AD ­ 1854 AD
Anglo-American Period 1854 ­ Present
*Dates are approximate.
Appendix G-3
Appendix G ­ Selected Cultural Resources Localities on BLM-Managed Lands Field Office AZ Strip Locality Paria Canyon and Paria Plateau Type Prehistoric Description Large variety of sites including pithouses, masonry features, habitation structures, granaries, storage cists, hearths, lithic scatters, campsites, rock art, rock shelters, and trails.
The Paria Plateau Archeological District (constituting 70,000 acres and 416 sites) was determined eligible for the NRHP in 1976.
Pinyon-juniper woodland with water sources at mesa footlands.
High potential for prehistoric sites.
Rock shelters, masonry features, and rock art in the vicinity of Lost Spring Mountain.
The Mount Trumbull Archeological District (18,250 acres and 72 sites) was determined eligible for the NRHP in 1976.
The area was occupied by 2600 BC, based on split twig figurines found in canyon rockshelters, and by 1 AD, the fertile soils of the area were being exploited by the Anasazi, who established habitation sites in the area.
Evidence of Paiute occupation has been noted from ceramics associated with Anasazi pueblo sites.
Two significant rock art sites are Witch Pool and Nampaweap, a half-mile long site with thousands of rock art elements.
Antelope Cave, an Anasazi Village site on the Uinkaret Plateau was listed on the NRHP in 1975.
High density of prehistoric sites including the petroglyph site at Little Black Mountain (over 500 designs), and seasonal campsite locations in the vicinity of the Virgin and Beaver Dam Mountains.
Habitation sites and campsites are likely in the Wolf Hole, Black Rock, and Poverty Mountains, and medium density hunting/gathering sites are predicted on the benches of the Shivwits and Sanup Plateaus.
Seasonal hunting and gathering sites are predicted in the Grand Wash areas.
High densities of sites in the canyon floors leading to the Grand Canyon, where flood zones would suggest agricultural development are also predicted.
Historic overland trade route from New Mexico to California, established ca. 1829 by Antonio Armijo, a New Mexico trader.
Extends from St. George, Utah to sawmill sites on Mt. Trumbull.
The sawmills and trail were established in 1872 by members of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-Day
AZ Strip
Moonshine Ridge
Prehistoric
AZ Strip
Mount Trumbull and the Uinkaret Plateau
Prehistoric
AZ Strip
Virgin River Corridor
Prehistoric
AZ Strip AZ Strip
Old Spanish Trail Temple Trail
Historic Historic
Appendix G-4
Field Office AZ Strip
Locality Honeymoon Trail
Type Historic
AZ Strip
Mount Trumbull
Historic
Kingman Kingman Kingman Kingman Lake Havasu Kingman Kingman Kingman Lake Havasu Safford Safford Safford Tucson Tucson
Joshua Tree Forest Wright Creek Black Mountains Lower Colorado River Area Cerbat Mountains Carrow-Stephens Historical Area (ACEC) Beale-Mojave Road Burro Creek San Pedro River Valley Gila Mountains Turkey Creek Lehner Mammoth Kill Site Fairbank Historic Townsite
Prehistoric Prehistoric Prehistoric Prehistoric Prehistoric Historic Historic Historic Prehistoric Prehistoric Prehistoric Prehistoric Prehistoric Historic
Yuma
Antelope Hill
Prehistoric
Yuma
Sears Point
Prehistoric Historic
Yuma
Fisherman Intaglio
Prehistoric
Description Saints to transport lumber to their Temple in St. George.
Originating at the St. George Temple and established in 1876, this trail diverges from the Temple Trail at the Hurricane Cliffs near Antelope Spring, and extends eastward to Lee's Ferry on the Colorado River.
Livestock/farming center established in 1916.
The Mount Trumbull Schoolhouse and the Mount Trumbull Sawmill Site are preserved as interpretive sites.
Large roasting pits near Grand Wash Cliffs.
Cohonina campsites and Prescott Pueblo sites.
Bighorn Cave and other rock shelters; polychrome pictographs and petroglyphs.
Extensive (36 sq. mi.) macro-flaking industry, trails, petroglyphs and rock rings.
Extensive prehistoric and historic mining sites.
19th century ranch site along Big Sandy Creek Wagon road and old Indian trail.
Stone cabins dating from the 1860's, associated with prospecting Fort Mojave troops.
Prescott Culture pueblos and camp sites; obsidian sources.
Paleoindian kill sites; Salado village sites.
Anasazi sites in Bonita Creek Canyon.
Salado cliff dwelling established ca. 1300 A.D. in the northern foothills of the Galiuro Mountains.
Kill site dating to 11,000 B.C, with significant Clovis component (9000 B.C.).
A designated National Historic Landmark.
Ghost town established in 1881 as an important railroad depot.
Located within the San Pedro Riparian National Conservation Area (NCA), along the San Pedro River.
Many structures associated with the town have been preserved.
Prehistoric and historic petroglyphs on the volcanic basalt outcrop adjacent to the Gila River.
This area was also used as a quarry for grinding stones.
Prehistoric and historic petroglyphs adjacent to the Gila River.
Abundant archeological features in this area, including sleeping circles, rock shelters, lithic and ceramic scatters, rock alignments, shrines/cairns, and geoglyphs.
One human figure and other designs (fish, sun) near the Plomosa Mountains, northeast of Quartzite, Arizona.
Appendix G-5
Appendix G-6
