NEWS OF THE NATION'S DIVERSE CULTURAL HERITAGE HERITAGE MATTERS NOVEMBER 2001 Changing Perceptions of the American Cultural Landscape Theresa Campbell-Page National Conference of State Historic Preservation Officers cultural genesis of the communities that use the lesson plan.
The lesson plan detailed the South's growing reliance on slave labor and the steps involved in South Carolina rice cultivation.
Based on an essay written
for the conference by Judith Carney, "Rice, Slaves, and Landscapes of Cultural Memor y,"(*) we added new content, demonstrating the long histor y of skilled rice cultivation in West Africa that preceded the settlement of South Carolina.
Furthermore, the lesson now
National Park Service Activities
Recent scholarship presented at the "Places of Cultural Memory: African Reflections on the American Landscape" conference, in Atlanta, Georgia, encouraged Teaching with Historic Places (TwHP) to take another look at our lesson plan, "When Rice Was King."
TwHP, a program of the National Register of Historic Places, offers a series of more than 70 online lessons for teachers of history and other subjects.
The Atlanta conference developed out of the realization that little was known about African cultural heritage in the United States.
Likewise, while our lesson plan described the labor Africans contributed to the emerging eighteenth centur y American agricultural economy, it did not acknowledge prior African expertise in rice cultivation.
Information from the conference inspired us to revise the lesson's focus to include the examination of the origins of rice production and the
The map illustrates inland and Tidewater rice systems used near the Cooper River, South Carolina.
Courtesy of Richard Porcher.
Floodgates on a Carolina tidal plantation, c. 1920, allowed fresh water in to irrigate the rice beds.
Courtesy of the Charleston Museum.
page 1
specifies similarities between the methods used in West Africa and South Carolina, such as the successful tidal production method, which required manipulation of tidal flows to attain high levels of productivity in flood plains of rivers and streams.
Carney asserts that African-born slaves provided the critical expertise that made South Carolina rice cultivation successful.
Questions accompanying the reading make the lesson plan users consider slave contributions to agricultural advances and the effect this had on the institution of slaver y. Additional questions ask students to consider whether slaves were given credit for the experience and knowledge they brought to rice cultivation.
Further revisions include an activity to enhance appreciation of multicultural contributions to different areas.
Lesson plan users research various cultures in their community, e.g., Where did they come from? What skills did they bring to the area? They look for evidence representing their influence, discuss similarities and differences of the groups, and conclude which one has the most influence today.
Finally, we added supplementar y resources so lesson plan users could further explore this topic.
Changing the lesson became a useful exercise in keeping our materials current.
New evidence presented in the lesson will help users examine the complex role of slave labor in America, while highlighting the influence of African cultural heritage on the American landscape.
For more information on Teaching with Historic Places, visit our website at www.cr.nps.gov/ nr/twhp.
To read the "When Rice Was King" lesson plan, visit www.cr.nps.gov/ nr/twhp/wwwlps/lessons/3rice/3rice.htm.
* Judith Carney, "Rice, Slaves, and Landscapes of Cultural Memory," in Places of Cultural Memory: African Reflections on the American Cultural Landscape, Conference Proceedings, May 9­12, 2001, Atlanta, Georgia (Washington, D.C.: U.S. Department of the Interior, National Park Service, 2001).
Understanding and Preserving Africanisms in the USA Brian D. Joyner Cultural Resources Diversity Initiative
The "Places of Cultural Memor y: African Reflections on the American Landscape" conference took place May 9­12, 2001 in Atlanta, Georgia.
The conference brought together academic scholars and historic preservationists to explore Africanisms--aspects of African heritage--in the built environment in the Americas.
Approximately 200 people participated in the landmark event.
Over the course of the conference, speakers with interdisciplinary perspectives addressed African cultural heritage in the Americas.
Joseph E. Harris of Howard University opened the conference with a global perspective on the African Diaspora.
Robert Farris Thompson of Yale University addressed reflections of African culture throughout the arts of the New World.
These opening presentations were followed by thematic sessions on the diaspora, agricultural lifeways and technology, cultural landscapes, and urban and rural communities.
In his comments on the session, "Agricultural Lifeways and Technologies," Ted Landsmark of the Boston Architectural Center cr ystallized the spirit of the conference.
Landsmark stated that much on this topic was already known and available in print.
However, it was time for preservationists to take advantage of this scholarship and use it in preservation and cultural heritage efforts in their communities.
"Places of Cultural Memory" also addressed the preservation concerns in the Gullah/Geechee community of South Carolina and the African Burial Ground project in New York City.
Each of the sessions highlighted historic preservation efforts and discussed areas of conflict between community needs, commercial desires, and governmental involvement.
The question asked in many different ways at "Places of Cultural Memor y" conference was: what should we do with this information? The underlying theme of a need for confluence of academic scholarship and historic preservation seems to be the answer, in addition to use of the materials in the development of heritage tourism opportunities.
The National Park Service seeks to use the conference papers and subsequent publications to assist in disseminating the conference contents.
Hard copies of the conference papers are available through the Cultural Resources Diversity Initiative program of the National Park Service; electronic copies are available over the Initiative's website: www.cr.nps.gov/crdi.
For more information or to receive hard copies of the papers, contact Brian Joyner, 202/3431000, or e-mail brian_joyner@nps.gov.
American University are project co-leaders.
Together with other NPS members, S. Terr y Childs, Clarenda Drake, Doris Fanelli, Antoinette Lee, Cynthia Salter-Stith, Mark Scheopfle, and Fredrick York, they bring expertise in ethnography, cultural resource planning, management and interpretation, historic preservation, web design, online education methodologies and African American cultural heritage.
The CWG also includes six universitybased anthropologists: Mario Gonzales (Southwestern University), Stephen Gregor y (Columbia University), Pensiri Ho (American University), Arlene Torres, (University of Illinois), Lok CD Siu (New York University) and Rosita Worl (University of Alaska).
Completing the group's membership are John Franklin and Olivia Cadaval, Center for Folklife and Cultural Heritage, Smithsonian Institution; Sandy Hoa Dang, social activist and cultural performer; Marianna Blagburn, public anthropologist; and Diane Dale, community historian.
These group members bring expertise in the cultures of Native Alaskans, African Americans, Asian Americans, and Hispanic Americans.
On January 7­10, 2002, the CWG will participate in a Curriculum Development workshop at the Sumner School in Washington,DC.
Miki Crespi,Chief Ethnographer, will conduct a session called "Ethnographic Resources: What Are They, Whose Are They and Why Are They Important in Park Planning, Management, and Interpretation?" Tony Knapp, Program Manager, Cultural Resources Stewardship Career Field, will facilitate the discussions proceeding the session.
The intent is to provide National Park Service staff with a greater competency in managing and interpreting these resources in consultation with culturally diverse communities.
Park staff and others with expertise in Pacific Islander, Asian American, Hispanic American, or Native Alaskan cultures who wish to participate may contact Audrey Brown at audrey_brown@nps.gov.
Teaching About African American Heritage Preservation and Ethnographic Resources Online Audrey L. Brown Cultural Anthropologist Archeology 
The Archeolog y 
The course will be a model for an online course series: "Multicultural Heritage Preservation and Stewardship of Ethnographic Resources."
Under the coordination of Audrey L. Brown, the courses are being developed by the Curricula Work Group (CWG), to provide National Park Service staff with a greater competency in managing and interpreting these resources and in consultation with other kinds of communication with culturally diverse communities.
The CWG was formed to develop courses for the online series.
John Hale, Superintendent, National Capital Parks-East and Brett Williams, Chairperson, Department of Anthropolog y,
page 2
HERITAGE MATTERS Museum.
Students also toured the Shaw neighborhood, the Moorland-Spingarn Research Center at Howard University, and the Frederick Douglass National Historic Site.
They worked in smaller peer groups on topics related to their intern projects and made presentations on the final day of the workshop.
The Cultural Resources Diversity Internship Program is funded by a grant from the Challenge Cost Share Program of the National Park Service; the National Center for Cultural Resources, National Park Service; the Everett Public Service Internship Program; and the intern sponsors.
The Student Conservation Association is the administrative partner for this program.
In the summer of 2002, the Cultural Resources Diversity Internship Program will sponsor another group of interns.
Students enrolled at Historically Black Colleges and Universities, Hispanic Serving Institutions, Tribal Colleges, and other minority schools and academic departments are encouraged to apply to this program.
For additional information on the internship program, contact Moriba N. McDonald, e-mail:moriba_mcdonald@nps.gov.
Intern applications should be directed to: Student Conservation Association, 1800 North Kent Street, Suite 102, Arlington, VA 22209 or visit SCA at: www.sca-inc.org.
The deadline for submitting intern applications to the Student Conservation Association is March 1, 2002.
NOVEMBER 2001
The Cultural Resources Diversity Internship Program Sponsors 20 Interns in Summer of 2001 Moriba N. McDonald Cultural Resources Diversity Initiative
Internships, Colleges, and Universities
Charleston, South Carolina.
During my 10-week internship, I had the privilege of working with various preservation organizations, including the Preservation Society of Charleston, the Board of Architectural Review, and City of Charleston Preservation Planning Department, while participating in the review of alterations to historic properties.
In my work with city planner, Eddie Bellow of the City of Charleston Preservation Planning Commission, I was able to get a larger picture of preservation planning and a behindthe-scenes look at the Board of Architectural Review.
Eddie and his staff allowed me to see how they prepare materials about the properties that go before the Board of Architectural Review.
I also interviewed staff members and asked them about the pros and cons of preservation planning, their educational backgrounds, and how that led them to their present careers.
I also experienced the private sector side of historic preservation with the Preservation Society of Charleston.
While working with the Preservation Society, I was able to pull together an easement package, conduct research, make site visits, and organize meetings regarding easement acceptance.
At the offices of the National Trust for Historic Preservation in Charleston, SC, I assisted Sierra Neal with a five-year plan for the Southeast Regional African American Preservation Alliance conferences.
I also participated in the review of transportation-related projects in Charleston, where five homes were affected by a road-widening project for a bridge, and in Savannah, Georgia where a road-widening project was located adjacent to a historic district.
During the summer, I interviewed several individuals who work in historic preservation.
They included Dwayne Green, a lawyer and Vice Chair on the Board of Architectural Review; Mar y Edmunds, Deputy State Historic Preservation Officers for the State of South Carolina; Vanessa TurnerMaybank, tourism director for the City of Charleston; and Valerie Perr y, See INTERNSHIP, page 10, column 2
In the summer of 2001, the Cultural Resources Diversity Internship Program sponsored 20 undergraduate/graduate students.
This 10-week summer program is designed as a career exploration experience for students who are interested in applying their interest in histor y, architecture, and related subjects to work at historic sites, public preservation agencies, and private preservation organizations.
Through this program, students can build their resumes of work in the cultural resources stewardship/historic preservation field.
In 2001, interns were assigned to work at Independence National Historical Park, National Register of Historic Places, Advisor y Council on Historic Preservation, Mar yland Historical Trust, the Arizona State Historic Preservation Office, and private non-profit organizations, including the National Trust for Historic Preservation, the Dallas Historical Society, and the Historic Preservation Trust of Lancaster County, Pennsylvania.
The intern sponsors were selected competitively based on the quality of the proposed project.
Student projects ranged from designing a website for a historic slave cabin in Mar yland to cataloging historical artifacts related to Scott Joplin, indexing archival items from the Texas Centennial, assisting the Mar yland African American Museum Corporation with membership and outreach programs, surveying historic places associated with women's histor y in New Jersey, and conducting research on diverse American Revolutionar y War heroes.
During the sixth week of the program, the interns were invited to Washington, DC to participate in a week-long career workshop.
The workshop included presentations by staff of the National Park Service, the National Trust for Historic Preservation, and the National Building
An Internship in Historic Charleston Nekya Young
Charleston, South Carolina has the oldest historic district in the nation.
In 1931, the Charleston City Council established a permanent Board of Architectural Review to review plans for alterations and additions in the Old and Historic Charleston District.
Although it has enjoyed more than 70 years of protection, historic Charleston continues to evolve and meet new challenges.
In the summer of 2001, I was selected as an intern in the National Park Service's Cultural Resources Diversity Internship Program.
My internship was with the National Trust for Historic Preservation Southern Office in
page 3
HERITAGE MATTERS
NOVEMBER 2001
and of the Lower East Side's important historic Jewish sites.
Lower East Side Conservancy Assists with Recognition of Neighborhood and Two Synagogues The Lower East Side Conservancy announced at a ceremony on April 19, 2001, that the historic Lower East Side historic district in New York City has been placed on the New York State and National Registers of Historic Places in recognition of the role the Lower East Side played in our nation's histor y.
The Lower East Side has the distinction of a place of first settlement for almost ever y immigrant group that has come to America.
Nomination for the Lower East Side was co-sponsored by the Conservancy and the Lower East Side Business Improvement District.
In addition, two of the neighborhood's most important and historic synagogues, Beth Hamedrash Hagadol and Kehila Kedosha Janina, were added to the New York State and National Registers.
At the June 21, 2001, presentation in New York, the synagogues received a combined total of more than $375,000 in grants and loans to enable them to restore their building exteriors.
For more information contact Gail Morse, Director of Tourism, The Lower East Side Conservancy, 200 East Broadway, Suite 3A, New York, NY 10002.
Telephone: 212/5981200, fax: 212/598-4573, LESConservancy@ aol.com, www.nycjewishtours.org.
the pizza place, diner, pool hall, and the deli.
More hang-out spots are mentioned: the Jewish Community House itself, a vibrant and nurturing gathering place; and the lively shopping strip under the "el" trains on 86th Street.
Finally, the local park, with its basketball and handball courts.
Beyond the confines of Bensonhurst, these youths see themselves as citizens of the city and roam it pretty widely via subway.
What makes a good neighborhood for Russian immigrant teens in Bensonhurst? Good home, schools, public spaces, places for hanging out, transit.
The basics that have made good urban neighborhoods continue to do so.
These things create a neighborhood heritage of places that sustain Vlad and his friends from Moscow and Odessa as they add a new layer to it.
Ned Kaufman is a cultural resource consultant based in Yonkers, New York and director of the program at the Jewish Community House.
Contact Ned Kaufman at 914/476-3045; e-mail: nk290nk@aol.com.
Immigrant Teenagers Discover Their Neighborhood: A Report from Bensonhurst, Brooklyn Ned Kaufman
Vlad is 15 years old.
He lives in Bensonhurst, Brooklyn, but he has not been there ver y long.
He was born in Russia, and Russian is his first language.
Many of his friends have similar stories, for Bensonhurst is one of New York's fastest-growing Russian communities.
It has a rich heritage, sustained by its inhabitants and their abiding connection with the neighborhood.
An eight-week after-school program at the Jewish Community House, carried out with funding from New York City Councilman Kenneth Fisher's New American Youth Initiative, seeks to understand what living in Bensonhurst means to Vlad and his friends.
The program starts with a question: "What are the places you care about in your neighborhood?" Then the students discussed, photographed, and wrote about aspects of neighborhood life that were important to them.
They interviewed Brooklyn Borough Historian John Manbeck.
They designed and assembled an exhibit, and presented it to the community at an evening gathering.
The program had two valuable outcomes.
First, the students learned to care about their neighborhood in new ways, to value places and opportunities they had taken for granted.
Second, adults gained a better understanding of the city as experienced by teenagers, teenagers who had brought a fresh eye and a different set of experiences.
The places the students singled out are instructive.
Home, the center of family life and self; school; hang-out spots like
St. Croix Heritage Trail Now Navigable Online The St. Croix Heritage Trail, a designated Millennium Legacy Trail maintained by the St. Croix Landmarks Society, received funding for a navigable web site from the Federal Highway Administration through the Virgin Islands Department of Public Works.
The grant funds several Heritage Trail publications and products including the design and construction of several scenic pullovers and overlooks along 28 miles of the trail.
The route consists of existing roadways and has been developed as a joint effort of the St. Croix Landmarks Society, the Virgin Islands Department of Tourism, and the St. Croix Chamber of Commerce.
The St. Croix Heritage Trail is a 72-mile driving tour that circles St. Croix, the largest of the three United States Virgin Islands and the site of one of the earliest American landings of Christopher Columbus.
The trail connects many of St. Croix's rich natural and cultural heritage sites.
This includes two world-
Community Initiatives
Beth Hamedrash Hagadol was built in 1852 as a Baptist church and became a synagogue in 1885.
In 1967 the synagogue was one of the first to become a New York City Landmark when the congregation's rabbi used the new landmark law to help prevent demolition of the building.
Kehila Kedosha Janina, built in 1926, is the last remaining Greek Romaniote synagogue in the Western Hemisphere and houses a museum of the histor y of Romaniote Jews and the stor y of Greek Jews during the Holocaust.
The Lower East Side Conservancy was created in 1998 as a project of the United Jewish Council of the East Side.
The Conservancy's mission is to celebrate, preserve, and share the Jewish heritage of the Lower East Side of New York City.
In addition to working in historic preservation with the local community, the Conservancy is developing heritage tourism through its Insider's Tours of many of the local synagogues
class historic colonial towns, one of the earliest American-European contact points in the western hemisphere, an eclectic mixture of churches, a prison, and a large assemblage of eighteenth and nineteenth centur y architectural remains associated with Danish colonial rule and the sugar industr y. Point Udall, which is the eastern-most point in the United States, is also included on the Trail.
The site has photographs, maps, and descriptions of St. Croix's attractions, agriculture, natural areas, plantations, culture, historic churches, animal life, and vegetation.
Links are provided for a number of supporting companies and organizations, as well as tour operators that run tours of specific segments of the St. Croix Heritage Trail.
A link to the Virgin Islands Department of Tourism Web site also is included.
The website was developed locally by St. Croix business Media Mate Inc.
Nancy Buckingham, St. Croix Heritage Trail coordinator said, "A community project such as the Heritage Trail certainly benefits from the exposure gained through a website."
For more information, contact Nancy Buckingham, St. Croix Heritage Trail, 69 King Street Frederiksted, St. Croix, Virgin Islands 00840; phone, 340/713-8563.
Visit the website at www.stcroixheritagetrail.com.
The main building holds Heritage Hall, dedicated to the 39 ethnic groups that settled in the area.
Early in its use, nine nationalities--Native Americans, Scandinavians (a combination of Swedish, Danish, Norwegian and Finnish) Polish, Croatian, Italian and Cousin Jacks--held festivals and celebrated with folk tales, music, dance, and culinar y specialties.
An artist from each group was asked to portray characteristics of their nationality with paintings on a beam, which stretched across the hall with images of their heritage.
While the festivals have diminished to two-- Scandinavian and Italian--the beams continue to remind the community of its composition.
In addition, the main building contains over 100 exhibits on life in the North.
The Museum has also undertaken several other preservation projects.
It maintains an area archives and has published 15 books on local histor y. Among the latest are Barns, Farms, and Yarns, containing over 300 photos in color of barns in the county, and Men, Mines, and Memories, containing pictures of local mines.
Both books contain over 20 oral histories by people describing their lives and their occupations.
For more information, visit the website at www.ironcountymuseum.org.
The Pine/Piedra Stock Driveway, located in southwest Colorado, is a 27-mile long ribbon of histor y that stretches from the lowlands along the Colorado-New Mexico border to the high meadows of the Weminuche Wilderness.
The driveway was used from 1900 to 1960 by sheep and cattle ranchers to move their herds from winter grazing grounds to summer pasture in the San Juan Mountains.
Lonely, homesick, and bored, Hispanic and Basque sheepherders would carve their names, dates, and hometowns on the aspen trees, documenting their existence to the next person who passed by.
Drawings of homes, animals, and loves left behind grace the aspen trees.
Cattle ranchers were using the driveway as well, intent on bringing their livestock to the same high meadows used by sheepherders.
The aspen trunks recorded the range wars, with trees declaring "Cattle Only!" and others warning "No cattle, only sheep allowed here."
Contrasting to the graceful Hispanic script, Anglo arborglyphs were oftentimes big and bold, with chiseled words that demanded to be noticed.
The ranching histor y marked on aspen trees is slowly being lost, as aspens live only 80­100 years.
Blow downs, forest fires, and vandalism are also taking their toll.
The San Juan Mountains Association, a non-profit interpretive organization located in Durango, Colorado, has begun efforts to document the arborglyphs found on the Pine/Piedra Stock Driveway and adjacent trails.
Using GPS units and digital cameras, volunteers painstakingly photograph, sketch, and note the location of trees bearing carvings.
In one summer, volunteers have recorded almost a thousand arborglyphs.
In the project's next phase, volunteers will use the information gathered to search for families of the ranchers in an effort to gather oral histor y about an almost-forgotten lifestyle.
For more information, contact Karen Thurman at kthurman@fs.fed.us, or visit the website at www.sjma.org.
The arborglyphs on the Aspen trees relay the stories of Hispanic and Basque herders in the Southwest in the early twentieth century.
Photo courtesy of the San Juan Mountains Association.
Iron County Museum Reflects Mining Culture and Regional Diversity Marcia Bernhardt Curator, Iron County Museum
The Wooden Canvas: Documenting Historic Aspen Art Carvings in Southwest Colorado Karen Thurman Education Outreach Coordinator San Juan Mountains Association
The Iron County Museum, which was established nearly 40 years ago has grown from one building to 22, and is one of the best kept secrets in the Upper Peninsula of Michigan.
The head frame, used to lift tons of iron ore to the surface, is listed in the National Register of Historic Places, and is one part of five outdoor complexes.
Depicting the histor y of the area are a logging camp, a homestead, the mining area, and transportation, all moved to the grounds and most over 100 years old.
At first it looks like graffiti left behind by early travelers through the forest.
Upon closer inspection, however, the carvings on the soft bark of aspen trees tell a fascinating stor y of the lives of Hispanic and Basque sheep herders, as well as the challenges they encountered with cattle ranchers who used the same meadows to graze their herds.
Ignored for years, the stories told by arborglyphs are being sought out by cultural historians and those interested in a unique form of Hispanic folk art.
page 5
HERITAGE MATTERS
NOVEMBER 2001
Located in Reno, Nevada, the Bethel AME church was listed in the National Register in recognition of its role in fostering social equality in the community.
Photo courtesy of Mella Rothwell Harmon.
National Register Listings State Historic Preservation Offices continue to identify and document historic places associated with the nation's cultural groups.
The properties described in this section recently were nominated by states and listed in the National Register of Historic Places.
State Activities
Bethel AME Church
The property was listed on the strength of the church's social histor y. Bethel AME fostered social equality through its active role in the community, its direct tie to the establishment of the Reno-Sparks branch of the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People (NAACP), and its abiding dignity in the face of discrimination.
Bethel AME Church is one of Nevada's most significant building associated with the histor y of its African American population.
For more information, contact Mella Harmon, Nevada Department of Cultural Affairs, 775/684-3447, e-mail; mrharmon@ clan.lib.nv.us.
of the agricultural traditions Portuguese immigrants maintained on the island of Maui.
Portuguese presence in Hawaii dates back to the late eighteenth centur y. Several successful Portuguese families lived in Makawao, including the Gomes family.
The family, like other Portuguese families, maintained their cultural ties through ranching and farming (the house sits on 21.5 acres of land, some of which was leased out to the Ha'iku Pineapple Company, some for raising cattle), and the forno (outdoor oven) behind the Gomes home.
Traditionally, homes with fornos were places for the neighborhood's women to gather several days each week.
The Gomes residence is exemplar y of the contributions of Portuguese immigrants to Maui's heritage.
For more information, contact Timothy Johns, Hawaii Department of Land 
Bethel African Methodist Episcopal (AME) Church in Reno, Nevada, is the oldest surviving African American institution in the state.
Built in 1910, Bethel AME was not only the seat of religious observance, but also a center of social interaction and participation.
It was added to the National Register June 12, 2001.
Frank and Theresa Gomes House
Listed in the National Register on June 14, 2001, the Gomes House is significant for its place in the social and ethnic histor y of the Makawao Portuguese community in Hawaii.
Built in 1924, the Gomes House represents a continuation
Brightwell Shotgun Row
The Brightwell Shotgun Row was listed in the National Register in recognition of the importance of the double shotgun house type.
Photo courtesy Department of Natural Resources.
of Georgia
The Brightwell Shotgun Row was added to the National Register, based on its architecture, community planning and development, and ethnic heritage.
Located in the New Town section of Athens, Georgia, the double shotgun house row on Barber Street was built between 1935­1940 by Helen Brightwell, and housed working class African Americans.
The shotgun house is an African American vernacular architectural form, with roots in the Caribbean and Africa, and is typically found in African American neighborhoods throughout the lower south.
It also can be found as far north as Ohio, and as far west as Texas.
However, the double shotgun variety is unique to Georgia.
The shotgun row in Athens is considered notable due to the back-to-back configuration of the six homes.
The Brightwell Shotgun Row was listed in the National Register on June 14, 2001.
For more information, contact Richard Cloues, Georgia Department of Natural Resources, Historic Preservation Division, richard_cloues@mail.dnr.state.ga.us.
The Frank and Theresa Gomes House was listed in the National Register in recognition of its place in the social and ethnic history of the Portuguese in Hawaii.
Photo courtesy of Dawn E. Duensing.
page 7
HERITAGE MATTERS
NOVEMBER 2001
"Growing Up in Washington" Views the Nation's Capital Through Children's Eyes Jill Connors Exhibit Coordinator, The Historical Society of Washington, DC
When most Americans think about children in Washington they picture school trips and tour buses at the Smithsonian.
Some children never visited Washington, they already lived here.
For them, the nation's shrines served as playgrounds.
Their memories combine the ordinar y pleasures and pains of childhood with the awareness of growing up in a special place.
Washington is a city of people with a rich and multilayered histor y who feel connected to the city through community and neighborhood relationships.
Washington is historically a city of black and white.
Although Washington is becoming increasingly multicultural, it is still a city 66% African-American and 27% white.
Washington is also a city that spills beyond its official boundaries into the neighboring states of Mar yland and Virginia.
It is a city rich with the histor y of the Jewish community, German community, black community, newer immigrant communities, service and government workers, working class and wealthy, and generations of families.
The Historical Society of Washington, DC began investigating the idea of growing up in Washington several years ago with a community oral histor y interview initiative.
Created around the theme of childhood in Washington, it has since grown into several projects, including an exhibit currently on display at the Historical Society of Washington, DC and a book to be published this fall through Arcadia Publishing.
The "Growing Up in Washington" project has added new scholarship on the histor y of childhood by emphasizing the importance of place in the experience of children.
People identified movie theaters, parks, and schools as common places they visited as children.
The most common themes that were repeatedly echoed in memories of place were references to the importance of
Private Sector Initiatives
Children in Washington stay cool on a hot and hazy summer day at the Columbus Monument, Union Station Plaza, 1960.
Photo courtesy of Gallagher Photo Collection, HSW Collections.
movie theaters to children and the impact of segregation on children.
"Growing Up in Washington" gives a sampling of the experiences the children of Washington had over the past centur y. Together these memories weave a stor y of Washington and begin to show the nuances of living in different quadrants, in different neighborhoods, in different religious affiliations, and in different time periods over the past centur y.
The immediacy of the stories provides a sense of the social and cultural changes in the city over the past hundred years.
"Growing Up in Washington" captures what it means to be a Washingtonian.
For more information, contact the Historical Society of Washington, D.C. at 202/785-2068.
Looking Back and Forward: Significant Places of the GLBT Community Conference Held in San Francisco Gerry Takano
The recognition of diversity sites as historic places has strengthened mainstream preservation interests in gay, lesbian, bisexual and transgender (GLBT) histor y, built environment, and public space.
Recently, San Francisco became the venue for an international conference that focused on the identification and interpretation of GBLT sites.
On June 21-22, 2001 the "Looking Back and Forward: Significant Places of the GLBT Community" conference was presented by the Friends of 1800, a grassroots, nonprofit organization dedicated to preserving significant historical and
cultural resources, with a special interest in the preservation of sites important to GBLT histor y.
The two-day conference opened with the plenar y session, "Rainbow Revitalization: The GLBT Role in the American Historical Preservation Movement" presented by William Coburn, a historic preservation consultant based in Dearborn, Michigan.
Sessions that followed provided detailed reports on the state of GLBT preservation work in Los Angeles, San Francisco, Honolulu,Seattle,Detroit,Chicago,and Washington,D.C.
On the final day's plenar y session, author Will Fellows of Milwaukee read excerpts from a forthcoming book, Preservation Comrades, Gay Men as Keepers of Culture.
Other conference activities included a tour of San Francisco's City Hall, highlighting the assassination of openly gay supervisor Harvey Milk.
Accompanying the official City Hall tour guide was actor Jim Kennedy who supplemented the official tour presentation with his own commentar y and audiotapes from the time of Harvey Milk.
Susan Str yker of the GLBT Historical Society of Northern California provided a walking tour of the Tenderloin, providing historical documentation on transgender presence in the area and pre-Stonewall resistance at Compton's Cafeteria.
(Stonewall in New York City is the site of the 1969 raid and demonstrations that led to the modern gay and lesbian movement and is a designated National Historic Landmark.)
Other outings included a walk through the Hayes Valley, a nearby neighborhood with an emerging GLBT presence, as well as a hard-hat tour of the Fallon Building, undergoing restoration as a result of the Friends of 1800's efforts.
Conference participation and support included the GLBT Historical Society of Northern California, San Francisco Public Librar y's James Hormel Center, and the Joie de Vivre, developers and owners of the Hotel Bijou Conference headquarters.
With local, national, and international interest among activists, communitybased historians, and academics, additional conferences and activities related to the GLBT built environment are planned in the future by the Friends of 1800.
was held, to Ford's Theatre where he was assassinated.
In her introduction to the accompanying booklet, Kathr yn Schneider Smith, Executive Director of the DC Heritage Tourism Coalition, relates DC's trail to other similar trails around the countr y. Smith points out how Boston's Freedom Trail represents our colonial and Revolutionar y War histor y, and that in Philadelphia, the Liberty Bell and Independence Hall symbolize the creation of the new nation.
In turn, Washington, DC has been at the heart of the struggle to preserve the Union and fulfill its promise.
The Civil War to Civil Rights heritage trail helps residents and visitors alike to understand the important role our nation's capital played at this crucial time and the continuing impact of the ideals for which the Civil War was fought.
For more information, contact Richard Busch, Downtown Heritage Trail Project Manager, DC Heritage Tourism Coalition, 202/661-7581, or visit the website at www.dcheritage.org.
Participating in Preservation Mayor Anthony Williams reads one of the new heritage trail signs during the Civil War to Civil Rights heritage trail opening ceremony.
Photo courtesy of Carole Kolker.
Kathleen May Southwest Colorado Cultural Site Stewardship Program
For further information, visit the website: www.friendsof1800.org.
Gerry Takano is principal in the firm of TBA West, an architectural and planning firm based in San Francisco.
Washington, DC Unveils Civil War to Civil Rights Heritage Trail On July 2, 2001, District of Columbia Mayor Anthony Williams uncovered the first sign of the city's new 21-sign Civil War to Civil Rights heritage trail.
The trail winds through the downtown neighborhood and was developed in a partnership between the Downtown DC Business Improvement District and the DC Heritage Tourism Coalition.
Professor Edward Smith, Chair of American Studies at American University in Washington, DC and project consultant, noted early on that the war was the defining event in our countr y's histor y and that it forever changed Washington, DC as well.
Building on Professor Smith's analysis, the trail uses existing historic landmarks to help tell a two-fold stor y: how the war transformed the city into the center of national power, and how our countr y and its capital have continued to experience the challenge of realizing the American dream of equal rights for all its citizens.
Trail walkers will encounter places where well known individuals lived and worked before, during, and after the Civil War: individuals such as nurse Clara Barton; founder of the Contraband Relief Society to aid new freedmen, Elizabeth Keckley; poet and wartime nurse, Walt Whitman; abolitionist and equal rights champion, Frederick Douglass; Lincoln assassin, John Wilkes Booth; and civil rights leader, Martin Luther King, Jr.
President Lincoln's presence pervades the trail, from the church where he and his family worshipped, to the old Patent Office where his second inaugural ball
Southwest Colorado is home to infinite archeological treasurers.
The region was at the heart of the prehistoric ancestral Puebloan culture.
It lay directly in the path of adventurers and traders along the Spanish Trail and boasted countless boomtowns during the exploration and settlement of the West.
Today, thousands of highly visible, yet fragile, sites of national and international significance can be found scattered among southwest Colorado's canyons, forests, and mesa tops.
Urban and rural development, increased site visitation, and a rise in the level of vandalism and looting have resulted in alarming damage to archeological sites.
Cultural resource managers and archeologists agree that the most effective way to stem losses is through public education and community involvement.
page 9
The Southwest Colorado Cultural Site Stewardship Program (CSSP) was created in response to these concerns.
A key CSSP objective is to help preserve and protect our irreplaceable cultural resources by teaming volunteer stewards with endangered prehistoric and historic archeological sites.
Established in 2000, CSSP has trained some 75 volunteer stewards, as well as a number of recreational permittees to monitor and report activities at or near dozens of unattended cultural sites.
CSSP is one of several programs of the San Juan Mountains Association (SJMA) in Durango, Colorado.
SJMA is a nonprofit organization created in 1988 to help public land agencies enhance personal and community stewardship of southwest Colorado's natural and cultural resources through interpretation, information, education and volunteerism.
CSSP is funded by the Colorado Historical Society/State Historical Fund, the San Juan National Forest, the Bureau of Land Management, and the Four Corners Heritage Council.
In August 2001, CSSP's first annual Stewardship conference brought speakers and registrants together from all over Colorado and the Southwest.
Educators, archeologists, and other experts conducted seminars on topics ranging from the histor y and role of archeological site stewardship, to techniques of monitoring, artifact and site identification, oral histor y collection, archival research, and heritage education.
The conference--co-sponsored by the Fort Lewis College Center of Southwest Studies, the Office of Community Services, and the San Juan Public Lands Center--provided a venue and opportunity for CSSP to partner with the local community in a joint effort to further preservation efforts.
A key CSSP goal is to enhance heritage education by disseminating accurate preservation information through outreach programs, developing materials that focus on site etiquette, and helping to coordinate the efforts of various organizations, federal agencies, and members of the public under a cohesive site stewardship program.
For more information contact the San Juan Mountains Association at (970) 385-1267.
INTERNSHIP from page 3
director of the Nathaniel Russell House and a member of the city's planning commission.
Most were minorities who shared with me their experiences entering the preservation field and their current roles in supporting historic preservation in Charleston.
Because of this internship, my views on preservation have completely changed.
Historically, the preservation field was commonly known as an "elite" field.
During this internship I have been persuaded that the stereotype about preservation is just a stereotype.
The field of preservation includes all races and cultures.
Thanks to the National Park Service, the National Trust for Historic Preservation, the city of Charleston, and the Student Conservation Association, I now am interested in pursuing a historic preservation career.
A student at Tennessee State University, Nekya Young participated in the Summer 2001 NPS Cultural Resources Diversity Internship Program.
She also is a recipient of the National Trust's Emerging Preservation Leaders scholarship and attended the National Preservation Conference in Providence, RI in October 2001.
organize the UGRR Summit.
DHPA awarded grants to seven Hoosiers to research UGRR activity throughout Indiana.
Five of the researchers shared their fascinating discoveries with the general public at the Summit on August 4, 2001 at the Indiana Government Center Auditorium.
With an attendance of over 60 people, including two National Park Service regional representatives, Fox 59, and the Indianapolis Star, the Summit proved to be a success.
Based on the research compiled by the Summit presenters, I created a database of UGRR sites and routes.
I was able to provide relevant information to those interested.
For example, I assisted a North Carolina reporter find out about a UGRR site in south central Indiana.
In addition to the Summit and database, I also worked with the Indiana Freedom Trails (IFT), an organization of volunteers who research and provide educational programs on the Network to Freedom application (IFT is to be nationally recognized as an UGRR educational program), and updated the IFT brochure.
Lastly, I also was the DHPA volunteer coordinator for the Indiana Black Expo (IBE), the largest cultural fair in the nation.
In this role, I attended the organizational meeting and registered DHPA staff to volunteer in the DNR booth and at the IBE.
My internship with DHPA was truly rewarding, personally, professionally, and educationally.
I have a greater appreciation for historic preservation and renewed interest in histor y due to my experience with the National Park Service and the Student Conservation Association.
LeShone HoSang, a junior at Georgetown University, was an intern in the Summer 2001 NPS Cultural Resources Diversity Internship Program.
globalization and rapid technological advances as major factors that will impact the way we conserve our all important cultural and natural heritage.
Transformations of the world's political economy threaten those vital senses of place and identity that have served to sustain cultural and environmental resources.
The research in the Center will focus on four readily apparent components of heritage and they include: · Examining the recover y, celebration, and interpretation of the past as a necessar y component of sustaining local identity and sense of place.
· Understanding the uses and values associated with the natural environment as expressed in cultural terms.
· Investigating the appreciation of cultural and natural places as a major component as a way to maintain locality and ensure the survival of communities and locales that are threatened by transformations in the global economy.
· Analyzing the ways in which heritage is expressed and used to further economic development and political activity.
Heritage resource studies is an emerging field.
It is critical that this research be formulated in such a way that it can be readily applied by those who are responsible for the management of our historic, cultural, and environmental resources, as well as contribute to an increased public awareness of the need for responsible heritage development.
UMCHRS is committed to strengthening our networks in the professional community and making it a leader in the field.
The members include; Paul A. Shackel, Director, Associate Professor of Anthropology; Mark P. Leone, Professor of Anthropology; Erve Chambers, Professor of Anthropology; and Michael Paolisso, Assistant Professor of Anthropology.
For more information, visit the web page at http://www.bsos.umd.edu/anth/paullab/chrs.htm.
The Underground Railroad in Indiana LeShone HoSang
The Underground Railroad (UGRR) runs deep in the mytholog y of the United States.
What was depicted as a structured organization spiriting slaves to freedom, research has shown was actually more of a loosely affiliated group of people determined to assist runaways in their attempts to flee the harsh conditions of bondage.
Faceless individuals throughout the South and North provided shelter, food, and whatever other resources needed to help.
I spent my summer helping the Hoosier state interpret its role regarding the UGRR.
Through a ten-week internship with the National Park Service Cultural Resources Diversity Internship Program and Student Conservation Association, I worked with the Indiana Department of Natural Resources-Division of Historic Preservation and Archaeolog y (DHPA) on its UGRR Initiative.
As an UGRR Initiative assistant, my primar y responsibility was to help my supervisor, Jeannie Reagan-Dinius,
University of Maryland Creates Center for Heritage Resources Studies Paul Shackel Associate Professor of Anthropology University of Maryland
In December 2000, the University of Mar yland established the UM Center for Heritage Resource Studies (UMCHRS).
The center sees the effects of
page 10
HERITAGE MATTERS NOVEMBER 2001
Archeologist Receives the Cotter Award for Research on Manzanar National Park Service archeologist Jeffer y Burton received the John L. Cotter Award for excellence in archeolog y for his work at Manzanar National Historic Site and other sites where Japanese Americans were confined during World War II.
The award was given to Burton in recognition of the Western Archeological and Conservation Center's work in documenting the structures, features, and artifacts remaining at the sites related to the Japanese American relocation.
The resulting report, entitled "Confinement and Ethnicity," covers the ten main relocation centers and highlights some of the lesser-known sites associated with the internment.
For example, Burton's research uncovered a link between an abandoned prison site on national forest land and Dr. Gordon Hirabayashi, a civil rights activist who had been imprisoned there for his stand against the internment.
As a result, a United States Forest Service campground now at that location was renamed to honor him and an on-site interpretive display on the internment is nearing completion.
Burton's archeological studies have involved former internees and their families, students, volunteers, government agency officials, White House staff, and leaders of Japanese American community organizations.
His work at Manzanar was recognized for its interdisciplinar y research design, scientific historical archeological analysis, broad public involvement, and sharing of research results through a variety of media.
For more information on "Confinement and Ethnicity," visit website www.cr.nps.gov/history/ online_books/anthropolgy74/.
Conferences, Publications, Awards
Printed proceedings of the "Places of Cultural Memory" conference are available from NPS.
For more information, see the page 2 article, "Understanding and Preserving Africanisms in the USA."
Photo courtesy of Marcia Axtmann Smith Design/Communication.
Bouki Blues Conference and Festival The West African Research Association and the Association Ndar Label, in collaboration with the Municipality of Saint Louis, the Institut Fondamental d'Afrique Noire Cheikh Anta Diop, and the Conseil Regional de St. Louis will hold an interdisciplinar y, bilingual conference and music festival, Januar y 6­ Januar y 12, 2002 in St. Louis, Senegal.
The Bouki Blues Festival is the first of a series of events that flows from the work of historians who have established the connection between Senegambia and Louisiana.
Bouki is the Wolof name for the hyena, a character that has survived in folktales from Florida, the Bahamas, and Haiti.
As a fictional character, the appearance of Bouki symbolizes the persistence of African culture in America, and African wisdom at large.
Through music, dance, film, and visual art, the Festival will highlight the African basis of the culture of Louisiana.
The Festival aims to underscore the ways in which two multicultural societies were shaped by a common historical experience.
For more information, contact boukibluesfestival@hotmail.com.
NPCA's Inaugural Partners in Progress Newsletter Available The National Parks Conservation Association's Enhancing Cultural Diversity Program released Partners in Progress, a newsletter for the National Parks Community Partners Program in July 2001.
The newsletter highlights the activities of the Community Partners programs around the countr y.
The Community Partners Program and the newsletter have evolved out of NPCA's "America's Parks--America's People: Mosaic in Motion" conference that took place in San Francisco, CA in 1999.
The conference called for diverse communities and parks to form partnerships, with an increase in park attendance by diverse individuals as the goal.
Cities including Miami, Boston, Washington, DC, Los Angeles, and San Francisco, started partnerships made up of local and regional land management organizations, National Park Service employees, and NPCA, and meet monthly to raise the level of awareness in communities through various events.
The newsletter is the latest feature of the Community Partners Program.
For information about Partners in Progress, the Community Partners Program, and NPCA, contact Alan Spears at 202/454-3384; email, aspears@npca.org.
page 11
HERITAGE MATTERS
NOVEMBER 2001
FIRST CLASS MAIL Postage 
Fran P Mainella Director Katherine H. Stevenson Associate Director, Cultural Resource Stewardship and Partnerships John Robbins Assistant Director, Cultural Resources Antoinette J. Lee Special Projects Manager Brian D. Joyner Heritage Matters Editor Moriba N. McDonald Historian
Mission of the National Park Service NOVEMBER 2001 St. Croix Heritage Trail Now Navigable Online Iron County Museum Reflects Mining Culture and Regional Diversity The Wooden Canvas: Documenting Historic Aspen Art Carvings in Southwest Colorado page 6 State Activities National Register listings Bethel AME Church Frank and Theresa Gomes House Brightwell Shotgun Row page 8 Private Sector Initiatives "Growing Up in Washington" Views the Nation's Capital Through Children's Eyes Looking Back and Forward: Significant Places of the GLBT Community Conference Held in San Francisco Washington, DC Unveils Civil War to Civil Rights Heritage Trail Participating in Preservation page 11 Conferences, Publications, Awards Bouki Blues Conference and Festival NPCA's Inaugural Partners in Progress Newsletter Available Archeologist Receives the Cotter Award for Research on Manzanar page 1 National Park Service Activities Changing Perceptions of the American Cultural Landscape page 2 continuation Understanding and Preserving Africanisms in the USA Teaching About African American Heritage Preservation and Ethnographic Resources Online page 3 Internships, Colleges, and Universities The Cultural Resources Diversity Internship Program Sponsors 20 Interns in Summer of 2001 An Internship in Historic Charleston page 10 continuation The Underground Railroad in Indiana University of Maryland Creates Center for Heritage Resources Studies page 4 Community Initiatives Lower East Side Conservancy Assists with Recognition of Neighborhood and Two Synagogues Immigrant Teenagers Discover Their Neighborhood: A Report from Bensonhurst, Brooklyn
HERITAGE MATTERS
The National Park Service is dedicated to conserving unimpaired the natural and cultural resources and the values of the National Park System for the enjoyment, education and inspiration of this and future generations.
The Service also cooperates with partners to extend the benefits of natural and cultural resource conservation and outdoor recreation throughout this country and the world.
Heritage Matters, sponsored by the Cultural Resources Programs of the National Park Service, is published twice-a-year and is free of charge.
Readers are invited to submit short articles and notices for inclusion.
(Limit submissions to fewer than 400 words and include author 's name and affiliation.
Black and white photographs or slides are welcome.)
Please submit newsletter items in writing or electronically to: Brian D. Joyner, Editor, Heritage Matters, DOI/National Park Service, 1849 C Street, NW, Suite NC­350, Washington, DC 20240.
Phone: 202/3431000, e-mail: Brian_Joyner@nps.gov.
Visit the Web site for the NPS Cultural Resources Diversity Initiative: www.cr.nps.gov/crdi
