Small Animal Care Small Animal Care caring for specialty pets for production a safe environment contains objectives to prepare students for careers in managing and and pet animals.
As our population raises more specialty animals and purposes and personal value, careers that work with these animals in will continue to expand.
Pre-requisites: Recommended Credits: Recommended Grade Levels: * **
None ½ or 1 10th, 11th, or 12 th
½ denotes learning expectations that must be met when teaching the course for ½ credit.
All learning expectations must be met when teaching the course for 1 credit.
Small Animal Care Standard 1.0 The student will evaluate the history of animals on earth, the classification of organisms, the domestication of animals, and the importance of the small animal industry.
Standard 2.0 The student will explain and demonstrate safety techniques used when working with small animals.
Standard 3.0 The student will evaluate responsible pet ownership, the benefits of pets to humans, and the use of euthanasia.
Standard 4.0 The student will evaluate issues regarding human use of animals for food, pleasure and experimentation.
Standard 5.0 The student will evaluate the anatomy of an animal's digestive system and the importance of proper nutrition.
Standard 6.0 The student will evaluate the breeds, characteristics, care, feeding and health of dogs and cats.
Standard 7.0 The student will evaluate the breeds, characteristics, care, feeding and health of rabbits, chinchillas, and guinea pigs.
Standard 8.0 The student will evaluate the breeds, characteristics, care, feeding and health of hamsters, rats, mice, gerbils, and ferrets.
Standard 9.0 The student will evaluate the breeds, characteristics, care, feeding and health of birds, fish, amphibians and reptiles.
Standard 10.0 The student will integrate academic competencies with small animal care competencies.
Standard 11.0 The student will develop premier leadership and personal growth needed for careers in animal care.
Small Animal Care Course Description: Small Animal Care contains objectives to prepare students for careers in managing and caring for specialty and pet animals.
As our population raises more specialty animals and pets for production purposes and personal value, careers that work with these animals in a safe environment will continue to expand.
Standard 1.0 The student will evaluate the history of animals on earth, the classification of organisms, the domestication of animals, and the importance of the small animal industry.
Learning Expectations: The student will: 1 .1 Evaluate the historical use of domesticated animals.
1.2 Assess the process of and reasons for animal domestication.
1.3 Classify animals using scientific nomenclature.
1.4 Evaluate the impact of the small animal industry in the home and business environment.
½ ½ ½ ½
Evidence Standard is Met Th · · · · · · e student will: Determine the importance of vertebrates, invertebrates and mammals in the environment.
Present reasons for the domestication of animals.
Categorize common pets in the United States based on genus and species.
Specify the classes and kingdoms of animals.
Determine the characteristics of the phylum chordate.
Determine the taxonomy of small animals.
Integration/Linkages Social Studies, Science, Language Arts, Ecology, Biology, SCANS (Secretary's Commission on Achieving Necessary Skills)
Sample Performance Tasks · · · · Present a timeline of the history of small animals.
Using current technologies, research theories for the domestication of animals.
Present a survey of popular pets in the community.
Classify small animals by use and nomenclature.
Standard 2.0 The student will explain and demonstrate safety techniques used when working with small animals.
Learning Expectations: The student will: 2.1 Analyze diseases that may be transmitted 2.2 Demonstrate steps to prevent infection in 2.3 Evaluate methods for restraining animals 2.4 Examine steps used to mix and handle ch from animals to humans.
animals and humans.
for the safety of the handler and the animal.
emicals safely.
½ ½ ½ ½
Evidence Standard is Met Th · · · · · · e student will: Analyze the relationship between a parasite and a host.
Examine the life cycles of parasites found in animals.
Prescribe treatments for common parasites found in small animals.
Specify safety procedures for working with small animals.
Demonstrate proper restraint for small animals.
Demonstrate how to measure and mix chemicals using label directions.
Integration/Linkages Biology, Chemistry, Ecology, Mathematics, Algebra, OSHA Standards, TOSHA Standards, EPA Regulations, Language Arts, SCANS (Secretary's Commission on Achieving Necessary Skills)
Sample Performance Tasks · · · · · Recommend proper methods for storing and handling chemicals.
Conduct research with local officials on animal disruptions.
Calculate the dosage required for an animal using the label.
Demonstrate proper procedures for working with small animals.
Summarize speeches given by guest speakers on the treatment of animal diseases.
Standard 3.0 The student will evaluate responsible pet ownership, the benefits of pets to humans, and the use of euthanasia.
Learning Expectations: The student will: 3.1 Assess factors that should be considered in choosing a household pet.
3.2 Compare different options for obtaining a pet.
3.3 Evaluate steps for being a responsible pet owner.
3.4 Evaluate the benefits of pets in society.
3.5 Examine the use of euthanasia in controlling pets.
½ ½ ½
Evidence Standard is Met Th · · · · · · e student will: Determine questions to ask about an animal in choosing the proper pet to purchase.
Recommend places where pets can be obtained.
Compare different animal breed personalities.
Summarize responsible pet ownership.
Assess the benefits of spaying/neutering.
Debate the use of euthanasia for control of animal populations.
Integration/Linkages Social Studies, Language Arts, SCANS (Secretary's Commission on Achieving Necessary Skills)
Sample Performance Tasks · · · Visit small animal agencies to determine procedures used in euthanasia, spaying and neutering.
Aid in placing homeless animals.
Present information for matching a pet to an owner's personality and values.
Standard 4.0 The student will evaluate issues regarding the human use of animals for food, pleasure and experimentation.
Learning Expectations: The student will: 4.1 Analyze animal rights and animal welfare in the livestock industry.
4.2 Summarize important persons, organizations, and dates associated with animal rights and animal welfare.
½ ½
Evidence Standard is Met Th · · · e student will: Interpret the history of the animal rights movement.
Determine the effect of the animal rights movement has had on society.
Debate the pros and cons of animal experimentation.
Integration/Linkages Social Studies, Language Arts, SCANS (Secretary's Commission on Achieving Necessary Skills)
Sample Performance Tasks · · · Debate issues related to animal rights and animal welfare.
Present philosophies of animal rights and animal welfare groups.
Present concerns on current animal welfare issues.
Standard 5.0 The student will evaluate the anatomy of an animal's digestive system and the importance of proper nutrition.
Learning Expectations: The student will: 5.1 Summarize terms related to animal nutrition.
5.2 Examine the basic nutrient requirements for different animals.
5.3 Distinguish between ruminant and nonruminant animals.
5.4 Specify the various nutrients that are important in the diets of animals during their life cycles.
½ ½ ½ ½
Evidence Standard is Met Th · · · · · e student will: Specify nutrients needed by animals during different seasons of the year.
Analyze biochemical reactions that take place in an animal's body.
Categorize basic nutrient groups and their importance to an animal's health.
Specify vitamins needed and their uses.
Compare and contrast ruminants and nonruminants.
Integration/Linkages Biology, Chemistry, Biochemistry, Mathematics, Language Arts, SCANS (Secretary's Commission on Achieving Necessary Skills)
Sample Performance Tasks · · · Compare feed nutrients from different companies.
Use different feeds on animals to determine effectiveness.
Present nutrition schedule for small animals.
Standard 6.0 The student will evaluate the breeds, characteristics, care, feeding and health of dogs and cats.
Learning Expectations: The student will: 6.1 Evaluate the history of the breeds of dogs and cats.
6.2 Assess housing needs for dogs and cats.
6.3 Evaluate the behavior and instincts of dogs and cats.
6.4 Examine the specific nutritional requirements of dogs and cats.
6.5 Assess the effects of common diseases of dogs and cats.
6.6 Examine the reproductive cycles and breeding methods for dogs and cats.
Evidence Standard is Met Th · · · · · e student will: Determine the importance of the use of dogs and cats.
Specify breed characteristics of dogs and cats.
Recommend considerations before selecting a dog or a cat.
Specify health care practices for dogs and cats.
Specify diseases that affect dogs and cats.
Integration/Linkages Mathematics, Biology, Language Arts, Social Studies, SCANS (Secretary's Commission on Achieving Necessary Skills)
Sample Performance Tasks · Develop a presentation on choosing a dog or a cat for a pet.
· ·
Create a chart for meeting the nutritional demands of a dog or cat during its life cycle.
Develop a presentation on different breeds of dogs and cats.
Standard 7.0 The student will evaluate the breeds, characteristics, care, feeding and health of rabbits, chinchillas, and guinea pigs.
Learning Expectations: The student will: 7.1 Evaluate the history of the breeds of rabbits, chinchillas, and guinea pigs.
7.2 Assess housing needs for rabbits, chinchillas, and guinea pigs.
7.3 Evaluate the behavior and instincts of rabbits, chinchillas, and guinea pigs.
7.4 Examine the specific nutritional requirements of rabbits, chinchillas, and guinea pigs.
7.5 Assess the effects of common diseases of rabbits, chinchillas, and guinea pigs.
7.6 Examine the reproductive cycles and breeding methods for rabbits, chinchillas, and guinea pigs.
Evidence Standard is Met Th · · · · · e student will: Determine the importance of the use of rabbits, chinchillas, and guinea pigs.
Specify breed characteristics of rabbits, chinchillas, and guinea pigs.
Recommend considerations before selecting a rabbits, chinchillas, and guinea pigs.
Specify health care practices for rabbits, chinchillas, and guinea pigs.
Specify diseases that affect rabbits, chinchillas, and guinea pigs.
Integration/Linkages Mathematics, Biology, Language Arts, Social Studies, SCANS (Secretary's Commission on Achieving Necessary Skills)
Sample Performance Tasks · · · Develop a presentation on choosing rabbits, chinchillas, and guinea pigs for pets.
Create a chart for meeting the nutritional demands of rabbits, chinchillas, and guinea pigs during their life cycle.
Develop a presentation on different breeds of rabbits, chinchillas, and guinea pigs.
Standard 8.0 The student will evaluate the breeds, characteristics, care, feeding and health of hamsters, rats, mice, gerbils, and ferrets.
Learning Expectations: The student will: 8.1 Evaluate the history of the breeds of hamsters, rats, mice, gerbils, and ferrets.
8.2 Assess housing needs for hamsters, rats, mice, gerbils, and ferrets.
8.3 Evaluate the behavior and instincts of hamsters, rats, mice, gerbils, and ferrets.
8.4 Examine the specific nutritional requirements of hamsters, rats, mice, gerbils, and ferrets.
8.5 Assess the effects of common diseases of hamsters, rats, mice, gerbils, and ferrets.
8.6 Examine the reproductive cycles and breeding methods for hamsters, rats, mice, gerbils, and ferrets.
Evidence Standard is Met Th · · · · · e student will: Determine the importance of the use of hamsters, rats, mice, gerbils, and ferrets.
Specify breed characteristics of hamsters, rats, mice, gerbils, and ferrets.
Recommend considerations before selecting hamsters, rats, mice, gerbils, and ferrets.
Specify health care practices for hamsters, rats, mice, gerbils, and ferrets.
Specify diseases that affect hamsters, rats, mice, gerbils, and ferrets.
Integration/Linkages Mathematics, Biology, Language Arts, Social Studies, SCANS (Secretary's Commission on Achieving Necessary Skills)
Sample Performance Tasks · · · Develop a presentation on choosing hamsters, rats, mice, gerbils, and ferrets for pets.
Create a chart for meeting the nutritional demands of hamsters, rats, mice, gerbils, and ferrets during their life cycle.
Develop a presentation on different breeds of hamsters, rats, mice, gerbils, and ferrets.
Standard 9.0 The student will evaluate the breeds, characteristics, care, feeding and health of birds, fish, amphibians and reptiles.
Learning Expectations: The student will: 9.1 Evaluate the history of the breeds of birds, fish, amphibians and reptiles.
9.2 Assess housing needs for birds, fish, amphibians and reptiles.
9.3 Evaluate the behavior and instincts of birds, fish, amphibians and reptiles.
9.4 Examine the specific nutritional requirements of birds, fish, amphibians and reptiles.
9.5 Assess the effects of common diseases of birds, fish, amphibians and reptiles.
9.6 Examine the reproductive cycles and breeding methods for birds, fish, amphibians and reptiles.
Evidence Standard is Met Th · · · · · e student will: Determine the importance of the use of birds, fish, amphibians and reptiles.
Specify breed characteristics of birds, fish, amphibians and reptiles.
Recommend considerations before selecting birds, fish, amphibians and reptiles.
Specify health care practices for birds, fish, amphibians and reptiles.
Specify diseases that affect birds, fish, amphibians and reptiles.
Integration/Linkages Mathematics, Biology, Language Arts, Social Studies, SCANS (Secretary's Commission on Achieving Necessary Skills)
Sample Performance Tasks · · · Develop a presentation on choosing birds, fish, amphibians and reptiles for pets.
Create a chart for meeting the nutritional demands of birds, fish, amphibians and reptiles during their life cycle.
Develop a presentation on different breeds of birds, fish, amphibians and reptiles.
Standard 10.0 The student will integrate academic competencies with small animal care competencies.
Language Arts: The student will: 10.1 Construct and use spreadsheets and databases to keep records on animal nutrition and breeding.
10.2 Using current resources, present information on animal nutrition or disease prevention.
½ ½
Mathematics: The student will: 10.3 Convert English units of measurement to metric units.
10.4 Use ratios to determine feeding requirements for animals.
10.5 Read and construct graphs on animal growth.
10.6 Calculate treatment dosages using the labels.
½ ½ ½ ½
Science: The student will: 10.7 Diagram gross anatomy of animals.
10.8 Examine an animal's physiology.
10.9 Determine an animal's nutritional needs.
10.10 Utilize the scientific method in analyzing health problems of animals.
½ ½ ½ ½
10.11
Use nomenclature classification to group animals.
½
Evidence Standard is Met: Th · · · · e student is able to: Propose feed needed for an animal during its life cycle.
Compare animal welfare to animal rights.
Compare graphs of growth rates of animals.
Diagram and label the parts of a pet animal.
Integration/Linkages Social Studies, Humanities, Science, Mathematics, Language Arts
Sample Performance Tasks · Prepare a portfolio that includes recommendations for matching a pet to an owner, nutritional information for the owner, and a brochure related to providing a healthy environment for the animal.
Standard 11.0 The student will develop premier leadership and personal growth needed for careers in animal care.
Learning Expectations: The student will: 11.1 Evaluate possible SAEP, supervised agricultural experience program, opportunities in small animal care.
½ 11.2 Relate the knowledge and skills learned in an SAEP to an agricultural career or hobby.
½ 11.3 Demonstrate skills needed for effective leadership.
½ 11.4 Demonstrate methods and techniques of parliamentary procedure.
11.5 Assess career opportunities associated with small animal care.
11.6 Recommend sources for obtaining information for advanced training in the care and marketing of companion animals.
Evidence Standard is Met Th · · · · · · e student will: Maintain records for a mock or real small animal SAEP.
Interpret the rules regarding the FFA public speaking CDE, career development event.
Employ appropriate parliamentary procedure abilities in a mock meeting.
Develop school and communities activities around FFA events in small animal care.
Summarize the duties of workers in various small animal careers.
Summarize the job requirements for small animal care careers.
Integration/Linkages Mathematics, Algebra, Language Arts, National FFA Guidelines for Prepared Speaking, National FFA Guidelines for Extemporaneous Speaking, National FFA Guidelines for Parliamentary Procedure, National FFA Code of Ethics, National FFA Procedures for Proficiency Awards and Degrees, SCANS (Secretary's Commission on Achieving Necessary Skills), National FFA Guidelines for Community Education Programs
Sample Performance Tasks · · · · · · · · · · · · Obtain employment requirements for a small animal agency to base a resume on.
Tour small animal facilities to observe work ethics and standards used in the facility.
Prepare a four-to-six minute prepared or extemporaneous speech on a small animal topic.
Create a mock meeting using FFA parliamentary procedure abilities.
Prepare a FFA proficiency award based on a mock small animal SAE.
Complete an application for advanced degrees in the FFA.
Prepare a schedule of school and community activities for chapter officers and members involved in small animal care projects.
Interview a small animal care worker.
Present advanced study opportunities in small animal care.
Participate in the FFA Farm Safety Just 4 Kids program.
Participate in the America Reads Challenge program.
Participate in the FFA PALS program.
