PRESS OFFICE NEWS RELEASE Release Date: May 3, 2001 Contact: Mike Stamler (202) 2056740 Release Number: 01-20 Internet Address: www.sba.gov/news/indexheadline.html ENTREPRENEURS FROM OREGON, FLORIDA, ALABAMA AND PENNSYLVANIA ARE FINALISTS FOR NATIONAL SMALL BUSINESS PERSON OF THE YEAR --Winner to be Named at National Small Business Week WASHINGTON Four small business owners a candy-maker, a restauranteur, a professional engineer and a builder are finalists for the National Small Business Person of the Year award, the U.S. Small Business Administration (SBA) said today.
One of the four will be selected as the National Small Business Person of the Year and honored in a ceremony at the White House next week as part of the SBA's National Small Business Week celebration.
The finalists were selected from among a group of 53 state small business persons of the year representing the 50 states, the District of Columbia, Puerto Rico and Guam.
"The 53 small business owners who are selected to represent their states at National Small Business Week run the gamut from candy-making to lumber, from amusement parks to fitness clubs," said Acting SBA Administrator John Whitmore.
"They are a mosaic of American entrepreneurship.
"It's a privilege to welcome these entrepreneurs to Small Business Week here in Washington, and a special honor to be able to choose the national winner from among them."
The four finalists in the national competition are Cindy M. McEntee, president and owner, Mo's Enterprises, Inc., a food manufacturer and restaurant chain located in Newport, Ore.;
; Thornton Stanley, President, Stanley Construction Company, Inc., a construction contractor in Huntsville, Ala.; and Brindley B. Pieters, president, Brindley Pieters 
The national small business awards are a highlight of SBA's National Small Business Week celebration, May 7-9.
National Small Business Week, now in its 38th year, honors the contributions of the nation's small business owners.
-more01-20 / Page Two The winners are selected on their record of stability, growth in employment and sales, financial condition, innovation, response to adversity and community service.
Involvement with SBA is not a selection criteria, though more than half of the winners received financial or management assistance from the SBA at some point.
Mr. Stanley began Stanley Landscaping and Construction Company in the spare bedroom of his home in Huntsville in 1961.
His company is a leader in excavation and paving and is among the top 20 subcontractors in Alabama and the top 100 contractors in the United States.
It has since grown to a $6 million business with more than 55 employees.
It handles all aspects of horizontal construction including rock blasting, clearing and grubbing, earthwork, the installation of storm sewers, and the pouring of concrete and asphalt.
Mo's Enterprises has been a family business since it opened in 1946 and now consists of three restaurants in the Newport area.
When her grandmother retired in 1987, Ms. McEntee stepped in to run the business.
Mo's Enterprises also owns and operates a chowder factory, which produces a frozen clam chowder base sold to retail stores.
Mo's restaurants have become nationally known for their New England-style clam chowder along with their cod fish `n' chips, clam strips, and hamburgers.
Mr. Sarris started his business from his home in 1960.
The company grew by 1963 to a 1,600 square-foot retail facility, still the site of the business today.
Sarris Candies started with three employees and sales of $600.
The business now employs more than 350 people at two locations and enjoys nearly $16 million in sales.
Production has expanded to a 120,000 square-foot facility that includes a manufacturing plant, a distribution center, and two retail outlets.
Mr. Brindley has been in the engineering business for 28 years.
His company has grown from a staff of three completing a handful of projects to a staff of 34 professionals successfully completing more than 150 projects with gross revenues topping $3.25 million.
The company offers professional engineering services to an impressive list of repeat clients from both government and industry.
For more information on National Small Business Week and a complete list of state and other award winners, visit the SBA's Small Business Week Web site at http://smallbusinesssuccess.sba.gov/.
Additional information about SBA programs and services is available at SBA's Web site: http://www.sba.gov/ .
Or call the SBA Answer Desk at 1-800-U-ASK-SBA.
###
