Overview graphic - drawing of Puebla Bonita Museum collections Chaco Project collections form the core of the research component of the Chaco Culture National Historical Park museum collection.
Today, the Chaco Collection contains approximately 1.5 million artifacts from over 120 sites in Chaco Canyon and the surrounding region.
Because most of the artifacts were systemically collected and documented, the collections are extremely valuable for scientific studies.
The Chaco Archive documents over 100 years of excavation in Chaco Canyon, and contains approximately 300 linear feet of records, 30,000 photographs, 7,000 color slides, 600 glass lantern slides, 2,000 maps, 1,000 manuscripts, and field notes, reports, and other written records.
The objects in this exhibit represent the wide range of materials in the collection.
They vividly illustrate what archeology can tell us about life and people who lived 1,000 years ago.
Chaco Canyon National Monument A Presidential Proclamation created Chaco Canyon National Monument in 1907 to preserve and protect the "extensive prehistoric communal or pueblo ruins . . . of extraordinary interest because of their number and their great size and because of the innumerable and valuable relics of a prehistoric people which they contain."
Expanded and designated a National Historical Park in 1980, Chaco Canyon was added to the UNESCO World Heritage List of Cultural Properties in 1987, in recognition of its worldwide cultural importance.
Chaco Canyon's spectacular architecture, seen at the great structures at Pueblo Bonito, Pueblo Alto, Chetro Ketl, and the Great Kiva at Casa Rinconada continues to enthrall visitors.
Chronology Ceramics are durable.
Designs, manufacturing techniques and materials can tell us about peoples who made and used them, and where they lived and worked.
We can learn about trends and cultural shifts, as well as trading patterns.
This chronology provides a dating sequence for the Chaco area.
Other Park Links to:
Bandelier National Monument homepage
Chaco's Ancient Architecture [www.nps.gov/chcu/arkitekt.htm]
Chacoan Road System [www.nps.gov/chcu/roads.htm]
Chaco Masonry [www.nps.gov/chcu/masonry.htm]
Maxwell Museum of Anthropology
Who are the Chacoan Anasazi? The prehistoric pueblo ruins in Chaco Canyon are the culmination of one of the most important cultures in the American Southwest, the Anasazi or now called ancestral Pueblo.
American Indian peoples have continuously occupied the Colorado Plateau and the Four Corners Region of the Southwest for over 10,000 years.
Today, their descendants are members of 20 Indian tribes in New Mexico and Arizona.
From about AD 1000-1150, the Chaco Anasazi dominated the region.
They built great houses, kivas, round, semi-subterranean rooms used for social activities and ceremonies, and distinctive roads.
The great houses were massive, multi-storied masonry structures of rooms, kivas, terraces, and plazas.
The largest, Pueblo Bonito, is estimated to have contained over 600 rooms and risen four, possibly five, stories high.
The Chacoan people created an urban center of spectacular public architecture by employing formal design, astronomical alignments, geometry, core-and-veneer masonry styles, landscaping, and engineering techniques that allowed multi-storied construction for the first time in the American Southwest.
The accomplishments of the ancient people of Chaco Canyon are part of the history and traditions of the modern-day Pueblo peoples of New Mexico, the Hopi of Arizona, and the Navajo.
What is Chaco? Understanding Chaco For over a century, researchers have carried out extensive excavations, studies, and surveys in Chaco Canyon.
From 1969-1985, the National Park Service conducted a multidisciplinary research; known as the Chaco Project, to better understand the Chaco Anasazi.
Over 3,600 prehistoric and historic sites have been identified.
A comprehensive excavation program was established to investigate the entire Chaco Canyon cultural sequence.
Excavations were designed to answer a series of questions, such as, when were these sites built? How long were they occupied? How did their occupants make a living? What did they eat? What products did they make? What kind of community life did they participate in? To help answer these questions, artifacts such as complete prehistoric ceramic vessels, stone projectile points, bone tools, construction beams, ornaments, fauna, soil, and pollen samples were collected.
Excavations were well documented, sites dated, and scholars continue to explore the Chacoan world.
