Statement of Gail S. Shaffer, Chief Executive Officer Business and Professional Women/USA
Testimony Before the Subcommittee on Oversight, of the House Committee on Ways and Means
Oversight Hearing on Pension Issues
March 23, 1999
Good afternoon.
On behalf of Business and Professional Women/USA (BPW/USA), I want to thank the members of the Subcommittee and particularly Congressman Houghton and Congressman Coyne for inviting me today.
I am Gail Shaffer, Chief Executive Officer of Business and Professional Women/USA, an organization representing 70,000 working women across the country, a third of whom are business owners.
Our members are involved in more than 2,000 local organizations nationwide-- at least one in nearly every congressional district in the nation.
We applaud this committee for focusing on the status of our nation's pension system.
BPW/USA is a member of the National Women's Business Council, a bi-partisan Federal government advisory panel that was created to serve as an independent source of advice and counsel to the President, the Congress, and the Interagency Committee on Women's Business Enterprise.
The mission of the Council is to promote bold initiatives, policies and programs designed to support women's business enterprises at all stages of development in the public and private sector marketplaces.
While the National Women's Business Council has not officially taken a position on pension reform legislation before this committee, the "Comprehensive Retirement Security and Pension Reform Act" will benefit women-owned businesses--the fastest growing segment of our economy.
This legislation grants relief from PBGC premiums for new small business defined benefit plans and eliminates IRS user fees for small business plans.
The legislation increases portability, improves rollover provisions, and cuts administrative burdens.
These provisions will benefit employers and employees alike.
It is a positive first step toward ensuring that all Americans have a secure retirement.
However, more needs to be done.
First, unlike the Retirement Savings and Opportunity Act in the Senate, the bill does not provide any tax incentives for small businesses, even to cover start-up administrative costs.
Today, women entrepreneurs employ more people than the Fortune 500 and tax expenditures for their small businesses are too high.
The bill also does not include an education provision to ensure that small businesses understand the full-range of pension options available to them.
Often, the only resources for pension information are the salespeople from financial services companies who are trying to sell their services.
Second, the catch-up provision that allows up to a $15,000 contribution into a 401(k) will benefit women but only those women at the higher end of the wage scale.
When you consider that only three percent of full-time working women earn over $75,000, the full benefits of this provision will be limited.
More needs to be done for the average woman who earns significantly less.
Third, although, the New SIMPLES are a positive step toward the goal of expanding pension coverage, they could have a regressive effect by discouraging employers from eventually offering employer-matching plans.
This is due in part because the New SIMPLES do not include requirements to ensure significant employee participation across the wage scale in a given company, thus removing incentives for employers to negotiate with their employees.
The goal here today is to discuss meaningful pension reform that expands coverage, cuts costs and improves the retirement security for us all.
I want to thank you for allowing me to share with you BPW/USA's particular area of expertise: the ways in which the pension system's current inadequacies disproportionately affect women.
BPW/USA has had a long-standing interest in this issue, and we are working not only to effect change on Capitol Hill, but also to educate our own members on the importance of retirement planning.
We are pleased to work in partnership with organizations like the Women's Institute for a Secure Retirement (WISER) to take this message to the grassroots.
BPW/USA was also a lead organization behind the passage of the Retirement Equity Act of 1984, which was a critical first step in addressing some of the difficulties women faced in gaining greater access to pension benefits, particularly as spouses and widows.
Since the REA was passed, there has been some modest improvement in the rate of pension coverage for women, which is certainly a welcome development.
However, that progress has been undermined by ongoing structural barriers and by the overall shift away from defined benefit, or "basic pension" plans to do-it-yourself, defined contribution plans.
This trend will leave women more financially vulnerable at retirement.
In fact, I would like to bring to the Committee's attention the disturbing fact that the United States has the distinction of having more elderly women living in poverty than any other industrialized nation.
Several factors contribute to the fact that women are especially vulnerable to economic insecurity in old age:
Women earn less.
The U.S. Census Bureau estimates that women earn on average, 74 cents for every dollar a man is paid.
If you are an African-American woman, that average falls to 64 percent.
And if you are a Latina, it bottoms out at 53 percent.
A recent joint study released by the AFL-CIO and Institute for Women's Policy Research estimates that the wage gap costs American women collectively more than $200 Billion every year.
As many of you are probably aware, pay equity is my organization's top priority.
It is our top priority for one simple reason: no other single economic factor has a greater impact on the lives of working women.
The wage gap effects nearly every facet of women's economic lives.
It severely limits women's purchasing power.
It means less money to put away into savings.
It reduces retirement income, because both Social Security and traditional pension formulas are calculated based on earnings and the amount paid into the system.
It also limits women's freedom, because women who might otherwise be able to afford to work fewer hours and devote that extra time to caring for young children or aging parents must instead work full-time and over-time just to keep up with the bills.
The wage gap is only one part of the tenuous economic picture for women.
The median income for all working women in 1997 was $16,716 and for full-time women it was $21,883.
Half of all women work in traditionally female, relatively lower paid jobs--without pension coverage.
Women are also more likely to work in part-time and minimum wage jobs--again without pension coverage.
The result of lower earnings means that women's pension benefits will be lower than those of men.
Another factor making women vulnerable is lifespan.
Although longevity is generally considered to be a blessing, when it comes to retirement security, the fact that women live longer than men is a disadvantage.
Unless women begin retirement with a bigger nest egg and a larger pension--which is rarely the case--the march of time and the pressures of inflation will combine to make their later years at best uncomfortable and at worst poverty-stricken.
Financial experts tell Americans generally to plan to replace 70 or 80 percent of their income at retirement.
Unfortunately, this advice doesn't work for women, who are likely to need more than 100 percent of their pre-retirement income in order to remain secure throughout their longer lives.
Marital status is another important factor.
Being single in old age is somewhat financially risky, but for women it is substantially more so.
Consider that in 1992, only six percent of married women over age 65 fell below the poverty line.
But well over 20 percent of single women fit the government's definition of poverty.
About 21 percent of women who were either widowed or never married were poor, while the percentage of divorced women in poverty climbs to 29 percent.
And it is important to keep in mind that as women grow older, as they reach 75 or 85 or older, their poverty rate also climbs.
Living alone is another predictor of elderly poverty and women are much more likely than men to live alone.
Three-quarters of men age 65 and older live with their spouse but only one-third of women do.
A single elderly woman is twice as likely as an elderly man to be poor.
It is also important to note that our nation's poverty rate for single elderly women, which stands at about 18 percent, is by far the highest percentage in the industrialized world.
And the breakdown of poverty rates among minority groups is even more stark.
Although the nation's pension system is gender-neutral, it was set up to reward a work pattern that does not reflect the reality of women's working lives.
For example, women over 25 tend to stay in jobs an average of only 4.7 years, whereas pension vesting rules generally require five years on the job.
Women remain the principle caregivers for their families, taking care of not only their children but often their parents as well.
The average woman spends 15 percent of her career outside the workforce compared to two percent of men.
Again, fewer years in the workforce means lower pension benefits.
But most women aren't lucky enough even to have a pension, regardless of its size.
As I mentioned, women are more likely to be working in low-wage, service, part-time jobs and/or to work for small businesses--where pension coverage is the most sparse.
Although about 48 percent of full-time female workers have some form of pension coverage, a majority still do not.
And only 39 percent of all female workers are covered.
The type of pension plan that is offered also makes a big difference.
We recognize that it is challenging to create a system that covers as many workers as possible, and that access to defined contribution plans is certainly better than no retirement savings vehicle at all.
But we are very concerned about the marked shift among employers away from defined benefit plans toward defined contribution plans.
This trend disproportionately hurts women, for a few reasons.
First, as I have already mentioned, women earn, on average, less than three-quarters of what men earn, and so they have substantially less income available to put in an IRA or a 401(k) plan.
Again, three out of four working women earn less than $30,000 annually.
Even a disciplined saver will have trouble accumulating much in savings at that level.
Second, studies have shown that women's savings priorities are often focused on their children's education and not on retirement.
Third, with women moving in and out of the workforce and from one job to another more frequently than their male counterparts, the problems associated with lack of portability become particularly acute for them.
And again, because of priorities such as their children's education and medical emergencies, women often opt to cash out their 401(k) accumulations when they leave a job rather than keep the funds for retirement.
Finally, given the fact that women generally have smaller amounts saved in their 401(k) accounts and have less to fall back on from other sources, it is not surprising that they are often more averse to riskier, albeit higher yield, investments.
It is not simply a lack of financial sophistication, it is actually a pretty rational behavior.
Consider that over age 40, the median benefit amount that a woman has accumulated in her 401(k) is only $7,000 compared to $20,000 for a similar man.
This is already an exponential disparity which is further amplified as the effects of the wage gap, compound interest and investment choices take their toll over time.
It must also be said that even in best-case scenarios, where women have saved much, invested well, and have a sizable lump sum distribution available to them when they retire, it is still incumbent on them to manage these assets so that they will provide income for the remainder of their lives.
If the market hits a prolonged slump, if they make poor investment decisions or fall prey to unscrupulous financial advisors, they could easily exhaust their assets late in life.
And once the money is gone, it is gone.
For all of the reasons outlined above, defined contribution plans may not always be the best option for women, who might in fact be better served by the features available in a defined benefit plan -- what we think of when we think of a traditional pension.
A defined benefit plan has a lot going for it as far as women are concerned.
First, it does not place all of the burden on the employee to plan and execute her retirement savings all by herself.
It features a contribution by the employer.
It is less voluntary in nature and is a form of forced savings.
It is also guaranteed to be paid out in monthly installments over the remainder of one's life, thus recipients are much less prone to the potential catastrophes of poor asset management.
To be fair, defined benefit plans do not solve all of the problems women face in retirement planning.
The wage gap, career interruptions and stringent vesting requirements still tend to depress the size of women's pensions as compared to men.
And over the long term, inflation will gradually erode the value of the monthly benefit.
But the annuitized format of these plans, their reliability, and the participation of employers are all features that are particularly important to women both as current and future retirees.
Unfortunately, as everyone in this room knows, the cost and complexity of defined benefit plans has made them a difficult option for small businesses to pursue.
The statistics bear this out: only about 24 percent of firms with fewer than 100 employees, and 13 percent of firms with 10 or fewer employees, offer such plans.
Given that small businesses are creating the majority of the jobs in this country, it is clear that we ought to make it easier for these firms to offer defined benefit plans.
That is why we were so very pleased last year when Congresswoman Nancy Johnson, along with her colleague, Congressman Earl Pomeroy, decided to address this problem and introduce the Secure Assets For Employees Plan Act in the 105^th Congress.
The SAFE Plan Act provided a framework to enable smaller employers to offer real pensions to their workers.
The bill guaranteed a minimum defined benefit, which as I have stated is so critical for women.
It also introduced portability to these benefits, like the Portman-Cardin bill, so that when an employee leaves her job, she can take her retirement savings with her.
We would also like to mention our support for another bill that addresses the problems women face in achieving retirement equity, and that is the Comprehensive Women's Pension Protection Act of 1999-- S. 132.
Senator Olympia Snowe, with whom we have worked closely over the years, introduced this bill in the Senate.
Representative Kennelly sponsored the bill in the House in the 105^th Congress and it is our hope that another Member of Congress will take the lead on this legislation shortly.
The Comprehensive Women's Pension Protection Act is important because in addition to attempting to address systemic barriers for women, it also addresses specific gender inequities within current law.
For example, it provides for the automatic division of pension benefits in a divorce unless otherwise specifically provided in the settlement.
Current law allows for division of pension benefits, but the process is confusing and many women are not made aware of these rights until after a divorce is final, when it is too late.
The bill also improves spousal consent protections for 401(k)'s so that they are on a par with those pertaining to defined benefit plans when it comes to lump sum distributions.
It expands options for joint and survivor annuity benefits so that either surviving spouse will have a benefit equal to two-thirds of the benefit received while both were living, and requires that both spouses be fully informed of their options before a decision is made.
Currently, survivor benefits are half of the previous benefits, which can be a significant financial burden for women, who are more likely to be the survivor and less likely to have other sources of income.
I hope the members of this subcommittee will take a look at this legislation and consider lending their support to it as well.
We believe that for anyone who is truly interested in improving gender equity and the economic status of older women, many of the provisions contained in this bill are must-see language.
In closing, I would like to once again commend this Subcommittee for focusing attention on this critically important issue.
The implications of inadequate pension coverage are far-reaching -- indeed, inter-generational.
If we address this issue now and take steps that will narrow the gap between those retirees who are financially and those who are poor, we will not only be making an investment in our citizens, but also ensure a much smaller tax burden in the future.
Thank you for your kind attention to my remarks.
I'd be pleased to take any questions you may have.
__________________________________________________________________
