TESTIMONY TO THE US HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES COMMITTEE ON EDUCATION AND THE WORKFORCE MAY 25, 1999 Joe Nathan, Ph.D. and Director Center for School Change, University of Minnesota Humphrey Institute of Public Affairs
Representative Castle, and Committee Members, thank you for the opportunity to share ideas with you.
I have been deeply involved in public education as a teacher, administrator, researcher and parent.
I believe in public education not just theoretically, but with our own children.
I have watched and sometimes participated over the last 29 years in federal efforts to improve the schools.
My research and experience lead me to three broad conclusions, which will be followed by some specific recommendations for issues this committee, and Congress may wish to examine.
Good intentions are not enough.
Some of the biggest problems are created by good intentions run amok.
Recommendation: Congress should investigate how the NCAA is frustrating, outstanding students, educators and families throughout the US, under the guise of increasing standards.
The federal government functions most effectively when it sets clear goals and lets educators, community leaders, parents, students and others develop the most appropriate ways to reach those goals.
Congress has succeeded in helping encourage use of the many good ideas, such as the charter school movement by providing incentives, not mandates.
Recommendation: Congress ought to seriously consider providing grants to encourage schools, businesses and community agencies to share facilities, and to explore other creative way to meet facilities needs.
The federal government can be extremely helpful by helping to share information, providing financial and technical assistance, and not dictating the way things ought to be done.
Congress ought to encourage thoughtful examination and response to the teacher supply issue, without selecting one preferred approach.
Here are a few examples of those lessons.
Number one, good intentions are not enough.
Some of the biggest problems are created by good intentions run amok.
Let's begin with the NCAA.
"The NCAA is the most arrogant, frustrating, obstinate organization I've ever dealt with," reports Elk River, Minnesota Superintendent David Flannery.
"The NCAA has created a monster," says Ken Gunn, Principal of Walnut High School in Walnut, California, and president of the California Interscholastic Federation.
"We've had to spent a lot of time justifying what are clearly college preparation courses, notes Margaree Mills Fitchett, a high school counselor in Wilmington, Delaware.
This has taken time away from students."
A growing number of educators agree.
The NCAA, which was created to regulate college and university sports programs, is creating enormous problems for high school students, parents and educators throughout the nation.
Brief background on the NCAA
Why have NCAA actions led to law suits against public school systems? Why is the National Association of State Boards of Education warning school districts about legal problems the NCAA has created for schools? Why are school reform authorities like Jonathan Kozol, Asa Hilliard, Jeanne Allen, Deborah Meier and Ted Sizer challenging the NCAA? Answering these questions requires understanding the NCAA.
As McKinley Boston, Senior Vice President at the University of Minnesota explains, "The NCAA was created because universities didn't trust each other.
They wanted to create a relatively level playing field for sports."
The NCAA is big business.
They report more than $247 million in revenue in 1997.
NCAA officials are eager to protect that revenue.
About a decade ago, the NCAA was vigorously criticized because some professional athletes announced they could barely read, even though they had been university students.
In response, the NCAA developed high school grade point averages and college entrance test score minimums, which prospective college student/athletes had to meet.
Then some university coaches convinced the NCAA that freshman should be eligible for varsity teams.
Some excellent athletes were skipping college, going directly into professional sports.
But what does this have to do with high schools?
NCAA Creates National Curriculum Standards
Permitting freshman to play varsity sports brought increased scrutiny of high school students.
Some high school students graduate without strong academic skills.
K-12 educators, as well as university officials, are concerned about such students.
Without consulting with superintendents, school board members, or other members of the K-12 community, the NCAA decided to create standards for high school courses.
It decided that good high school grades and strong test scores were no longer enough to qualify students for university sports.
The NCAA decided to specify the content of acceptable high school courses.
For example, the NCAA decided that an acceptable high school social studies course could spend no more than 25% of its time on current or contemporary issues.
No more than 25% of an acceptable social studies course could be devoted to humanities, or criminal justice.
The result is that thousands of students with strong academic records found that they were declared ineligible for athletic scholarships - and ineligible to compete as freshman.
A few of the many, many examples:
Yale accepted Alison Rosholt on an "Early Decision" basis in the fall of 1997.
She has excellent grades and test scores, and is a fine tennis player.
But despite dozens of phone calls from her parents and her school, and mounds of material submitted to the NCAA, as of mid-summer, 1998, Rosholt still does not know if she will be allowed to try out for Yale's tennis team this fall.
Amber Hofstad, a National Merit Scholar, spent more than a year battling the NCAA.
She still has not been approved to participate in Division I sports (the largest schools are in Division I.)
After many months, she was approved for Division II sports.
The problem seems to lie with some advanced courses she took which the NCAA questioned.
The NCAA prevented Chris Rohe, who compiled a 3.97 high school grade point average, high test scores and membership in the National Honor Society from playing football at the Air Force Academy during the 1996-97 school year.
Why? The NCAA rejected l/3 of a required 10th grade English class.
Dan Zien, a suburban Milwaukee student who won honors in the Junior Olympics, compiled a B high school grade point average and scored above l300 on his SAT.
However, the NCAA refused to allow him to participate in track at the University of Indiana because it rejected a single English class he took, although the same course was accepted at other Wisconsin high schools.
A Milwaukee Journal Sentinel article noted that "an expert with the Wisconsin Department of Public Instruction says he has heard similar or worse complaints from almost every high school athletic director in the state."
The NCAA ruled a Rebecca Burt, a young woman with a strong academic record ineligible to accept a track scholarship on the basis of a single "Tech Prep" science class.
As a result, she had to drop out of college.
A USA Today editorial discussing this and other cases ran under the headline, "NCAA's too-tight rules hurt deserving students."
The NCAA tried, simply on the basis of courses taken, to prevent a high school class valedictorian from participating in college sports.
The Detroit News reporter who uncovered this case began his story: "Ninety thousand dashed hopes.
That's how many graduating high school seniors hoped to be playing sports in college this year, only to find they were academically ineligible."
Misty Hollingshead graduated with a 3.56 G.P.A. and strong test scores from North Thurston High School in Olympia, Washington.
She was class president and a member of the National Honor Society all four years in high school.
A highly regarded volleyball player, Misty also took 43 quarter hours of college work her senior year in high school, as permitted under Washington state's "Running Start" law.
However, she and her parents went through months of anguish because the NCAA challenged the amount of credit Hollingshead was awarded under the Washington state law.
Misty's mother Sandy, a Washington educator, wrote:
"We were stunned by the rigidity and lack of common sense on the part of the Clearinghouse, and at their arrogance and unwillingness to give us answers concerning the process they had used in making decisions about our daughter...It's crazy for an organization to have the power that they do to override and overrule educational statutes set forth by a state legislature, and to not really have to answer to anyone for their actions and decisions.
I think the colleges have created a monster that's devouring some of the brightest and the best of their potential student-athletes, a system that is weeding out the cream of the crop right along with the bottom of the barrel."
Ken Gunn, president of the California Interscholastic Federation notes that the NCAA "deserves every bit of the negative publicity" they've received, which includes strong criticism in New York Times and USA Today editorials.
Gunn and other educators are concerned not only about the deserving students who have been frustrated, but by the NCAA's disturbing impact on efforts to improve schools.
The NCAA frustrates school reformers
Elk River Minnesota superintendent David Flannery was cited earlier as a leader angry with the NCAA.
The NCAA rejected an Elk River interdisciplinary English/Social Studies course, which placed outstanding student/athletes in limbo for months.
The NCAA's three sentence memo rejecting the course, contains three grammatical mistakes: "Thank you for you (sic) fax regarding `Essential Communications.'
Do (sic) to the vocational aspect of this, we are unable to approve this course as a core course.
Therefore, the decision remains unchange (sic) for student named above."
Bob Rodrigues knows about frustration with the NCAA.
The National Council of Social Studies named him "1997 national outstanding secondary teacher of the year."
Rodrigues, a suburban Pittsburgh teacher, has spent frustrating months trying to gain NCAA approval of carefully developed interdisciplinary courses.
He has won many awards, including a fellowship from the Council for Basic Education.
But time after time, his interdisciplinary courses have been rejected.
Mike Bonacci, principal of the school, wrote, "After having had too many experiences calling, submitting curricula, resubmitting curricula, and receiving different answers to the same questions because one can never talk with the same Clearinghouse representative, it makes my guidance counselors and me wonder whether the NCAA Academic Requirements Committee know anything at all about curricula and those components of a planned course which qualify it as a core course."
The NCAA does not impose course standards on colleges and universities.
It accepts university courses so long as the course helps students make progress toward a degree.
How about the same standard for high schools? Parents in at least three states (Iowa, Minnesota and Michigan) have sued school districts, insisting that the district should have warned students the NCAA doesn't accept a particular course.
But it can take months to get a response from the NCAA about which courses are acceptable.
And who is the NCAA to over-rule courses acceptable to universities like Yale, the Air Force Academy, or Harvard? Should the NCAA judge which high school courses are appropriate for college preparation?
The National Association of State Boards of Education says "absolutely not."
It calls the NCAA "far behind the curve" in understanding research based high school innovations.
NASBE also strongly criticized the NCAA for increasing the legal liability of public school districts.
Public education is not represented in NCAA's governance structure.
But the NCAA has made high school principals and counselors agents of the NCAA.
A year ago the NCAA asked every high school in the nation to send in a description of each of its English, Social Studies, Math and Science courses.
The NCAA's Clearinghouse, operated by the American College Testing Service, would decide which courses were acceptable.
Imagine judging each core academic course offered by every high school in the country.
It's clear why it takes a long time to get a response from the NCAA.
And in a Connecticut court case the NCAA Clearinghouse Director admitted that none of the people reviewing courses had any experience as a teacher or administrator involved in high school curriculum.
Now the NCAA has asked high school principals to recommend which courses meet NCAA standards.
But the NCAA reserves the right to over-rule principals.
The U. S. Department of Justice also has challenged the NCAA.
The NCAA was automatically rejecting courses involving special education services, despite the fact that some students, with such assistance, have done very well in college.
The NCAA insisted that it did not have to follow the Americans with Disabilities Act.
The Department of Justice disagreed.
After months of negotiation (and a federal law suit), the NCAA agreed to consider special education courses.
Next steps
After intense criticism, the NCAA has started to respond.
They have met with a variety of education groups over the last 3 years.
Change has been very slow, and halting.
The U.S. Department of Justice also has challenged the NCAA for automatically rejecting courses involving special education services.
Some students who had received acceptable college entrance tests despite their disability were not allowed to participate as freshman because they had taken high school courses involving special ed assistance.
The NCAA has argued in several court cases that it does not have to follow the Americans with Disabilities Act.
Not so, said the U.S. Department of Justice, pointing out that some youngsters with disabilities were performing well in universities.
After months of negotiation, the Department of Justice and NCAA signed an agreement in which the NCAA agrees to consider courses with special education designation.
However, recent cases raise new questions about whether the NCAA truly has changed the way it assesses courses.
Recently state Attorneys General had established a study committee to examine NCAA practices.
Their interest was prompted by complaints from educators in more than two dozen states.
Ironically, the NCAA already has a model which would dramatically reduce problems it has created for schools and students.
The NCAA could adopt the same approach to high school courses than it has toward college courses.
The NCAA accepts any university course as appropriate for athletes if a department says it leads toward a degree.
Isn't it time for the NCAA to give high schools the same respect it gives universities? In dealing with families and high schools, the NCAA seems to be confused about the difference between being rigorous and rigid.
The NCAA has frustrated high school educators all over the nation who are attempting to improve their schools programs.
School districts have had to devote enormous amounts of time and energy to supplying information for demanding, unresponsive NCAA officials.
And as the cases cited above illustrate, the NCAA has frustrated many deserving student athletes.
This is a good time for school administrators to help the NCAA understand that its intentions may be worthy, but its approach is wretched.
As Oz Twedt, parent of a Wisconsin honor student who lost her fall season because of the NCAA put it, "the system is definitely messed up."
Increasing standards is a good idea.
But high school course content should not be dictated by the NCAA.
As a New York Times editorial concluded, "The NCAA should be promoting educational innovation, not obstructing it."
Just last month the National School Board Association voted to challenge the NCAA.
A USA Today editorial from October 27, 1998 concluded, "Until the NCAA gets out of the business of deciding course content, all high school students will continue to lose out."
And just two days ago, on May 23, a columnist in the Philadelphia Inquirer described problems all over the nation with the NCAA and concluded, "The NCAA would be better served if it policed its member institutions and left high schools alone."
This situation cries out for Congressional review.
Please consider doing this as part of your re-authorization of the ESEA.
Let's now turn to lesson number two: The federal government functions most effectively when it sets clear goals and lets educators, community leaders, parents, students and others develop the most appropriate ways to reach those goals.
Congress has succeeded in helping encourage use of the many good ideas, such as the charter school movement by providing incentives, not mandates.
Recommendation: Congress should seriously consider providing financial encouragement for schools, businesses and community agencies to share facilities, and to explore other creative way to meet facilities needs.
Congress has had a very positive impact on the charter school movement, an effort that is helping solve some of the nation's toughest education problems.
Despite powerful, intense opposition, Republicans and Democrats support the charter movement because it is creating more effective, accountable public schools and stimulating the larger system to improve.
Charter advocates have learned several lessons from previous school reform successes and shortcomings.
1.
Public schools can make a strong positive impact on students, including youngsters from troubled backgrounds.
Bob Slavin, James Comer, Deborah Meier and Henry Levin, among others, have demonstrated how public schools can have a major, measurable positive impact on all kinds of students.
Unfortunately, districts often ignore their success.
Poverty, racism and violence must be reduced.
But like Slavin, charter advocates know that problems outside schools should not excuse failures inside schools.
Schools can do a better job.
Charter schools around the nation are improving student achievement.
California, Colorado and Minnesota charter schools have had contracts renewed because of their success.
2.
One of public education's central problems is the system itself.
After studying about 1,000 classrooms, John Goodlad concluded: "The cards are stacked against innovation."
American Federation of Teachers president Al Shanker described the plight of educators trying to create new, more effective public school options.
Such educators often are "treated like traitors or outlaws for daring to move out of the lock-step and do something different...often they could look forward to insecurity, obscurity or outright hostility."
Henry Levin "loves the charter movement," partly because he's seen so much district interference with schools.
"Many districts regularly move principals.
Or they hire new superintendents, or elect new school board members.
Schools making progress often encounter higher level decisions disrupting, even terminating their programs."
3.
Public education can be offered without relying exclusively on school districts: Several legislatures have created public schools which report directly to the state.
These schools serve, for example, students with disabilities or special interests in art, mathematics or science.
Schools can be public without being district controlled.
Effective charter laws build on this tradition, but to serve all kinds of students, prohibit admissions tests.
Strong laws stimulate district improvement by authorizing local boards and the state to sponsor charters, and allow charter schools to completely control budget and personnel.
The Massachusetts charter law, allowing applications directly to the state, helped convince Boston to create a new "pilot school" program.
Colorado's law persuaded the Jefferson County's board to respond to parents who pleaded for replication of successful programs.
Rochester, Minnesota's board created a Montessori public school after a private Montessori program requested a charter.
Strong charter laws stimulate system change as they create new, more accountable public schools.
However, a 1996 Humphrey Institute survey of 77 legislators, aides and policy leaders in 9 states with charter laws found that most statewide teacher unions vigorously opposed strong laws.
Unions generally favor permitting only local boards to approve schools and/or allowing local boards and unions to rule on contract changes.
States following these recommendations have no or very few charters.
And weak laws provide no stimulus for local districts and unions.
Having failed to block the charter idea, opponents are trying to stifle it by retaining district and union control over schools.
4.
School choice plans vary in their impact.
The nation's largest (informal) school choice plan is the most inequitable: the school district system allowing affluent families to move to exclusive suburbs, where they deduct high property taxes from taxable income.
The real policy debate is whether low and moderate income families will have choices too, and if so, what kind.
Badly designed school choice plans promote inequity.
Several southern states used school choice to maintain segregation.
And because more than half of U.S. secondary magnets, and about a quarter of elementary magnets use admissions tests, low income and low achieving students often are under-represented.
Many magnet schools receive more funding than nearby neighborhood schools.
Good charter laws prohibit admissions tests.
Ironically, some opponents call charters "elitist," while ignoring explicitly elite (and often higher-spending) magnet schools.
Like charters, many distinguished public alternative schools serve all kinds of students .
They anticipated, sometimes by 25 years, research supporting small, more individualized schools.
Charters build on excellent non-selective public alternatives, like Walden III in Racine, SAIL in Tallahassee and St. Paul's Open School.
But charter proponents - some of them, like me, public alternative school veterans - also recall frustrations.
Districts regularly assigned teachers to alternative schools via seniority, rather than agreement with the school's philosophy.
It can take months, even years for supplies to arrive, or repairs to be made.
Many alternative schools pleaded in vain for control over budget and personnel.
Gaining this control helps charter schools produce higher student achievement, as they are doing around the nation.
And a number of charters are doing this with challenging young people.
5.
The public wants better schools.
The charter concept is spreading because it combines opportunity, choice and responsibility for higher achievement.
Local advocacy groups like the Urban League, Urban Coalition, Tejano Center and ACORN helped start charters.
They know better education is possible, now.
Some charter opponents cite a few troubled charters.
Most were closed in a few months, rather than taking years to reorganize, which was necessary with deeply troubled districts like Newark, Compton and Washington, D.C.
Some union leaders are responding.
Houston Federation of Teachers president Gayle Fallon helped Houston's Tejano Center create a charter sponsored by the state of Texas.
She believes it will "help participating students, and encourage district-wide improvements."
In 1988, Al Shanker popularized the term "charter."
But little happened until 1991, when Minnesota passed the first charter law, adding accountability, permitting multiple sponsors and freeing charters from local contracts and most state rules.
Shanker wasn't pleased.
In 1993, he included charter schools in a list of "quick fixes that won't fix anything."
In 1991, the Minnesota Education Association called charters "a cruel hoax."
Two years later its statewide newspaper featured Milo Cutter on page one.
Cutter, an MEA member, co-founded and teaches at City Academy, a St. Paul charter school whose students all are former drop-outs.
Last year City Academy's contract was renewed because of its success.
In 1992 the National Education Association opposed federal charter startup funds.
But as support grew for charters, the NEA endorsed weak laws.
NEA also allocated $1.5 million and asked several charter veterans, including Cutter, to help other teachers start charters.
That's progress.
The charter movement is producing more involved families, more fulfilled educators and more successful students.
American education needs this combination of hope, stimulation, accountability and opportunity.
One of the lessons of the charter movement is that we can make very creative use of space to help make small schools viable.
Charters operate in facilities they share with, for example, a city recreation center, a community college, a YMCA, a museum, and a small shopping mall.
And charters can help us think about the next steps in school building facilities.
Creative use of buildings is not confined to charter schools.
Some rural and urban districts have created small public schools in business office buildings, community centers, and social service agencies.
We already know the value of small schools.
This appears to be something on which everyone from the American Federation of Teachers to the American Legislative Exchange Council (ALEC) agree.
See attached articles.
An AFT publication, the American Teacher, notes in its December/January 1996 issue, "Smaller is better.
That's the consensus of a growing body of research on the effects of size on a variety of measures."
An ALEC report, cited in the September 21, 1994 New York Times, noted that "children do better in small schools...300 students or less."
A large federally funded study, summarized by University of Chicago professor Tony Bryk, reached similar conclusions:
"These findings complement and extend a now-large body of research evidence that smaller schools are more productive work places for both adults and students.
In these more intimate environments, teachers are more likely to report greater satisfaction with their work, higher levels of morale and greater commitment.
Problems of student misconduct, class cutting, absenteeism and dropping out are less prevalent.
We also now that student achievement tends to be more inequitably distributed in bigger schools...The envisioned economics of scale have actually been quite elusive...while school districts that are currently saddled with large physical plants might productively move toward schools within schools, there is little reason to continue to build more buildings like this.
In light of the positive consequences for both adults and students associated with working in small schools, the reality is one of a dis-economy of scale."
But we are poised to produce another generation of huge schools.
Congress can and should intervene by providing incentives for alternatives to these mega-schools.
Here's the third lesson: The federal government can be extremely helpful by helping to share information, providing financial and technical assistance, and not dictating the way things ought to be done.
Recently our center worked closely with the Minnesota legislature on the teacher training and supply issue.
One of the central issues of the next decade is the attracting, training and retaining excellent teachers.
Our research asked every public school principal and superintendent what they thought about the teacher training programs in Minnesota.
This was the first time this has been done.
Public school administrators welcomed the study, and well more than half of them responded.
Many felt that recently prepared teachers knew a good deal about their subject matter, but did not know how to teach it.
Administrators had other concerns, including colleges of education apparent lack of involving public school administrators.
More than 75 per cent of the administrators said they would like to help plan teacher preparation programs, or speak in a teacher preparation class.
Less than 50 per cent said they had been asked to do so.
This led the Center for propose, with strong support from the Urban Coalition, and many professional educators, that the state identify outstanding public schools, and allocate them to create teacher training programs.
The 1999 Legislature agreed to do this, asking the Commissioner of Children, Families and Learning to identify up to five public schools which clearly are improving achievement.
These schools will be given a small grant and allowed to work with parent, community, business and educator groups to create new training programs.
These programs also create a new career option for outstanding teachers, which we think is critical to help retain outstanding educators.
As you proceed in this area, Congress ought to encourage thoughtful examination and response to the teacher supply issue, without selecting one preferred approach.
It would be very helpful to encourage innovation in states in this key area.
I wouldn't necessarily pick out one group, such as the National Board for Professional Teaching Standards, and direct money to them.
Let states make decisions about how to proceed.
A number of questions have been raised about the National Board, including their apparent disinterest in determining whether candidates actually produce improvements in student achievement.
Another concern has been the National Board's disinterest in survey parents of the students served by these teachers.
I do not intend to suggest the National Board has no value - only that Congress should not stipulate, as it has in the past, that tax funds will go directly to this group.
Joe Nathan , a former public school teacher and administrator, directs the Center for School Change at the University of Minnesota's Humphrey Institute of Public Affairs.
Center for School Change, Humphrey Institute, University of Minnesota, 301 19th Avenue S, Minneapolis, MN 55455.
