may2001-5/22 7/15/01 7:40 PM Page 1 NEWS OF THE NATION'S DIVERSE CULTURAL HERITAGE H E R I TA G E M AT T E R S JUNE 2001 The Tuskegee Airmen Oral History Project Todd Moye, Southeast Regional Office subsequent desegregation of the U.S. military and the ensuing civil rig hts movement.
The task of creating the Tuskegee Airmen NHS p resents t he National Park Service with a uni que opportunity.
Many of the p eople whose s tories w ill be commemorated and interpreted at the new site are still a live.
From the outset, it has been clear that an oral history project w ith the goal of interviewing as many participants in t he Tuskegee Airmen experience as p ossible would b e a cr ucial component of this effort.
Oral histories of the surviving Tuskegee Airmen will be used for three main purposes.
Informat ion from the interviews will guide the Park Service's rehabilitation and construction projects at Moton Field.
Recordings of the interviews will be used in the NHS's interpretive programs, so that visitors will be able to learn about the Tuskegee Airmen experience from those who participated, in their own words.
Finally, the interviews and their transcripts will housed in an archive at the NHS and made available to researchers and the public.
In 1998, President C linton signed Public Law 105­355, establishing t he Tuskegee Airmen National Historic Site at Moton Field in Tuskegee,AL, to commemorate the heroic actions of the Tuskegee Airmen during World War II.
Two years later in 2000, the National Park S ervice initiated the Tuskegee Airmen Oral History Project.
Today, five f ull-time oral history interviewers a re interviewing participants in t he Tuskegee Airmen experience throughout t he country.
When opened to the public, the Tuskegee Airmen National Historic Site at Moton Field w ill contain a museum and interpretive programs at the hi storic complex at Moton Field.
The new unit of the National Park System will address the training of the Tuskegee Airmen, their contributions to t he U.S.
World War II effort, their role in exp anding the opportunities available to African Americans in t he U.S.mi litary, and the impact of their efforts on t he
The National Park Service has c hosen to define a "Tuskegee Airman" in the broadest possible terms.
Nearly 1,000 pilots successfully c ompleted Army Air Corps flig ht training at Tuskegee between 1941 a nd 1946.
These pilots have recently b egun to w in recognition for their excellent service in World War II, and justly so.
But they made up o nly a fraction of the total number of people whose collective service was responsible for the success of the Tuskegee program.
The Tuskegee Airmen Oral History Project is identifying and interviewing the thousands of people who served behind the scene--as mechanics, parachute packers, weather forecasters,radio operators,secr etaries, etc.-- in addit ion to t hose who fl ew the planes.
The goal is to i nterview a mini mum of 1,500 participants in t he Tuskegee Airmen experience.
The staff of fulltime interviewers is b ased in t he Southeast Regional Office of the National Park Service, in Atlanta,GA.
If you know of anyone who should be considered for an interview, contact Todd Moye at 404/562-3117 or Todd_Moye@nps.gov.
Moton Air Hanger No. 1.
In interpreting the story of the Tuskegee Airmen, NPS seeks to interview at least 1,500 participants in the Tuskegee Airmen experience.
Moton Field, Tuskegee, AL, 1999.
Photo by Museum Management Program, NPS.
page 1
may2001-5/22 7/15/01 7:40 PM Page 2
Everyone who works in a Civil War p ark knows t hat staff and v isitors come to these sites with their own past exper iences and b eliefs.
Fort Sumter National Monument is committed to telling a broader story about our hi story, including the voices of captured and enslaved Africans.
These voices from the past are voices that we hope will provoke cur iosity and interest in l earning more a bout our shared heritage as United States citizens.
Visitors should be a ble to connect with our exhibits with i ssues that are still relevant to who we are today--the role of the federal government, states' rights, and race relations.
For more information, contact Carlin Timmons, Ft Sumter National Monument; 843/883-3123, e-mail: Carlin_Timmons@nps.gov.
When completed in l ate 2001,NPS staff expects t hat this brochure will expand public understanding of, and appreciation for, the cultural, natural, and recreational resources within and close to t he park.
The b rochure also can build support for interpretative prog rams, environmental a nd cultural resource education, and maintenance.
The NPS FY 2000 C hallenge Cost S hare Program (CCSP) p rovided se ed money for t he preparation of the brochure.
NPCA matched the CCSP gra nt with grants f rom t he Marpat Foundation and the Seraph Foundation, both of Washington, DC.
The Anacostia Brochure Project g rew out of the Community Partners Program of the NPCA, and its eff orts to engage minority communities in national parks a nd the work of the National Park Service.
In addition, the Anacostia Brochure Project can be h elpful to efforts of the District of Columbia government in revitalizing the historic Anacostia community.
Moriba N. McDonald is a historian with the NPS Cultural Resources Diversity Initiative.
For more information, contact Mr. McDonald at 202/3432231, or by e-mail: moriba_mcdonald@nps.gov .
Anacostia Park Brochure Moriba N. McDonald, Cultural Resources Diversity Initiative
This US Army Air Force Training war bond poster features a Tuskegee Airman pilot standing on the wing of a fighter airplane.
The inscription reads "Back our attack buy your share of war bonds today.
5th war loan drive June 12­July 18."
Owned by Tuskegee Airman Robert Glass, courtesy of Tuskegee Airmen National Historic Site, TUAI 40
Ft. Sumter Ferry Facility Offers New Interpretation for Visitors Carlin Timmons, Fort Sumter National Monument
A dream 25 years in t he making is about to b ecome a r eality in Charleston, SC. Fort Sumter National Monument's new ferry boat facility w ill be o pening downtow n at Liberty S quare this summer.
This project is signifi cant in a number of ways.
It is b uilt on a reclaimed Super Fund site and is part of a broad based waterfront revitalization.
On t he ferry, visitors to Fort Sumter take part in i nterpretive programs that will help them appreciate the many meanings associated w ith Fort Sumter.
The challenge has been to greatly expand the story told at the fort's museu m ,w h ich was renovated in 1995.
Its emphasis is on the what happened at Sumter and the Charleston area during the Civil War.
The new Liberty Square exhibits will place the events at Fort Sumter in the larger context of United States history.
This context will extend back to the colonial roots of the conflict and events leading up to secession.
The exhibits will bring the visitor up to the beginning of the Civil War in April 1861.
The exhibits w ill cover the causes of the war, the g rowth of sectionalism, slaver y, the Constitution, and the greatest challenge that this country has ever faced.
Visitors likely w ill include those wh ose great-great grandparents were born into slaver y and others whose ancestors might have b een Confederate generals.
The National Park Service is cooperating with t he National Parks Conservation Association (NPCA) t o produce a b asic NPS brochure for Anacostia Park in Washington, DC.
Located on both sides of the Anacostia River, Anacostia Park is a major n atural, cultural, and recreational resource in the national capital city and an i mportant part of the national park system in the Washington DC a rea. Anacostia Park is close to o ther NPS attractions, including the Frederick Douglass National Historic Site and Kenilworth Aquatic Gardens.
City historic places, including the residential Anacostia Historic District and Anacostia High Sc hool, are near t he park.
Despite t he central l ocation a nd large size of Anacostia Park, it is l ittle known to ma ny residents of the Washington, DC metropolitan area or to many visitors.A NPS brochure will provide t he visitor with a map of the park.
It identifies park boundaries, visitor facilities, ranger stations, and areas for recreational uses and summarizes the natural and c ultural resources within and around the park.
These brochures a re provided to v isitors,sc hools, and residents of nearby communities.
Applied Anthropology's Unique Role in the National Park Service Alexa Roberts, Intermountain Region Support Office, and Jacilee Wray, Olympia National Park
Your park has completed a comprehensive archeological survey, and you know where all your archeological sites are.
You have also inventoried all of your historic s tructures, cultural landscapes, and museum collections.
You now k now all that you need to k now to p rotect and interpret your park's cultural resources.
Or do you? What do you know about that prominent hill in the southeast corner of the park that people who have always lived around here have a special name for? What about those cattails growing around the spring, or the place where that old cabin used to stand--where you still sometimes see people parked? Are you aware that these may be
page 2
may2001-5/22 7/15/01 7:40 PM Page 3
and resources.
They facilitate consultations with tribes and other communities.
They help park i nterpreters, and other staff learn about connections between parks and traditionally a ssociated groups.
They assist in t he collection of oral histories, and in a ddressing tribal access a nd other issues.
When the park proposes projects, they help c ommunities document c ommunity responses,evaluate cultural impacts, and determine courses of action t o resolve conflicts.
And, they help you find your way through NPS p olicies and federal requirements, NAGPRA,EIS preparation, and regional implementation of the service-wide Ethnographic Resources Inventor y database.
For more information, contact Ms. Roberts at Alexa_Roberts@nps.gov, or Ms. Wray at Jacilee_Wray@nps.gov.
Hope and Glory: The Story of the Fifty-Fourth Massachusetts Regiment Marty Blatt, Chief of Cultural Resources/Historian at Boston Nat ional Historical Park, is the co-editor of the new b ook, Hope and Glor y: Essays on the Legacy of the 54th Massachusetts Regiment, published by University of Massachusetts Press.
Secretary of State Colin Powell wrote the foreword.
Contributors examine the media of history, memory, art, literature, music, and film regarding the 54th, the most celebrated black reg iment to fight for the Union in t he Civil War.
Blatt wrote a n essay entitled "Glory: Hollywood History, Popular Culture and the F iftyfourth Massachusetts Regiment."
This book originated in the 1997 c entennial celebration of the Augustus Saint-Gaudens Monument to Robert Gould Shaw and the 54th.
The National Park Service played a central role i n planning this p rogram.
Not since the Civil War has Boston or a ny city in t he United States witnessed such an outpouring of admiration for the AfricanAmerican soldiers a nd their white brethren who together risked their l ives so that others might be f ree.
The story of the Massachusetts 54th, the most celebrated black regiment to fight for the Union in the Civil War, is the subject of Hope 
Courtesy of University of Massachusetts Press.
ethnographic resources, to which neighboring communities may attach special cultural values? Do you know the community's names for these special places--and do you understand the community's concerns about how they are managed? And what happens if your park hasn't yet identified its c ulturally significant resources? NPS's Applied Ethnography Program is a small service-wide group of cultural anthropologists based in regions, support offices,se rvice centers, programs, and parks across the country.
They focus on the relationships b etween Parks,NPS programs, and p eoples whose c ustomar y ways of life affect, or
are affected by, NPS management activities.
They also reach out to federal, state, tribal, and other partners beyond the NPS.
Although ethnographic, cultural, and natural resources (including the landscapes of which they are a p art) can be eligible for listing in t he National Register of Historic Places, the t rue importance of these resources lies in the unique c ultural value that they have to contemporary peoples and communities and the continuance of traditional practices.
NPS ethnographers can guide your basic ethnographic research, as you identify tra ditionally associated communities, and their uses o f parklands
page 3
may2001-5/22 7/15/01 7:40 PM Page 4
HERITAGE MATTERS
JUNE 2001
Fort Lewis College Starts Undergraduate Heritage Preservation Program Deborah Uroda, Fort Lewis College
thirteenth century, an Incan shirt,ra re Saltillo serapes woven by Navajo slaves for colonial Spanish gentlemen, and other rare weavings.
The world-renowned collection will be on permanent rotating display in the center's 4,400-square-foot main exhibit gallery.
It also w ill be used to tra in students through the college's new Heritage Preservation Program, established with the c enter's opening, to train s tudents for careers in c ultural tourism, museum work,historic preservation and historical interpretation.
"Located as we are in t he Four Corners Region with Mesa Verde National Park, the various Indian tribes and the many archaeological and hi storical sites the can be f ound in t he area, we can offer our students numerous opportunities for internships.
We'll be able to provide trained professionals for the growing ecotourism, cultural tourism, and tribal museum facilities," Gulliford added.
For more information about the Center of Southwest Studies at Fort Lewis College, con tact Andrew Gulliford at 970/247-7494, e-mail: gulliford_a@fortlewis.edu, web site: swcenter.fortlewis.edu.
Stored within the collections of a new museum at Fort Lewis College in Durango, CO, is a sma ll baby's blanket that, by itself, doesn't have much value, but whose stor y is priceless.
The blanket had belonged to a Navajo man b orn at Fort Sumner, New Mexico, in t he early 1860s following the Diné Long Walk from Canyon de Chelley in Arizona.
More than 3,000 died during the death march and subsequent incarceration.
With its s tory, the weaving has become a p owerful symbol of a p eople's history t hat should never be forgotten.
The b lanket is one of thousands of historic and prehistoric artifacts, oral histories,ra re books,ma ps, and hi storical photographs now available to t he public through the college's new $8 mi llion Center of Southwest Studies,a museum, archives, research library, and home to the institution's award-winning Southwest Studies a nd Anthropology degree programs.
Although originally established in 1964, it is t he country's oldest c enter that is focused solely on S outhwest history and cultures.
The center had been hidden away on t he third floor of the college's library, and trying to a ccess its c ollections was akin to e ngaging in a n archaeological dig.
That is,until n ow. Built w ith private donations and funds from t he state of Colorado, the threestory, 48,500-square-foot facility w ill offer un precedented opportunities for researchers to explore the cultural heritage of the Southwest,says Center Director Andrew Gulliford.
For example, the center is h ome to the one-of-a-kind Durango Collection,a selection of 160 textiles that spans eig ht centuries of Southwestern weaving.
Donated by the Richard and Mar y Lyn Ballantine family of Durango and the Mark and Lerin Winter family of Pagosa Springs, the collection includes an Ancestral Puebloan shawl da ting from t he
Assumption of SHPO Duties by Five Tribes As of October 27, 2000, the follow ing tribes have officially assumed State Historic Preservation Officer (SHPO) functions within the exterior boundaries of their respective reser vations, bringing the number to 27 tribes that have assumed SHPO duties, pursuant to Section 101 (d)(2) of the National Historic Preservation Act: Catawba Indian Nation, South Carolina Lac Courte Oreilles Band of Lake of Superior, Wisconsin Makah Tribe, Washington Seneca Nation of Indians, New York Skokomish Indian Tribe, Washington
may2001-5/22 7/15/01 7:40 PM Page 5
Fort Lewis College alumna Candace Becenti, a Navajo from Fort Defiance, AZ, wears a Navajo Woman's Serape from The Durango Collection outside the new $8 million Center of Southwest Studies.
Courtesy of Deborah Uroda.
This Germantown Eyedazzler, a Navajo weaving from the 1870s, is one of 160 weavings found in The Durango Collection, a collection that illustrates eight centuries of weaving traditions in the Southwest.
It is one of the most famous collections in the Center of Southwest Studies at Fort Lewis College in Durango, CO. Courtesy of Deborah Uroda.
page 5
may2001-5/22 7/15/01 7:40 PM Page 6
HERITAGE MATTERS
JUNE 2001
National Center for the Preservation of Democracy Established at Japanese American National Museum On October 17,2000, the Japanese American National Museum and the Chairman of its B oard of Governors, Senator D aniel K. Inouye (D-HI), announced the appropriation of $20 million in f ederal fun ds to e stablish the Nat ional Center for the Preservation of Democracy.
This Center will be affi liated with and housed at the National Museum in L os Angeles.
The purpose of the National Center is to exami ne the rights and freedoms of all Americans through the lessons learned from the Japanese American exp erience.
In ma king the announcement, Senator Inouye stated, "The Japanese Americans' stor y celebrates t he t riumphs of American democracy.
I am proud to be able to announce that the National C enter for the Preservation for Democracy w ill be affi liated with the Japanese American National Museum, which is an i nstitution that is d edicated to t he study, preservation, and i nterpretation of democratic i ssues.
The National Center's development of nationwide programs about t he issues of democracy a nd its e ducation and public programs examining democracy in action will be a n atural complement to t he important work being done by the National Museum."
The National Center will provide a w ide array of educational programming that includes exhibitions, media arts presentation, public programs, conferences, and civic dialogue/public forums.
The educational programming w ill be multi-faceted, using Japanese American history as the lens to look at U.S. constitut ional and civil rig hts issues and the experiences of a broad range of ethnic and racial g roups.
George Takei, Chairman of the Board of Trustees for the Japanese American National Museum,cited the appropri-
ateness of the National Museum's hi storic building--a National Historic Landmark as designated by the Secretary of the Interior.
The building has been a focal point of American history, serving as a U.S. government assembly point where Japanese Americans were ordered to report before their un constitutional World War II incarceration.
As Takei stated, "What better place to l earn the lessons of American democracy than at this historic site?" For more information, contact Chris Komai, the National Center for the Preservation of Democracy, 213/830-5648.
Descendants of Elizabeth Hawkins are doing more than just p art icipating in the excavations.
Several Hawkins family descendants have provided informal oral hi stories and family genealogies of the seven Hawkins family lines who trace their ancestry to t he slave quarters at Northampton.
Family members are also ta king a proactive role in h elping to obtain finding and to encourage community support for the project.
Excavations of the two slave quarters have been completed.
Historical research and artifact analyses are now being conducted via a gra nt f rom the Maryland Historical Trust.
The foundation of one of the quarters has been reconst ructed as a p ermanent exhibit.
Upon e ntering t he park, an asphalt path directs the visitor past the reconstructed foundation of an 1840s duplex quarter, to a s itting area w ith two benches.
A sign includes text, graphics, and photographs,which offer an interpretation of the site.
Among the brief narratives on t he sig n is the following statement by the descendants of Elizabeth Hawkins: "There a re five living generations of descendants of the Hawkinses, the family that resided on this fa rm here in Prince George's C ounty.
We total in excess of 400 people, and more than three-fourths of those folks make t heir home within a 20-mi le radius of the location of the slave cabins in L ake Arbor.
Its significance to this fami ly i s tremendous; it has b een like a t ie t hat binds us together....
We the descendants of Robert and Lizzie Hawkins remember the Northampton Plantation."
Through the Hawkins' family's active part icipation in t he planning and interpretation of the Northampton Slave Quarters and Archaeological Park, the Maryland-National C apital Park and Planning Commission b elieves this project can serve as a model for engaging communities in t he interpretation of their past.
For more information, contact Donald Creveling at 301/218-9651; e-mail: dcreveli@pgparks.com.
Engaging a Descendent Community in Interpreting the Past Donald K. Creveling, Archaeology Program, Maryland-National Capital Park and Planning Commission
Many public archaeology projects offer volunteers and students the opportunity to p articipate in an excavation.
Most people are fascinated with t he discovery of artifacts f rom the past,wh ether they are stone tools from thousands of years ago, or shreds of pottery, glass, or buttons from our more recent past.
One such project is the archaeology project being conducted at the Northampton Slave Quarters and Archaeological Park in Prince George's C ounty, MD.
This unique African American site is located in a one-half acre park within a townhouse development in suburban Maryland, less than ten miles from Washington, DC.
The archaeology project at the Northampton Slave Quarters and Archaeological Park is ta king public archaeology one step further.
The descendants of Elizabeth Hawkins, an African American who w as b orn at Northampton P lantation in t he midnineteenth century, are helping to e xcavate the ruins of two slave quarters, where their ancestors were enslaved.
may2001-5/22 7/15/01 7:40 PM Page 7
which had collapsed in t he 1960s a nd was rebuilt based on exist ing photos.
The preservation philosophy which governed the decision ma king process for this project required the conservation and reuse of historic materials, the use of period materials where necessary, and the replication of moldings,fixtures and elements as n eeded.
Unique to this project was t he barg ing over of materials and the ferrying of workers to the b arrier island.
Students gained firsthand knowledge and experience undertaking a ll phases of the documentation, construction and restoration process while working hand in hand w ith residents of the island.
The Sapelo Preservation Project has preserved an important element of an island heritage and created a l egacy for a g rowing audience that has come to appreciate the traditions and lore of the Gullah-Geechee community.
For more information on this project or Historic Preservation at the college, contact Maureen Burke or Robert Dickensheets at the Savannah College of Art and Design, P.O. Box 3146, Savannah, GA. 31402-3146, Phone: 912/5255200; email: smburke@scad.edu or rdick ens@scad.edu.
Zion Poplars is connected to b road patterns of our nation's history.
Before 1865, and for some time afterwards, blacks were prohibited by law from gathering in large numbers for the purpose of educational or religious instruction.
Consequently, blacks held "brush arbors," or clandestine religious meetings in wooded areas.
However, brush arbors held signifi cance beyond their function as sa fe havens for worshipping God.
Brush arbors represented appropriate sanctuaries because, according to some west African religious beliefs, spirits reside in t he brush.
Zion Poplars developed out of this west African-influenced tradition when, in 1866, its founding mothers and fathers chose seven p oplar trees as t heir sa nctuary.
These trees, four of which are extant on c hurch grounds,uni te to form one base.
In the African-Baptist worldview, Mount Zion was the sacred place where God m et with his p eople.
The seven united poplar trees constituted a k ind of "Zion," or sacred place, indicated by t he inclusion of the word Zion in t he name of the church.
Therefore, the history and culture of Zion Poplars Baptist Church are "rooted" in the seven untied poplar trees.
Observing t he tradition of most independent black churches that were established during the Reconstruction Era, Zion Poplars was a m ulti-functional institution that served the spiritual, educational, and economic needs of its congregants and communit y members.
In t hat regard, Zion Poplars prov ided blacks with many resources that the larger society refused to grant.
Mutualaid is one of Zion Poplar's cherished legacies, fostered by t he communal and indomitable spirit of its members a nd their ancestors.
For its se rvice to t he congregants, its architectural s tyle, and its west African cultural influences, Zion Poplars Baptist Church is a l ocal, state, and national treasure.
For more information, contact Natalie S. Robertson, 757/727-5749.
Dr. Robertson is an assistant professor at Hampton University.
The brush arbors provided a safe place for religious meetings, and are connected to the develoment of Zion Poplars Baptist Church in Gloucester, VA.
Photo courtesy of Natalie S. Robertson.
Zion Poplars Baptist Church, Rooted in 135 of History and Culture Located amid t he haunting beauty of the island's maritime forest and nearby shore, the century-old First African Baptist C hurch is testimony to t he strong faith a nd tra ditions of a culture, which is one of America's living t reasures.
Deserted for almost 40 years, the wooden Gothic style church was rededicated this past December by Governor Roy Barnes and college President Paula S. Wallace to b ecome a p lace to celebrate special community events and g ive island v isitors a g limpse of a restored heritage.
The restoration program called for stabilization of foundations, roof replacement,se nsitive addit ion of conventional electric lig hting, and climate control a s well as rebuilding the church steeple Natalie S. Robertson, Hampton University
The Sapelo Preservation Project On one of Georgia's protected sea islands, an abandoned, century-old church has gained new life t hough the Sapelo Preservation Project.
Students and faculty of the Savannah College of Art and Design over the past year joined forces with t he Sapelo Island Cultural Revitalization Society and w ith the state's D epartment of Natural Resources to save the First African Baptist C hurch.
The church revitalization has preserved one of the most significant monuments of the island's Gullah-Geechee culture.
In 1999, the magnificent edifice known as Z ion Poplars Baptist Church, located in Gloucester, VA, was placed on the Virginia Historic Landmarks Reg ister, as well as t he National Register of Historic Places.
Built in 1894, the c hurch is rendered in t he mid-nineteenth century g othic revival a rchitectural style with vernacular detailing.
The spectacular interior of the church exhibits t he creative craftsmanship of Frank Braxton,a former slave.
Braxton, early congregants, their descendants, and Civil War veterans are interred in t he old cemetery.
One of the oldest African American congregations in G loucester C ounty,
page 7
may2001-5/22 7/15/01 7:40 PM Page 8
The Spanish Caribbean Colonies as Stepping Stones In the North American Colonization Luis F. Olivieri-Robert, University of Puerto Rico-Carolina
As early as the sixteenth century, both Cuba and Puerto R ico were steppingstones for the early Spanish colonization of the North American lands.
Cuba was a departure port for the exploration of Florida by Hernando De Soto, while Puerto Rico was the departure site for Juan Ponce de Leon's attempt in the early quarter of the same centur y.
This history dealt with t he pirates a nd buccaneers that made the Caribbean Sea, the Gulf of Mexico, and the Atlantic coast their p erforming scenario.
The underground economy sponsored and promoted by t hese outlaws was strong.
Monitoring of, and participation in, the illegal trade of tobacco, slaves, sugar, leather, or other goods was one of the non-written duties of the colonial governor.
There are well-documented testimonies of New York, Pennsylvania, and Puerto Rico governors as a ctive participants in this e conomy as e arly as t he sixteenth century, and up to the days of the American Revolution in t he eighteenth century.
The famous William Kidd used Vieques and Mona islands (in Puerto Rico) as tra ding posts for his s muggled goods.
In the same way William Syms, from Boston,MA, was well known in the Caribbean ma ritime routes.
The commerce b etween New York a nd Puerto Rico was very lucrative up to 1769 due to the C aribbean need for flour and the American colonial need for rum.
During the Revolutionary period (1776­1783) pirates and c orsaries from the revolutionized colonies traveled through the Antilles, in v iolation of the British laws, and in favor of the Spanish policy of exclusivism, which made the Cuban and Puer to Rican colonial economies eventually more dependent of the North American.
In Puerto Rico, places like Fort "El Morro," under the purview of the National Park Service, were vital to the militar y history of the C aribbean
basin.A b uilding like "La Fortaleza," the governor's mansion since the 1540s, is a good example of the presence of late Gothic military architecture combined w ith baro que and Neoclassical decorative t rends.
At this present moment, "La Fortaleza" in San Juan and the "Armstrong-Poventud" mansion are asking for urgent attention concerning its preservation and conservation.
Luis Olievera-Robert is a professor at the University of Puerto Rico-Carolina.
it shows how to turn conflict into a cause for collaboration,whi le pointing to new understandings of the meaning of place.
In 1864,American soldiers massacred an e ncampment of Cheyenne and Arapaho Indians by the banks of Sand Creek, CO. 135 years later, at the prompting of Senator Ben Nighthorse Campbell, the Nat ional Park Service joined forces with four Indian tribes, local landowners, and the State of Colorado to p rotect a nd commemorate the site.
The first challenge was to find it.
Indian tradition placed it in o ne location, while documentar y ev idence a nd archeology raised the possibility of a nearby place.
In the end, the boundaries of the Sand Creek Massacre National Historic Site were draw n to include both sites.
Sand Creek offers several lessons.
First, it shows how we can stretch the bounds of collaboration beyond the limits typically set by government agencies.
Second, it demonstrates the special power of sites associated with conflict and grief.
Such sites enable us to carry on a public conversation about painful and unresolved episodes in our national history.
The debates themselves can create a new public consciousness of history.
Finally, Sand Creek poses a q uestion about what we mean by place.
All participants ag reed that it was important to find the site and protect it.
In the end, they also agreed to d iffer in wh ere they thought it was.
That is no t rivial disagreement, yet n either need i t become a cr ippling one.
We need different things from a site.
While the scientific mi nd may crave the certainty of saying "it happened precisely here," others seek a s pot where they can commune with memory, observe some personal or communal r itual.
For them, the site's authenticity may not depend on a t est boring.
Shovels might even diminish its aura.
As preservationists, we need to create collaboration out of conflict,ma ke peace between research a nd reflection, create space f or ceremony as well as science.
Sand C reek shows that it c an be done.
Sites of Conflict and Collaboration: New Developments from the West Ned Kaufman
Preservat ionists are finding common ground with environmentalists in a new appreciation of the cultural heritage of place: all over the West, people are working together in n ew ways to protect environmental values and traditions.
It's happening in B ozeman, MT, where a g roup of ranchers recently got together to place their land under conservation e asements.
It's happening in Missoula,wh ere the O'Connor Center for t he Rocky Mountain West is study ing ways for local ranchers, and others, to gain greater responsibility for managing public lands; in Steamboat Springs, CO, where the City Council, helped by the Orton Family Foundation, just opened a ci vic hall where planning meetings c an be t ruly public; and at Heart Mountain,WY, where efforts to preserve a World War II i nternment camp are bringing together the State Historic Preservation Office with l ocal business interests and Japanese Americans.
It's happening throughout the West, where g roups like the Northern Lights Institute and the S onoran Institute a re developing new techniques of collaborative conservation, bringing residents, environmentalists, business interests, and officials together to so lve the thorniest problems of conservation and development.
In e ach example, people have come to value c ultural heritage as p art of their environment.
One story is e specially relevant to our concern w ith ethnic heritage, because
Bohemian Hall in Astoria, NY, was listed in the National Register of Historic Places as a traditional cultural property .
Bohemian Hall added to the National Register Bohemian Hall, in Astoria,NY, was listed in t he National Register of Historic Places on March 23,2001 as a tradit ional cultural property.
Bohemian Hall has served the Czech community, and other ethnically diverse groups se eking a place to congress in Q ueens for 90 years.
Completed in 1911, the two-stor y, Neo-Classical Revival style hall is used not only for "public assembly," but also as a C zech language school, and presently houses a Greek seni or center and t he Emerald Society of Irish p olicemen.
Behind it is the beer garden, added in t he 1930s, the last one b uilt in New York.
Bohemian Hall is a p lace representing the ethnic heritage of one of the many enclaves of immigrants to the United States.
It serves as a social, educational, and heritage center for the Czech community.
Ned Kaufman is a cultural heritage consultant based in Yonkers, New York and founder of Place Matters, a non-profit program in New York City.
Contact Mr. Kaufman at 914/476-3045; email: NK290nk@aol.com.
page 8
may2001-5/22 7/15/01 7:40 PM Page 9
HERITAGE MATTERS
JUNE 2001
Colorado Annual Conference Emphasizes Diverse Cultural Heritage Antoinette J. Lee, National Park Service
"Preserving D iverse Cultural Heritage" was the theme for the annual m eeting of Colorado Preservation, Inc.(CPI).
Held February 1­3,2001, the c onference attracted approximately 600 attendees.
The conference featured plenary sessions by Senator Ben Nighthorse Campbell, Congressman Mark Udall, and State S enate President Stan Matsunaka.
Speakers i ncluded representatives from national, state, regional, and local preservation organizations and agencies.
Among the hig hlights of the conference were the sessions that addressed the new Sand Creek Massacre National Historic Site.
Senator Campbell was a driving force behind the project t hat studied of the location of the massacre of 1864,where 700 so ldiers, led by Col. John M. Chivington, attacked a v illage of 500 C heyenne and Arapaho people.
At least 150 p eople, including women and children, were killed.
In order to identify the location and extent of the massacre, the Sand Creek Massacre Project staff consulted w ith Indian tribes,un dertook research on written records, studied archeological sites, and conducted aerial photography a nalyses.
The Special Resource Study for the Sand Creek Massacre site concluded that the site possessed exceptional value in i llustrating and interpreting the histor y of U.S.-Indian relations in t he American West.
The massacre was a major tur ning point in t he relationship between whites a nd Indians and succeeding Indian and army conflicts were tied in someway to the massacre.
Today, the site's high d egree of physical i ntegrity and its isolated sett ing give v isitors an opportunity to comprehend the tra gedy that took place there.
During the conference,CPI announced the properties on its "most endangered places list" for 2001.
Historic properties associated with diverse cultural g roups included Camp Amache in Powers
County, a relocat ion camp that housed thousands of Japanese Americans during World War II.
Today, the Camp Amache s ite is threatened by neglect and vandalism.
Another property is t he 1895 S an R afael C hurch in C onejos County, which represents a religious clash between Anglo and Hispanic missionaries.
Dating f rom 1200 A.D., the Shield Rock Art Site in R io Blanco County is l ocated in an a rea that has some of the oldest Native American pictographs and petroglyphs in the state.
Conference sessions reinforced the major conference theme.
Topics i ncluded hi storical archeolog y and cultural diversity, redefining c ultural heritage for the twenty-first century, historic Jewish sites in t he Denver area, diverse communities and historic preservation, and current issues in p reserving Native American heritage.
The 2001 CPI annual conference offered Colorado preservationists an important opportunity to t ie their programs w ith the state's and the nation's increasingly diverse population.
In addition, the conference i nvited diverse community members to ma ke connections between their priorities and available preservation tools and approaches.
Antoinette J. Lee is Special Projects Manager , National Center for Cultural Resources, National Park Service.
Endowment for the Arts, and administered by the National Trust for Historic Preservation and the Faculty of Landscape Architecture at SUNY Syracuse.
Your Town workshops bring together rural community leaders to engage in c ommunity design problems.
This Delta workshop was the first one devoted to African American community i ssues.
Fift y five participants convened in Cleveland to discuss a ra nge of planning, development, and design issues.
At the c ore of the workshop was a fourhour field t rip along Highway 61 to v isit Mound Bayou, an exclusively African American town founded in 1867; Jonestown,a tiny African American community; and C larksdale, home of the Delta Blues Museum.
Participants worked on design problems for these communities, including rehabilitating and re-using historic structures, enhancing community spaces, and maintaining cultural identity in t he context of limited resources and high unemployment.
Mark Robbins, Director of Design at t he National Endowment for t he Arts, believes strongly that rural African American communit ies, generally underserved in a ccess to d esign, preservation, and planning assistance, are entitled to t he same level of design exper tise that other communities receive.
The Your Tow n workshop brought nationally k now n African American speakers to t he Delta, to offer their experience a nd expertise.
For more information, contact Shannon Criss, 662/525-2207; Michelle Weaver-Jones, 662/325-2520; or, Shelley Mastran 703/734-1742.
Your Town: Mississippi Delta Focuses on African American Community Planning Shelley S. Mastran, Your Town: Designing Its Future, and Shannon Criss, Small Town Center, Mississippi State University
In mid-November 2000,a special workshop was held at the Center for Community Development, Delta State University, in Cleveland, MS, focused on planning and design for rura l African American communities of the Delta.
Coordinated by the Small Town Center of Mississippi State Universit y, and the Mississippi Department of Archives and History, the workshop was a s pecial initiative of the Your Town: Designing Its Future prog ram, funded by the National
page 9
may2001-5/22 7/15/01 7:40 PM Page 10
HERITAGE MATTERS
JUNE 2001
Scholarship Funds Offered for 2001 National Preservation Conference The National Trust for Historic Preservation e ncourages culturally diverse community activ ists and c ollege students to a pply for scholarships to t he National Preservation Conference 2001, which w ill be h eld in Providence,RI, Oct.16­21, and is considered t he country's premier preservation event.
The scholarship deadline is June 15,2001.
Since 1992, the Emerging Preservation Leaders Scholarship Program has provided financial assistance to more than 780 preser vationists from diverse racial, ethnic and cultural b ackgrounds.
The National Trust is se eking applicants whose attendance at the conference w ill benefit their c ommunities,whose commitment to hi storic preservation w ill be strengthened by their participat ion, and who will contribute valuable perspectives to conference dia logue.
Awards will help p ay registration, transportation, and accommodation costs.
The conference theme is "Preserving the Spirit of Place."
The conference will offer tools to strengthen the commitment and effectiveness to preserve historic places and revitalize communities.
Participants will learn through plenary and educational sessions,field sessions, discussion groups and tours of Providence and surrounding areas.
For an application, contact the National Trust's Southern Office, 456 King Street, Charleston, SC, 29403, or call 843/722-8552; e-mail, schol arships@nthp.org.
Applications are also avail able through the National Trust fax service at 202/588-6444, document #9006, or online at http://www.nthpconference.org/.
logue w ith history i nstitutions regarding the general lack of ethnic diversit y in t heir collections and interpretation programs.
For more information, contact Lauren E. Batte and Natalie Norris of AASLH, at 615/320-3203, e-mail, history@asslh.org.
The Wheel Reinvented in Spanish Cindy Olsen, National Task Force on Emergency Response, Heritage Preservation
A Spanish language version of the Emergency Response a nd S alvage Wheel is n ow in progress.
This popular resource is an i nteractive slide chart that makes accurate information on protecting and salvaging collections easily accessible.
The wheel was originally produced in 1997 by t he National Task Force on Emergency Response, an initiative of Heritage Preservation, the Federal E mergency Management Agency, and the Getty Conservation Institute.
Today, nearly 65,000 wheels are in circulation.
Last year, the National Endowment for the Humanities made a gra nt to Heritage Preservation for the partial costs of producing and distributing 25,000 free copies of the Rueda de Salvamento y de Respuesta a Emergencias.
Private sector funds have been sought to complete the project.
The current goal is to launch the Spanish-language wheel w ith a ma ss mailing of more than 15,000 c opies near the b eginning of the 2001 hurricane season.
The project will ta rget archives, libraries,hi storic sites, collecting institutions, and other cultural resources in areas where the Spanish-speak ing populations are the largest: California, Florida, New Mexico, Texas, Puerto Rico, parts of Arizona and Colorado, and the metropolitan a reas of New York City, Philadelphia, and Chicago.
The remaining wheels w ill be d istributed free by request.
For more information call 888/979-2233, e-mail: spanishwheel@heritagepreservation.org, or colsen@heritagepreservation.org, or visit the Web site for National Task Force on Emergency Response at www.heritagepreservation.org/ programs/taskfer.htm.
Formation of AASLH Diversity Task Force The Amer ican Association for State and Local History has assembled a special task force to develop strategies for improving the persistent problem o f the low number of minority professionals in the field.
The committee has identified two goals.
The first is to increase the number of minority professionals in the field.
The second is to create a dia-
may2001-5/22 7/15/01 7:40 PM Page 11
HERITAGE MATTERS
JUNE 2001
Asian American Comparative Collection Seeks to Interpret Asian Material Culture Piece-byPiece There has b een an i ncrease in s tudies of people of Asian ancestry, primarily of Chinese a nd Japanese decent,wh o immigrated to the West during the nineteenth and early twentieth centuries.
Archaeological excavations conducted on a v ariety of sites have recovered ever yday objects t hat were made in China and Japan.
The need to un derstand these a rtifacts, their uses, and the people who owned them led to the establishment of the Asian American Comparative Collection in 1982.
Priscilla Wegars is t he volunteer Curator and founder of the Asian American Comparative Collection (AACC), at the University of Idaho Laboratory of Anthropology.
According to t he website, their charge is "to o btain an actual example, or photograph, of every representative object of Asian manufacture that has b een, or is likely to be, found in an archaeological context in t he western United States and elsewhere," since 1982.
In addition to t he collection,AA CC serves as a c learinghouse of information for indiv iduals conducting research.
Students, researchers, museum curators, have consulted the collection.AA CC also publishes a quarterly newsletter, the Asian American Comparative C ollection newsletter, w ith information on recent publications.
For more information, contact Priscilla Wegars at 208/885-7075 or 208/885-6723, e-mail: pwegars@uidaho.edu.
Visit the website at http://www.uidaho.edu/LS/AACC.
US f rom t he C ivil War through the end of WWII.
The editor welcomes recommendations of subjects to be covered.
To be i ncluded, architects need not have been licensed; they may have trained through a correspondence course, apprenticed w ith an a rchitect, or attended an a rt school, vocational institute, college, or university.
Contributors must be w illing to un dertake primary research and w rite individual biographies of 250­1000 words in l ength.
Cont ributing authors will receive attribution for their entries and a f ree copy of the published dictionar y.
If you would like to suggest architects for inclu sion or if you are interested in contributing, contact: Dreck Wilson, Editor, 202/726-2101; e-mail: Dwi5928417@aol.com.
Conference on African American History
The University of Memphis Department of History and the Graduate History Association announced the Third Annual Graduate Student Conference in African American History, October 19­20,2001.
Graduate students wishing to present a p aper on or iginal research on any topic i n African American history are invited to submit a cur riculum vitae and a o ne-page abstract,which discusses the paper's thesis,sources, and conclusions.
Abstracts s hould be directed to: Graduate Student Conference in African American History, Program Committee,100 Mitchell Hall, University of Memphis, Memphis,TN 38152.
E-mail inquiries to: Program committee, UMGradConf@aol.com.
Additional information will be available at http://www.people.mem phis.edu/~history.
Photographic Histories of African American Communities
Arcadia Publishing, the nation's leading publisher of local and regional photographic histories is cur rently looking for authors to work w ith on photographic histories of African American communities throughout the Midwest.
Arcadia is in se arch of any community historian, or another i ndividual i nterested in a collaboration.
Arcadia assumes costs of publication, and p ays royalties on every b ook sold.
For more information, contact Brendan McKenna, acquisitions editor, Arcadia Publishing, at bmckenna@ mailhost.chi.ameritech.net.
Conference on Slave Narratives
Call for Information and Papers: Biographical Dictionary of African American Architects
"Consolidating Our Ga ins; Strategizing for the Twenty-first C entury: The Second Wilberforce International Conference on Slave Narratives," Wilberforce Ohio, w ill be h eld Oc tober 11­13,2001.
This conference w ill cover slave narrative (authors, works, genres, the slave family, theories, themes,history, pedagogy, slavery in c ontemporary Africa a nd the diaspora; slavery in t he 21st century, etc).
For more information, contact Olabisi Gwamna, convenuer, Wilberforce International confernece on Slave Narratives, Wilberforce University , P.O. Box 1001, Wilberforce, OH 45384, 937/708-5615; ogwamna@wilberforce.edu.
A Biographical Dictionary of African American Architects,1865­1945, to be published by Routledge Press in 2002, seeks contributors.
This reference work will profile approximately 250 b lack architects who practiced throughout t he
page 11
may2001-5/22 7/15/01 7:40 PM Page 12
HERITAGE MATTERS
JUNE 2001
FIRST CLASS MAIL Postage 
Katherine H. Stevenson Associate Director, Cultural Resource Stewardship and Partnerships John Robbins Assistant Director, Cultural Resources Antoinette J. Lee Special Projects Manager Brian D. Joyner Heritage Matters Editor Moriba N. McDonald Historian
Mission of the National Park Service JUNE 2001 page 1 National Park Service Activities The Tuskegee Airmen Oral History Project Ft. Sumter Ferry Facility Offers New Interpretation for Visitors Anacostia Park Brochure Applied Anthropology's Unique Role in the National Park Service Hope and Glory: The Story of the Fifty-Fourth Massachusetts Regiment page 4 Tribal Preservation Fort Lewis College Starts Undergraduate Heritage Preservation Program Assumption of SHPO Duties by Five Tribes page 6 Community Initiatives National Center for the Preservation of Democracy Established at Japanese American National Museum Engaging a Descendent Community in Interpreting the Past The Sapelo Preservation Project Zion Poplars Baptist Church, Rooted in 135 of History and Culture The Spanish Caribbean Colonies as Stepping Stones In the North American Colonization Sites of Conflict and Collaboration: New Developments from the West Bohemian Hall added to the National Register page 9 State News Colorado Annual Conference Emphasizes Diverse Cultural Heritage Your Town: Mississippi Delta focuses on African American Community Planning page 10 Private Sector Initiatives Scholarship Funds Offered for 2001 National Preservation Conference Formation of AASLH Diversity Task Force The Wheel Reinvented in Spanish page 11 Research, Reports, Publications Asian American Comparative Collection Seeks to Interpret Asian Material Culture Piece-byPiece Call for Information and Papers: Biographical Dictionary of African American Architects Photographic Histories of African American Communities Conference on Slave Narratives Conference on African American History
The National Park Service is dedicated to conserving unimpaired the natural and cultural resources and the values of the National Park System for the enjoy ment, education and inspiration of this and future generations.
The Service also cooperates with partners to extend the benefits of natural and cultural resource conservation and outdoor recreation throughout this country and the world.
Heritage Matters, sponsored by the Cultural Resources Programs of the National Park Service, is published twice-a-year and is free of charge.
Readers are invited to submit short arti cles and notices for inclusion.
(Limit submissions to fewer than 400 words and include author 's name and affilia tion.
Black and white photographs or slides are welcome.
Photocopied images will not be accepted.)
Please submit newsletter items in writing or electronically to: Brian D. Joyner, Editor , Heritage Matters, DOI/National Park Service, 1849 C Street, NW, Suite NC 350, Washington, DC 20240.
Phone: 202/343-1000, e-mail: Brian_ Joyner@ nps.gov.
Visit the Web site for the NPS Cultural Resources DIversity Initiative: www.cr.nps.gov/crdi
