Appendix F: List of Commission Meetings and Programs I. Formal Meetings and Programs of the Commission January 10, 1995 First Meeting of the Commission, U.S. Capitol, Room S-116 Election of Chairman and Vice Chairman and Commissioner introductions Second Meeting of the Commission, U.S. Capitol, Room S-116 Commissioners are sworn in by Mr. Calvin R. Snowden, U.S.
General Services Administration; Speakers: Mr. Steven Garfinkel, Director, Information Security Oversight Office; and Mr. Jeffrey H. Smith, Partner, Arnold and Porter, and Chairman of the Joint Security Commission Third Meeting of the Commission, U.S. Capitol, Room S-116 Speakers: Ms. Regina Genton, Director of Intelligence Programs, National Security Council; Mr. Steven Garfinkel, Director, Information Security Oversight Office; Dr. John Earl Haynes, Library of Congress; and Dr. Harvey Klehr, Emory University Fourth Meeting of the Commission, U.S. Capitol, Room S-116 Speakers: The Honorable John W. Carlin, Archivist of the United States, National Archives and Records Administration, accompanied by other senior Archives officials; and Dr. Harold C. Relyea, Specialist, American National Government, Congressional Research Service, Library of Congress Fifth Meeting of the Commission, Dirksen Senate Office Building, Room SD-215 Speakers: Mr. Edward J. Appel, National Security Council; Mr. Gerald A. Schroeder, Department of Justice; Mr. Eric Biel, Commission Staff Director; and Mr. Jacques Rondeau, Commission Deputy Staff Director Sixth Meeting of the Commission, U.S. Capitol, Room HC-4 Presentation by Commission Staff Seventh Meeting of the Commission, U.S. Capitol, Room S-116 Speaker: Mr. Peter D. Saderholm, Staff Director, U.S. Security Policy Board Industry Roundtable at E-Systems, Inc., Garland, TX Chairman Moynihan and Commissioners Faga, Podesta, and Sonnenberg in attendance Discussion Facilitators: Mr. John Hancock, Commission Senior Professional Staff Member; Mr. James Van Houten, Vice President for Security, Rockwell International Corporation; Mr. Kerry Redlin, Information Systems Security Specialist, Lockheed Martin Tactical F-1
March 30, 1995
May 17, 1995
June 20, 1995
July 27, 1995
October 19, 1995
December 6, 1995
March 15, 1996
Appendix F: List of Commission Meetings and Programs
Aircraft Systems; and Mr. David Kendrick, Manager of Defense Industrial Security Programs, E-Systems, Inc.
April 18, 1996 Industry Roundtable at Loral Federal Systems, Gaithersburg, MD Commissioners Podesta and Sonnenberg in attendance Discussion Facilitators: Ms. Shirley J. Krieger, Director of Support Services, Honeywell Space Systems Group; Mr. Daniel J. Ryan, Vice President, Science Applications International Corporation; and Mr. Marshall C. Sanders, Security Manager, TASC Systems Division Public Access Roundtable, National Archives and Records Administration, Washington, DC Chairman Moynihan and Commissioners Deutch, Faga, Fortier, Fox, Hamilton, Hume, Huntington, Podesta, and Sonnenberg in attendance Panelists: Mr. Terry Anderson, journalist and former hostage in Lebanon; Dr. Alexander DiVolpi, Argonne National Laboratory; Mr. David G. Major, Aegis Research Corporation; Mr. Paul McMasters, The Freedom Forum; Mr. Morton Halperin, Council on Foreign Relations; Dr. Anna Kasten Nelson, Assassination Records Review Board; Mr. Tom Blanton, The National Security Archive; and Mr. David Bearman, Archives and Museum Informatics Eighth Meeting of the Commission, Library of Congress, Members Room Discussion of draft staff findings and recommendations Ninth Meeting of the Commission, U.S. Capitol, Room S-116 Discussion of Draft Report Tenth Meeting of the Commission, U.S. Capitol, Room S-116 Discussion of Revised Draft Report
May 16, 1996
July 12, 1996
November 19, 1996
December 12, 1996
II.
Commissioner Activities and Presentations July 11, 1995 Chairman Moynihan delivers remarks at ceremony commemorating "VENONA: Soviet Espionage Against the U.S. Atomic Energy Program," Central Intelligence Agency Commissioner Podesta and Commission staff visit the National Security Agency Commissioner Sonnenberg and Commission staff visit the Federal Bureau of Investigation Commissioners Hume and Fortier and Commission staff visit the U.S. Atlantic Command, Norfolk, VA Commissioner Fortier and Commission staff visit the Department of Defense Security Institute, Richmond, VA F-2
August 9, 1995
August 29, 1995
October 12, 1995
October 13, 1995
Appendix F: List of Commission Meetings and Programs
November 7, 1995
Vice Chairman Combest addresses the Open Source Solutions Conference, Washington, DC Commissioner Faga addresses the National Security Industrial Association, Crystal City, VA Commissioner Fortier and Commission staff meet with representatives of six major industrial associations: National Security Industrial Association, American Society for Industrial Security, National Classification Management Society, Aerospace Industries Association, Contractor SAP/SAR Working Group, and Industrial Security Working Group, Rockwell, Arlington, VA
November 28, 1995
November 29, 1995
December 13-14, 1995 Commissioner Hume and Commission staff visit the Lewisburg Federal Penitentiary, Lewisburg, PA, for interview with convicted spy Ronald Pelton, and the Allenwood Federal Correctional Facility, Allenwood, PA, for interview with convicted spy Michael Walker January 26, 1996 Commissioner Hamilton interviewed by Lesley Stahl, 60 Minutes, concerning secrecy issues Commissioner Faga addresses the American Bar Association Standing Committee on Law and National Security breakfast, Washington, DC Chairman Moynihan and Commissioners Faga, Hume, and Sonnenberg meet with Central Intelligence Agency officials and National Reconnaissance Office officials at the Department of State Chairman Moynihan addresses the Department of State's Open Forum on "Protecting and Reducing Government Secrecy in the Information Age" Chairman Moynihan, Commissioners Faga and Sonnenberg, and Commission staff visit Texas Instruments, Dallas, TX Commissioners Faga and Podesta and Commission staff visit EDS (Electronic Data Systems), Plano, TX Commissioners Hume and Sonnenberg and Commission staff visit the National Security Agency and meet with Director Lt. Gen. Kenneth Minihan (USAF) and Deputy Director William Crowell Chairman Moynihan and Commission staff visit the National Security Agency, meet with Director Lt. Gen. Minihan (USAF) and Deputy Director Crowell, and tour the National Cryptologic Museum Vice Chairman Combest addresses the Seventh Annual National Operations Security Conference, McLean, VA
February 15, 1996
February 15, 1996
March 4, 1996
March 14, 1996
March 15, 1996
April 10, 1996
April 12, 1996
April 18, 1996
F-3
Appendix F: List of Commission Meetings and Programs
May 28, 1996
Commissioners Fortier, Hume, and Podesta and Commission staff visit the National Security Agency and meet with Deputy Director William Crowell Commissioner Podesta addresses the National Classification Management Society Annual Training Seminar, Baltimore, MD Commissioner Fortier and Commission staff meet with Ambassador James Collins, Department of State Commissioner Faga addresses the American Society of Industrial Security (ASIS) Annual Seminar, Atlanta, GA Commissioner Fortier addresses the Seventh Annual Department of Defense Security Conference, Rockville, MD Commissioner Podesta addresses the Center for the Study of Intelligence Conference, "The State of the Intelligence Community's Historical Declassification Program," National War College, Ft. McNair, Washington, DC Chairman Moynihan addresses the American Society of Newspaper Editors luncheon, Arlington, VA Chairman Moynihan delivers opening and closing remarks at the VENONA Conference, National War College, Ft. McNair, Washington, DC Commissioner Fortier addresses the Contractor SAP/SAR Working Group at Lockheed Martin, Sunnyvale, CA Commissioner Podesta addresses the American Society of Access Professionals' Conference on the 30th Anniversary of the Freedom of Information Act, Rockville, MD
July 9, 1996
August 19, 1996
September 9, 1996
September 10, 1996
September 13, 1996
September 13, 1996
October 3-4, 1996
November 20, 1996
December 12, 1996
III.
Commission Staff Activities/Presentations September 12, 1995 September 13, 1995 September 14, 1995 U.S. Central Command, Tampa, FL U.S. Special Operations Command, Tampa, FL American Society of Access Professionals Freedom of Information Act Symposium, Rockville, MD National Policy Forum, "American Competitiveness in the Information Age," Washington, DC
October 25, 1995
F-4
Appendix F: List of Commission Meetings and Programs
October 31November 2, 1995 November 6, 1995 November 7-9, 1995 November 8, 1995
Presentation by John Hancock to the Contractor SAP/SAR and Industrial Security Working Group Conference, Sunnyvale, CA National Military Intelligence Association Seminar, Washington, DC Open Source Solutions Conference, Washington, DC Presentation to the Information Warfare course at the National Defense University, Ft. McNair, Washington, DC "Implications of Information Technology for U.S. National Security and Foreign Economic Policy," Conference at Ft. McNair, Washington, DC John F. Kennedy Presidential Library, Boston, MA Carter Presidential Library, Atlanta, GA American Historical Association Conference, Atlanta, GA National Archives and Records Administration and the Department of Energy meeting with historians and public interest representatives on declassification of DoE records, National Archives and Records Administration, Washington, DC Personnel Security Research and Education Center (PERSEREC), Monterey, CA Department of Defense Historical Records Declassification Advisory Panel Meeting, National Archives and Records Administration, Washington, DC Presentation by Sheryl Walter to the American Society of Access Professionals Regional FOIA Symposium, Denver, CO Presentation by Eric Biel and John Hancock to the Industrial Security Working Group conference, Fairfax, VA Presentation by Eric Biel to the Library of Congress/Congressional Research Service conference, Washington, DC Presentation by Eric Biel to the National Security Institute Conference, Reston, VA Seventh Annual Operations Security Conference, McLean, VA Department of Defense Historical Records Declassification Advisory Panel Meeting, National Archives and Records Administration, Washington, DC
December 14, 1995
December 15, 1995 January 4, 1996 January 5, 1996 January 17, 1996
February 5-6, 1996
February 23, 1996
March 7, 1996
March 13, 1996
March 19, 1996
April 1, 1996
April 18, 1996 May 10, 1996
F-5
Appendix F: List of Commission Meetings and Programs
May 21-23, 1996
Second Annual Intelligence Community Information and Classification Management Conference, McLean, VA Presentation by Sheryl Walter to the Second Annual Intelligence Community Information and Classification Management Conference, McLean, VA Presentation by Michael Smith to the Second Annual Intelligence Community Information and Classification Management Conference, McLean, VA Presentation by Eric Biel and John Hancock to the Non-NFIB Security Officers Conference, Tysons Corner, VA Presentation by Eric Biel and Sheryl Walter to the Department of State's Advisory Committee on Historical Diplomatic Documentation Presentation by Eric Biel to Personnel Security Research and Education Center (PERSEREC) conference, "Vision 2021," McLean, VA Personnel Security Research and Education Center (PERSEREC) conference, "Vision 2021," McLean, VA U.S. Army Center for Lessons Learned, Fort Leavenworth, KS Presentation by Jacques Rondeau to the Computer Security Program Managers' Forum, National Institute of Standards and Technology, Potomac, MD Controlled Access Program Oversight Committee (CAPOC) conference on the Future of SCI Control Systems, Williamsburg, VA Department of Energy's Openness Advisory Panel, Washington, DC Department of Defense Historical Records Declassification Advisory Panel Meeting, National Archives and Records Administration, Washington, DC Paper by Sheryl Walter presented to the American Society of American Archivists Annual Meeting, San Diego, CA Center for the Study of Intelligence Conference, "The State of the Intelligence Community's Historical Declassification Program," Ft. McNair, Washington, DC
May 22, 1996
May 23, 1996
May 23, 1996
June 6, 1996
June 25, 1996
June 25-26, 1996
July 2, 1996 July 17, 1996
July 23-25, 1996
July 24, 1996 August 9, 1996
August 31, 1996
September 13, 1996
September 16-18, 1996 Open Source Solutions Conference, Reston, VA September 18, 1996 Presentation by Eric Biel to the Open Source Solutions conference, Reston, VA F-6
Appendix F: List of Commission Meetings and Programs
October 9, 1996
Presentation by Eric Biel and Sheryl Walter to the Center for International Policy Seminar on Intelligence Reform, Washington, DC "An Overview of Critical Counterintelligence Issues for CIA Managers," training conference sponsored by the Counterintelligence Center Information Security Conference, Baltimore, MD Presentation by Eric Biel to the American Society of Industrial Security DC Chapter Security Seminar, Ft. McNair, Washington, DC Department of Defense Historical Review Declassification Advisory Panel Meeting, Defense Advanced Research Projects Agency, Washington, DC Presentation by Eric Biel to the Foreign Service Institute Political Training Seminar, Arlington, VA Department of Energy's Openness Advisory Panel Meeting, Washington, DC Presentation by Sheryl Walter to the United States Information Agency Declassification Conference, Washington, DC American Society of Access Professionals Conference on the 30th Anniversary of the Freedom of Information Act, Rockville, MD Presentation by Sheryl Walter to the American Historical Association Annual Meeting (joint panel with the Society of Historians of American Foreign Relations), New York, NY
October 14-16, 1996
October 22-25, 1996 November 13, 1996
November 15, 1996
November 20, 1996
December 3, 1996
December 5, 1996
December 13, 1996
January 3, 1997
IV.
Commission Staff Meetings Listed below are the individuals with whom the Commission staff met during the course of its investigation (beginning in June 1995).
Where the staff met with several officials from an agency or other organization (in some cases, on more than one occasion), only that agency/organization name is provided; the individuals who participated in the meeting are not listed separately.
In some cases, components of a particular department or agency are listed separately (for example, the National Photographic Interpretation Center is listed separately from the Central Intelligence Agency).
Finally, several individuals with whom the staff met requested that their names not be listed here.
The Commission appreciates their assistance and honors their requests to remain anonymous for purposes of this report.
Agencies/Organizations Aegis Corporation Aerospace Industries Association Air National Guard American Historical Association F-7
Appendix F: List of Commission Meetings and Programs
Assassination Records Review Board BDM International British Security Service BTG, Inc.
Carter Center, Jimmy Carter Library Center for Cryptologic History Center for Democracy and Technology Center for International Policy Center for National Security Studies Central Imagery Office Central Intelligence Agency Coca-Cola Company Community Management Staff Computer Sciences Corporation Congressional Research Service Customs Service Declassification Productivity Research Center Defense Information Systems Agency Defense Intelligence Agency Defense Investigative Service Department of Defense Department of Defense Gulf War Declassification Project Department of Defense Historical Records Declassification Advisory Panel Department of Defense Joint Staff Department of Defense Personnel Security Research Center Department of Defense POW/MIA Office Department of Defense Security Institute Department of Energy Department of Justice Department of State Department of State Historical Advisory Committee Department of the Air Force Department of the Army Department of the Navy Department of the Treasury Drug Enforcement Administration E-Systems, Inc.
Embassy of Australia Embassy of Canada Embassy of the United Kingdom Federal Aviation Administration Federal Bureau of Investigation Federal Communications Commission Federation of American Scientists Foreign Broadcast Information Service Freedom Forum General Research Corporation House Government Reform and Oversight Committee Staff House National Security, International Affairs, and Criminal Justice Subcommittee Staff F-8
Appendix F: List of Commission Meetings and Programs
House Permanent Select Committee on Intelligence Staff Information Minister of Canada Information Security Oversight Office Internal Revenue Service Jaycor John F. Kennedy Presidential Library Kroll Associates Lockheed Martin Corporation Loral Federal Systems MITRE Corporation National Archives and Records Administration National Computer Security Center National Coordinating Committee for the Promotion of History National Counterintelligence Center National Cryptologic Museum National Defense University National Institute of Standards and Technology National Intelligence Council National Photographic Interpretation Center National Reconnaissance Office National Security Agency National Security Archive National Security Council Staff National Treasury Employees' Union Natural Resources Defense Council Office of Management and Budget Office of National Drug Control Policy Planning Research Corporation PRB Associates President's Foreign Intelligence Advisory Board Staff Rockwell International Science Applications International Corporation Security Division, U.K. Cabinet Office Senate Committee on the Judiciary Staff Senate Select Committee on Intelligence Staff Society of American Archivists The Analytic Sciences Corporation (TASC) Treasury Board Secretariat, Government of Canada U.S. Army Center for Lessons Learned U.S. Bureau of Prisons U.S. Security Policy Board Staff Washington National Records Center Wang Corporation
F-9
Appendix F: List of Commission Meetings and Programs
Individuals Aftergood, Steven Alger, John Anderson, Maynard Anderson, Terry Andrew, Christopher Ansley, Norm Appel, Edward Armstrong, Scott Bagley, James Baker, James Banks, Brenda Barnes, Judith Barron, James Battaglia, Charles Bearman, David Becker, Irv Beers, Randy Bellinger, Jon Berman, Jerry Blanton, Tom Bok, Sissela Bolt, Alison Bond, James Boorstin, Robert Boswell, Eric Broad, Earnest Brown, Eileen Bruce, Jim Capps, Michael Caputo, Andrew Castillo, Joseph Cavanaugh, James Chambers, Marian Chance, Velecia Choate, Sandra Christy, James Cohen, Edmund Cohen, Sheldon Collins, Claudia Collins, Amb. James Cook, Blanche Wiesen Cooney, Manus Crawford, Kent Crowell, William Dalinsky, Barry Daman, Stephanie Davenport, Dewayne David, James
Davidson, William Davis, Fletcher Davis-Harding, Rene Deer, Tim DeGraffenreid, Kenneth Deitering, Randy Dempsey, James Dempsey, Joan Denk, Roger Dietrich, Lt. Col. Steve Disher, Susan DiVolpi, Alexander Donahue, Arnold Donlan, Matt Dougherty, Martin Doyle, Kate Dreyfuss, Robert Eberstadt, Nicholas Eldridge, Joseph Elliff, John Engel, Lee Epstein, Richard Ermarth, Fritz Falcon, Lee Fawcett, Stephanie Ferroggiarro, Will Ferrone, John Fogarty, Thomas Forbes, Marjorie Forbes, Suzanne Fradel, Jim Freeman, Bennett Frields, John Fuqua, Don Gaddis, John Lewis Garfinkel, Steven Gasiewicz, Philip Geiger, William Gelbar, Daniel Gelbard, Amb.
Robert Genton, Regina Glyn-Jones, Christopher Goldberg, Don Goldberg, Stanley Goldman, Janlori Goodman, Mel Grafeld, Peggy Green, Harold Gries, David F-10
Appendix F: List of Commission Meetings and Programs
Gualtieri, Roberto Guttman, Daniel Haag, David Hadley, Steven Hallman, Robert Halperin, Morton Hammit, Harry Hanlon, Kathy Harris, Gary Harris, Jeffrey Hastings, James Haugh, LeRoy Haynes, John Earl Hayward, Robert Hershberg, James Heusser, Roger Hibler, Neil Hickman, Stan Hickock, Gene Hill, Jimmie Hitz, Frederick Honts, Charles Howe, Larry Howell, Beryl Huff, Dick Huffstetler, Robert Huffman, Linda Irving, Peggy Jacobson, Dan Jelen, George Johnson, Deborah Kaiser, Frederick Kanin, David Kastenmeier, Robert Katz, Steven Katzke, Stuart Katzmann, Robert Keene, David Kimball, Warren Kimberly, Laura King, Bob Kingsley, Don Kloss, Cynthia Knauf, Daniel Knecht, Ronald Koh, Harold Kohn, Richard Kornbluh, Peter Kostelnik, Maj. Gen. Michael (USAF)
Kotapish, William Krofteck, Joseph Kurtz, Michael Kvetkas, Jr., William Lafferty, John Lamoureux, Bernard Langbart, David Lapham, Anthony Lattanza, Richard Leadbeater, J. Alan Lee, William Leonard, Michael Levin, Michael Levine, Ed Light, Paul Lilly, Jacqui Lipscomb, Thomas Locher, Jim Machak, Frank Major, David Mark, Edward Marshall, Mary Martin, Kate Matano, Albert May, Ernest Mazer, Roslyn McDonald, Kenneth McFadden, Maj. Gen. George (USA, ret.) McMasters, Paul McMenamin, Robert McMillan, Priscilla McNulty, F. Lynn Mead, Walter Russell Mellon, Christopher Metcalfe, Dan Michaelson, Avra Miller, Page Putnam Moore, Brig. Gen. William (USAF) Moore, John Norton Moose, Richard Morrell, Jim Mountcastle, Brig. Gen. John (USA) Mulvey, Mark Munson, Margaret Murray, Pat Myer, Daniel Narath, Al Nelson, Anna Kasten Nelson, Peter F-11
Appendix F: List of Commission Meetings and Programs
Neu, Richard Newberger, Stuart Nisbet, Miriam Norris, Genie Nye, Joseph Odom, Lt. Gen. William (USA, ret.) Oettinger, Anthony Oleson, Peter Oliver, James Otey, Glen Page, Cary Parra, Joseph Passarelli, James Pastor, Robert Pendlebury, David Pescatore, John Pitcher, Sadie Pitts, William Plesser, Ronald Porteg, Steve Quist, Arvin Rademaker, Stephen Rank, Jeffrey Ray, Gerda Rees, Richard Reicher, Dan Relyea, Harold Rhenish, Barbara Riccardi, Col. Frederick (USAF) Richelson, Jeffrey Rigamer, Elmore Rogalski, Robert Ronan, Mary Rosen, Col. Rick (USAF) Rosenau, Bill Rossman, Kenneth Rowen, Henry Ryan, Daniel Saderholm, Peter Sanford, Bruce Scalingi, Paula Schauble, Jeanne Schecter, Jerry Schecter, Leona Schewe, Donald Schmidt, Raymond Schroeder, Gerald Schwartau, Winn Scott, R. Adm. Hugh (USN, ret.)
Sessoms, Gayla Sheehy, Michael Siebert, Bryan Simonton, Andrea Skaggs, Congressman David Slany, William Smith, Jeffrey Smith, Col. Linda (USAF) Snider, Britt Spaulding, Mark Spaulding, Suzanne Springer, Edward Steele, Robert Steinauer, Dennis Stern, Gary Stern, Todd Stewart, Nina Stovel, Ferris Straub, Christopher Studeman, Adm. William (USN, ret.) Swietlik, Craig Thomas, Maj. Gen. Jack (USAF, ret.) Timm, Howard Tippit, John Tompkins, Frederick Torous, Becky Treverton, Gregory Truchon, Pamela Trulock, Notra Turley, Jonathan Turner, Robert Ulsch, N. McDonnell Uncapher, Mark Van Camp, Anne Varey, James Waguespack, Michael Walker, Frederick Walsh, John Wampler, Robert Warshaw, Richard Watson, Peter Webster, Mark Weinberg, Gerhard Weiner, Tim Wells, Linton Wendt, James White, Amb.
Robert Whitman, David Williams, Richard F-12
Appendix F: List of Commission Meetings and Programs
Wilson, Charles Winer, Jonathan Winkler, Ira Winston, Joan Wood, Lt. Gen. C. Norman (USAF, ret.) Woolsey, R. James Zubok, Vladislav Zuckerman, Michael
F-13
