Nebraska State Capitol Virtual Tour Foyer Walls The Foyer wall mosaics were added to the Capitol in 1967 to commemorate Nebraska's centennial.
Each mosaic tells a story of a memorable event in the history of the state.
The Blizzard of 1888
"The Blizzard of 1888" mural represents the story of the worst blizzard ever recorded in the history of Nebraska.
The event is of Minnie Freeman saving her school children so bravely from such a terrible storm by tying them together with a rope made of her cloak and guiding them to their homes through that terrible storm.
"The United States Survey" mural represents the first United States survey in Nebraska and the description of the steps involved in surveying Nebraska for homestead.
The survey created a systematic method for determining property lines.
It also determined the boundaries of counties, townships and municipalities
United States Survey Tree Planting
"The Tree Planting" mural celebrates Arbor Day, a national holiday that was started in Nebraska by J. Sterling Morton.
This mural helps remind Nebraskans that the plains were treeless and that today's landscapes are the result of much tree planting.
The shimmering tiles of red, orange, yellow, gold and blue look like the corpse of rustling cottonwood trees (the state tree).
"The Building of the Railroad" mural shows the importance of progress and scientific advancement.
Because of Nebraska's location on the Great Plains and because of its time of settlement, railroads have been central in the state's history.
This mural also represents the importance of the train during the Wild West.
Building of the Railroad Building the Capitol
"Building the Capitol" mural is the last mural to be installed.
It shows the second state capitol of Nebraska, a quote from the Declaration of Independence and to the right an outline of the current capitol building.
This artist's technique was unique in the way he placed his tiles tightly against each other leaving no space for grout to fill in the gaps.
He also used not only ceramic tiles but also glass and hardwood flooring to create his murals
"The Spirit of Nebraska" mural uses naturalistic elements and symbolic devices.
The bold numeral one made of gold glass symbolizes Nebraska's unicameral legislature...not that the Cornhusker Football team is number one! Even though many Nebraskans feel that is what the one stands for.
The dark brown colors represent the rich soil of Nebraska and the deeply rooted conservatism of its citizens.
The fossils shown are representations of Paleolithic creatures that roamed the plains.
Spirit of Nebraska Previous Next Start Capitol Tour Introduction | History | Artists and Architects | Vestibule | Foyer | Rotunda | East/West Chamber | Supreme Court | Governor's Reception Room | Memorial Hall | The Sower | Nebraska Hall of Fame | Restoration Project | Visiting the Capitol | Sources
