[ISMAP:et.gif]-Exploring Texas Prehistory of the Panhandle The cultural chronology of Northwest Texas is generally considered to have begun with the Paleo-Indian period which began around 11,000 years ago and ended around 8,000 years ago.
The Archaic, traditionally divided into Early, Middle, and Late, is thought to have begun around 8,000 years ago and ended some 2,000 years ago.
Specific time divisions within the long time span of the Archaic are still a matter of debate and these divisions vary from region to region.
The sequence established by Johnson and Holliday at the Lubbock Lake site is as follows: Early Archaic (8,000 - 6,400 B.P.), Middle Archaic (6,400 - 4,500 B.P.), and Late Archaic (4,500 - 2,000 B.P.).
These divisions of the Archaic will be used in this discussion of Region 1.
The Prehistoric period followed the Archaic and ended in the early 1500s.
The Protohistoric period encompassed the time from the end of the Prehistoric until the time of European contact in the region.
The Historic period began in the late 1600s and continues to the present.
The area called Region 1 is vast and diverse, and the archeological remains in this area cover the entire chronology of Texas from Paleo-Indian to Historic.
The first humans to inhabit North America came across the Bering Land Bridge around 11,000 years ago and their descendants reached the land that eventually became Texas not long after that.
The Paleo-Indians held some common characteristics, including but not limited to: an economic focus on hunting large game and the use of various distinctive lanceolate unnotched projectile points.
The Clovis, Folsom, Plainview, Midland, and Firstview dart points are some types of the best known projectile points associated with the Paleo-Indian period.
All of these point types are associated with sites in Region 1.
The Lubbock Lake Site is the most complete stratified sequence in the Southern Plains and one of the most important sites in North America.
As defined by Johnson, the Lubbock Lake site Paleo-Indian sequence consists of: Clovis, Folsom, Plainview, and Firstview (Johnson 1983).
Other important Paleo-Indian sites in Region 1 (not in Texas Parks and Wildlife parks) are: Miami, McLean, Lake Theo, Adair-Steadman, Rex Rodgers, Plainview, and Lone Wolf Creek.
Structural remains from the Paleo-Indian period are scarce at best, which leads archeologists to believe that structures from this period were quite temporary.
A lack of permanent structures most likely points to a highly mobile group, a theory which is also supported by the faunal remains associated with Paleo-Indian sites.
Many such sites also contain remains of large mammals such as: mammoth, mastodon, bison, caribou, deer, camel, and horse.
Knowledge of the Paleo-Indian period in Region 1 is based primarily on kill and butchering sites.
The early human arrivals in the New World enjoyed a combination of no competition from other humans and an abundance of wildlife.
It is not surprising, therefore, that these people hunted extensively, following herds of animals, shifting their focus from one species to the next as specific animals became scarce.
It has been suggested that some time between 7,500 to 4,000 years ago a period of widespread drought prevailed on the Llano Estacado.
As climatic changes occurred, the Paleo-Indian peoples adapted to their resources as their environment demanded.
The climatic changes which began to occur around 7,500 years ago mark the beginning of the transition to the Archaic period.
There is strong evidence for a period of time lasting from around 7,000 - 4,500 B.P., called the Altithermal, which was characterized by a trend toward a drier, warmer climate.
Within the Altithermal there were shifts toward drought, in between which periods of relatively wet conditions prevailed.
The people of the Plains were faced with changes in the climate, flora and fauna, and it is these environmental changes which resulted in the modifications of subsistence patterns characteristic of the Archaic period.
In the Paleo-Indian period large mammals were the primary economic focus.
During the archaic period people existed on a shared focus of plants and animals with shifts of primary dependence on large game to a focus on plant resources and then back again as the climate fluctuated.
Ultimately, the people of the area would balance a hunting and gathering economy.
As a result of a more diverse economy, site types within the Archaic period are more varied than in the Paleo-Indian period.
Site types include: open camps, rock shelters, bison kills, flint quarries, flint caches, and burials.
It is during the Archaic that small, stemmed dart points are first evident, as well as gouges, grinding implements, hearths, ovens, mortars, and wells.
The artifacts from this time period point to a more patterned seasonal scheduling lifeway with the corresponding dependence on plants.
New tool technologies were more common and populations were on the increase.
Archeological sites from the Middle Archaic include: Little Sunday, Lubbock Lake, and those associated with the Mackenzie Reservoir.
Some of the associated projectile points are: Bulverde, Ellis, Palmillas, Pandale, and Williams.
As summarized by Suhm, Kreiger, and Jelks (1954), the Archaic period "bridges the time between Paleo-American nomadic hunting people on the one hand, and settled agricultural, pottery making Indians on the other.
Hunting, gathering of wild plant foods and shellfish, and fishing were all pursued."
The appearance of the bow and arrow in the archeological record is one marker of the beginning of the Prehistoric period.
In addition, a growing dependence on plants eventually led to the use of ceramics and later the development of agriculture and a relatively sedentary lifeway.
These are the characteristics of the Prehistoric period and by approximately 2,000 years ago, some aspects of the Prehistoric period was established in Region 1.
Specific cultures have been identified in Region 1 including: the Plains Woodland, Palo Duro Complex, Antelope Creek Focus, and the eastern branch of the Jornada Mogollon.
With these cultures came their associated artifacts and feature types: cordmarked pottery, Scallorn and other arrow points, Mogollon-style pithouses, and brownware ceramics.
During the Early Prehistoric period bison were not abundant; however, in the Late Prehistoric bison once again played a major role in the lives of people of the are.
Puebloan influences were felt throughout the Prehistoric and the evidence is apparent in the archeological record at sites such as those at the Justiceburg Reservoir.
The well established Pueblo and Antelope Creek phases came to an end following the European expansion into Texas in the early 1500s.
The period immediately following the Prehistoric and preceding the Historic period is referred to as the Protohistoric period; it is a time when Europeans were making forays into Texas, but their impact was not extensive and contact with the indigenous people of the area was limited.
The Garza Complex, with its emphasis on bison, trading, and perhaps horticulture, is a distinctive group of the early protohistoric and is usually accompanied by the characteristic Garza point.
The Apachean groups were dominate in the area from sometime in the Prehistoric until around 1725 when they were driven from the area by the Comanche.
By the mid-1700s other groups had moved in: the Kiowa, Cheyenne, Arapaho, and Puebloan peoples from the Southwest.
There followed a period of intense interaction among these groups and later among the Europeans.
The sites most commonly associated with the non-Puebloan people are campsites and graves.
Structural remains are found with the associated Puebloan people.
Selected sites with protohistoric affiliation are: Pete Creek, Floydada Country Club, and Tierra Blanca.
With the arrival of the horse and an emphasis on bison hunting, the economic focus of the Protohistoric groups was quite different from their predecessors.
The economies of these groups would forever be altered by the arrival of the Europeans during the Historic period.
REFERENCES
Antevs, Ernst
1995 Geologic-Climatic Dating in the West.
In: American Antiquity 20:317-335
Boyd, Douglas K., Martha Doty Freeman, et al.
1989 Phase I Cultural Resources Investigations at Justiceburg Reservoir on the Double Mountain Fork of the Brazos River, Garza and Kent Counties, Texas.
Reports of Investigations, Number 66, Prewitt and Associates, Consulting Archeologists, Austin.
Hofman, Jack L., Robert L. Brooks, et al.
1989 From Clovis to Comanchero: Archeological Overview of the Southern Great Plains.
Arkansas Archeological Survey Research Series, Number 35, Fayetteville.
Johnson, Eileen, and Vance T. Holliday
1986 The Archaic Record at Lubbock Lake.
In: Plains Anthropologist 31 (114, part 2): 7-54.
Mercado-Allinger, Patricia A.
1982 Archeological Investigations at 41BI452 Caprock Canyons State Park Briscoe County, Texas.
Texas Parks and Wildlife Department, Austin.
Suhm, Dee Ann, Alex D. Krieger, and Edward B. Jelks
1954 An Introductory Handbook of Texas Archeology.
Bulletin of the Texas Archeological Society, Volume 25.
Whitsett, W. Hayden, Daniel E. Fox et al.
1991 Calendar Year 1990 Annual Report to the Texas Antiquities Committee by the Texas Water Development Board.
Texas Water Development Board, Austin.
About Caprock Canyons State Park Caprock/Bison Home Page Webcasts Home Page _________________________________________________________________
Please send comments, suggestions, or questions to: address.jpg (5649 bytes) or click on the address to send an E-mail message.
Home | Hunting | Fishing | Boating | Parks 
