DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES 4 I Food and Drug Administration 21 CFR Part 111 [Docket No. 95N-03041
q
4
Display __n_______ 3!3(3 P4 Date d j?d- 03 FlbhationDate Certier T. EK3 yip
RIN 0910-AC51
Dietary Supplements Comment Period
Containing
Ephedrine
Alkaloids;
Reopening
of the
AGENCY: Food and Drug Administration, ACTION:Proposed rule; reopening
HHS. period.
of the comment
SUMMARY: The Food and Drug Administration
(FDA) is reopening "Dietary
for 30 days
the comment period for a proposed rule entitled Containing June 4,1997 Ephedrine Alkaloids " that published
Supplements
in the Federal Register of In that document, FDA
(62 FM 30678) (the June 1997 proposal).
proposed a number of requirements ephedrine product alkaloids, including
relating to dietary supplements for a warning
containing
a requirement
statement on the
label.
Since publication
of the June 1997 proposal, new scientific health risks associated with the use of alkaloids.
FDA is reopening the
evidence has come to light concerning dietary supplements containing
ephedrine
comment period to receive comment on this new evidence, as well as on the warning ephedrine whether statement it is now considering alkaloids. for dietary supplements containing
FDA also intends to consider, to the extent possible, FDA should determine that dietary or
in light of current information containing ephedrine
supplements unreasonable 0~0362
alkaloids
present a "significant
risk of illness or injury under conditions
of use recommended /uFR 3
2 or suggested in Ia-beling, or if no conditions recommended DATES: Submit
of use are suggested or conditions of use.
"
in the labeling, written
under ordinary comments
or electronic
[insert date 30 days after date
of publication ADDRESSES:
in the Federal Register].
Submit written comments to the Dockets Management Branch
(HFA-305), Rockville,
Food and Drug Administration, MD 20852.
Submit electronic
5630 Fishers Lane, rm. 1061, comments to http://www.fda.gov/
dockets/ecomments.
FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT: Anthony
Curry, Center for Food Safety and 5100 Paint
Applied
Nutrition
(HFS-306),
Food and Drug Administration,
Branch Pkwy., College Park, MD 20740,301-436-2071.
SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION:
I. Reopening
of Comment Period (62 FR 30678) (the June 1997 to
In the Federal Register of June 4,1997 proposal),
FDA ( "we " or "the agency ") proposed to amend our regulations containing ephedrine alkaloids several
require the label of dietary supplements a warning
to bear
statement.
The proposed warning
statement contained
elements, including
cautions that consumers not use the product
if they have
certain diseases or health conditions stop using the product proposed restrictions containing ephedrine ingredients ephedrine alkaloids
or are using certain drugs, and that they FDA also
if they develop certain signs or symptoms.
on the potency and composition alkaloids, including a prohibition
of dietary supplements on the use of or with effect, such
in dietary supplements
with ingredients,
that contain substances that have a known
stimulant
3 as caffeine.
In addition, restrictions the agency proposed several requirements.
for use.
and
relating to labeling claims and directions
We proposed these actions in response to reports of serious illnesses and injuries, including a number of deaths, associated with the use of dietary ephedrine alkaloids and the agency ' investigations s
supplements
containing
and assessment of these illnesses and injuries.
The comment.
period for the proposed rule closed on August 18,1997.
On September 18,1997, FDA reopened the comment period for 75 days until
December 2,1997
(62 FR 48968).
3, 2000 (65 FR l7474), we withdrew concerning potency, labeling the
In the Federal1 Register of April proposed requirements and directions prohibition
and restrictions
claims,
for use, but not the proposed warning
statement or the proposed alkaloids with
on dietary supplements ingredients.
that combine ephedrine
other stimulant
In the same issue of the Federal Register (65 FR the availability of adverse event reports and related we on
17510), we also announced information
that had become available since the June 1997 proposal;
reopened the comment this new information
period until May 18, 2000, to receive comments (Docket No.
OON-1200). evidence has come to light concerning including approximately
Recently, more scientific posed by ephedrine alkaloids,
the risks
17,000 adverse event
reports received overall by FDA.
For example, one study compared the risks of adverse events attributable a comparative reporting to ephedra and other herbal products through
case series investigation
based upon poison control center investigation, examined stroke the
(Ref. 1).
Another
study, a case-controlled
association between the use of ephedra and the risk for hemorrhagic (Ref. 2).
One study evaluated the adverse cardiovascular
events from the FDA
4 database that were temporally Another associated with the use of ephedra (Ref. 3). of ephedrine alkaloids and caffeine
study evaluated the pharmacology
after a single dose in humans (Ref. 4).
Two studies were double-blind controlled clinical trials that evaluated the efficacy of ephedra in combination durations of 6 weeks (Ref. 5) or
with caffeine for weight loss, with treatment 6 months (Ref. 6).
Further,
the RAND Corporation,
under contract with the an evidence A on ephedrine alkaloid .--
U.S. Department
of Health and Human Services, has conducted
based review of all available sources of information containing dietary supplements (Ref. 7)
Comments to the June 1997 proposal stressed the importance that consumers were aware of the risks of consuming containing ephedrine alkaloids.
Therefore,
of ensuring
dietary supplements
in light of the new scientific
evidence as well as the comments received in response to the June 1997 proposal, FDA is considering containing the following alkaloids. warning statement for dietary with
supplements
ephedrine
This statement is consistent
the recent scientific
reports referenced in this document.
I)
.
The following warning st a temen t would appear on the principal display panel o f the produc t :
WARN ING: Con tains ephedrine alkaloids.
Hear t a ttack, stroke, seizure, and dea th have been reported a fter consump ti on o f ephedrine alkaloids.
No t for pregnan t or breas t-f eeding women or persons under 18 .
Risk o f injury can increase with dose or if used during strenuous exercise or with o ther produc ts con taining
sti mulan ts (including caffeine).
Do no t use with certain medica ti ons or if you have certain Iheal thconditions.
S top use and con tact a doc tor if side e ffects occur.
See more
The following addi ti onal information would appearon the ou ter produc t label or in produc t labeling tha t is an integral part o f the ou ter produc t packaging such tha t this information may be read a t poin t o f purchase (For example ,this information could be con tained in the ou ter information panel , riser backing, panel extension, ou tsert, e tc.): This produc t con tains ephedrine alkaloids, which can have po ten ti ally dangerous e ffects on the hear t and cen tral nervous system.
(* Do no t use with J anoamine oxidaseinhibitor (MAO I) or for 2 weeks a fter st opping a MAO1 drug ; J certain drugs for depressionpsychiatric, or emo ti onal conditions; , J drugs for Parkinson 's disease; J drugs for obesity or weigh t con trol; J me thlyldopa.
(* Con tact a doc tor be fore using this produc t if you have or ever had J hearl disease,high blood pressure,thyroid disease,seizure,diabe tes,depression o ther , men tal, emo ti onal or behavioralconditions, glaucoma ,or difficulty urina ti ng due to prostateenlargemen t. * -use and con tact a doc tor immedia tely if these side-effects occur J dizziness, severeheadacherapid and /or irregularhear tbea t, , chest pain , shortnesso f brea th ,nausea loss o f consciousness, changesin emo ti ons or behavior (such as , or depressionhallucinationsor severemood swings). , * J J J J J Your risks o f serious side-effects from this produc t can increase with increased dose ,frequency,or dura ti on o f use ; if you take it with o ther dietary supplemen ts tainingephedrinealkaloids (such as con ephedra ma huang ,S ida cordifolia); , if you take it with addi ti onal produc tscon taining sti mu lants, such as caffeinated beverages con , and foods (including dietary supplemen ts taining guaranakola nu t, ma te , yohirnbine/yohimbe,Citrus auran ti um) ; if you take it with med icationscon taining synephrine phenylephrine ephedrine , , , pseudoephedrine , phenylpropanolamine ; or if you use it be fore or during strenuousexercise.
6 FDA also intends to consider, current information containing ephedrine to the extent possible, whether in light of
FDA should determine alkaloids
that dietary supplements or unreasonable or suggested in in the risk of
present a "significant of use recommended
illness or injury under conditions labeling, labeling, or if no conditions under ordinary
of use are suggested or recommended
conditions
of use " (see 21 U.S.C. 342(f)(l)(A)). on what additional legislative authorities,
Furthermore,
FDA. seeks comment
if any, would be necessary or appropriate most effectively.
For interested or additional the comment parties who would
to enable FDA to address this issue
like to submit comments on these issues scientific studies, we are reopening
data from any well-conducted
period of the June 1997 proposal for 30 days.
If, after evaluating FDA believes that a warning containing consuming ephedrine alkaloids the
the comments received on this document,
statement on the labels of dietary supplements is necessary to protect the health of individuals agency will move quickly warning to publish
such products, the appropriate
a final rule requiring
statement and to take any other action we determine
to be appropriate.
Il.
How to Submit Comments Interested persons may submit to the Dockets Management or electronic comments.
Branch (see
ADDRESSES) written
Two copies of any mailed may submit one copy.
comments are to be submitted, Submit electronic Identify
except that individuals
comments to http://www.fda.gov/dockets/ecomments.
all comments with the docket numbers found in brackets in the You may review received comments in the Dockets Friday.
heading of this document.
Management
Branch office between 9 a.m. and 4 p.m., Monday through
III.
References The following Management references have been placed on display in the Dockets persons
Branch (see ADDRESSES) and may be seen by interested through Friday.
between 9 a.m. and 4 p.m., Monday
1.
Bent, S., T. N. Tiedt, M. C. Odden, and M. G. Shlipak, Safety of Ephedra Compared with Other Herbal Products, " Annals.of Internal Medicine,
"The Relative published in the
March 2003, vol. 138, number 6.
W. N. Kernan, L. M. Brass, J. P. T. Brott, and R. 1.
Horwitz, "Use of in
2.
Morgenster:n, L. B., C. M. Viscoli, Broderick, E. Feld:mann, J. L. W ilterdink,
Ephedra-Containing
Products and Risk for Hemorrhagic
Stroke, " published
the Journal of Neurology,
2003; vol. 60: pp. 132-135.
R. Contreras, T. C. Theohardes, Events Temporally Mayo Clinic
3.
Samenuk, D., M. S. Link, M. K. Homoud, P. J. Wang, Estes NA 3d., "Adverse Cardiovascular
Associated W ith ma huang, an Herbal Source of Ephedrine, " Proceedings,
2002, vol. 77(1):12-6.
"Pharmacology of Ephedra
4.
C. A., Haller, P. Jacob 3rd, N. L. Benowitz, Alkaloids and Caffeine After Single-dose and Therapeutics,
Dietary Supplement
Use, " CIinical
Pharmacology
2002, June, vol. 71(6), pp. 421432.
V. Wang, G. Chen, J. L. for Weight
5.
Boozer, C. N., J. A. Nasser, S. B. Heymsfield, Solomon, "An Herbal Supplement Double-blind Containing
Ma Huang-Guarana
LOSS:A Randomized, Related Metabolic
Trial, " International
Journal of Obesity and
Disorders,
2001;25(3):316-24.
J. A.
6.
Boozer, C. N., P. A. Daly, P. Homel, J. L. Solomon, D. Blanchard, Nasser, et. al.
"Herbal Randomized Ephedra/Caffeine for Weight Loss: a 6-month Journal of Obesity 593-604.
Safety and Efficacy Trial, " International Disorders,
Related and Metabolic
2002, vol. 26(5): pp.
7.
Shekelle, P. G, M. L. Hardy, M. Maglione, Ephedrine for Weight Loss and Athletic
S. C. Morton,
"Ephedra
and
Performance
Enhancement:
Clinical (in
Efficacy and Side Effects, " Agency for Healthcare press).
Research and Quality
.
Dated: February 27, 2003.
ocO362
William K. Hubbard, Associate Commissioner
for
Policy
and Planning.
[FR Dot. 03-????? Filed ??-??-03; 8:45 am] BILLING CODE 4160-01-S
COPYOF THE ORIGINAL-
