[graphic] National American Indian Heritage Month, National Register of Historic Places, National Park Service [graphic]
This month is dedicated to recognizing the intertribal cultures, the events and lifeways, the designs and achievements of American Indians and Alaska Natives.
As part of the observance, this site showcases historic properties listed in the National Register, National Register publications, and National Park units.
Join the National Register in paying powerful tribute to the spirit of American Indians and Alaska Natives, and their contributions to our history.
[graphic] Featured Properties
[photo] Ponca Tribal Self-Help Community Building Historic District, Nebraska Photo courtesy of the Nebraska State Historic Preservation Office
Ponca Tribal Self-Help Community Building Historic District, Nebraska A meeting place, learning and cultural center for the Ponca Tribe
Southwestern Range and Sheep Breeding Laboratory Historic District, New Mexico Part of a New Deal program to improve sheep breeding and wool production and preserve Navajo culture
Campus Center, Alaska Site of the Alaska Federation of Natives conference of 1971
[graphic] Publications
[photo] This drawing is from the Lewis and Clark journal entry for August 13, 1805.
The entry describes the meeting of Lewis and his scouting party with the Lemhi Shoshones, including a vivid description of the pipe smoking ritual of friendship with a sketch of this unique pipe.
This drawing is featured in one of the TwHP lesson plans for National American Indian Heritage Month.
You can also learn more about Lewis and Clark and their encounters with different American Indian tribes in our our Lewis and Clark Expedition travel itinerary.
American Philosophical Society Photograph
Teaching with Historic Places This program offers a series of award-winning lesson plans that use places listed in the National Register to enliven the study of history, social studies, and geography.
TwHP has seven ready-to-use lesson plans, available for free downloading, that examine different aspects of American Indian history.
Titles include:
* The Battle of Honey Springs: The Civil War Comes to the Indian Territory Learn how the Civil War created fierce conflicts among American Indian nations who had been moved across the Mississippi River.
* The Battle of Horseshoe Bend: Collision of Cultures Consider the complex political and cultural differences that existed between European Americans and American Indians during the early 19th century and learn how these conflicting views ultimately affected the Creeks.
* The Battle of Oriskany: "Blood Shed a Stream Running Down" Learn how New York's Mohawk Valley became the setting for a fierce Revolutionary War battle that pitted residents of the area, including the nations of the Iroquois Confederacy, against each other.
* Gran Quivira: A Blending of Cultures in a Pueblo Indian Village Examine the changing lifeways of the inhabitants of this village from the 7th century to the arrival of the Spanish in the early 17th century.
* Knife River: Early Village Life on the Plains Discover the complex culture and trading economy of the Hidatsa and Mandan tribes in North Dakota during the 18th century, as seen by anthropologists and artists.
* ~NEW~ The Lewis and Clark Expedition: Documenting the Uncharted Northwest Learn how the 1804-1806 expedition effectively opened the Northwest to the influence of the United States, established relations with numerous American Indian nations, and gathered useful scientific documentation about the West.
* San Antonio Missions: Spanish Influence in Texas Explore a group of 18th-century missions in modern San Antonio to learn about Spanish influence on native peoples and the patterns of Texas culture.
[photo] Mesa Verde National Park, Colorado, featured in the American Southwest travel itinerary Photo taken by and courtesy of Shannon Bell National Register Travel Itineraries Travel to historic places that convey the rich cultural heritage of our American Indian population with inspiring stories of their perseverance across America.
American Southwest American Indians were the first explorers and settlers of the Southwest.
Learn more about their distinctive cultures they established here.
* Three Historic Nevada Cities: Carson City, Reno, Virginia City Learn about the period in our history when Nevada's American Indian children were forced to attend schools like the Stewart Indian School.
* Lewis and Clark Expedition The places highlighted in this itinerary reflect the numerous American Indian groups the explorers met during their Corps of Discovery.
These places also tell the stories of Sacagawea and tribes like the Mandan, Hidatsa and Nez Perce who provided invaluable assistance to the explorers.
* Pipestone, Minnesota This itinerary features historic places in Pipestone County, located in the south west corner of Minnesota.
This area reflects a rich history of American Indian quarrying, prosperity brought by the railroad and mining enterprises, and a distinctive natural landscape.
See specifically Pipestone Indian School Superintendent's House and Pipestone National Monument.
* Indian Mounds of Mississippi This guide to the American Indian Mound sites of Mississippi provides a compact source of information on these impressive landmarks of the ancient past.
The mounds bring travelers face to face with a rich legacy of American Indian cultural achievement.
* Along the Georgia-Florida Coast Along the Georgia-Florida Coast uses the area's historic sites, buildings, structures, objects, and districts to reveal many of the most important developments in America's past, including encounters between Europeans and indigenous peoples.
See specifically Indian Key.
[graphic] History in the Parks Featured Park 2003: Bering Land Bridge National Preserve * Alibates Flint Quarries National Monument * Aztec Ruins National Monument * Bandelier National Monument * Bent's Old Fort National Historic Site * Big Cypress National Preserve * Big Hole National Battlefield * Bighorn Canyon National Recreation Area * Canyon de Chelly National Monument * Cape Krusenstern National Monument * Casa Grande Ruins National Monument * Chaco Culture National Historical Park * Colonial National Historical Park * Delaware Water Gap National Recreation Area * Effigy Mounds National Monument (previous feature) * El Malpais National Monument * Everglades National Park * Fort Bowie National Historic Site * Fort Laramie National Historic Site * Fort Raleigh National Historic Site * Fort Smith National Historic Site * Fort Stanwix National Monument * Fort Union Trading Post National Historic Site * Gates of the Arctic National Park and Preserve * Gila Cliff Dwellings National Monument * Grand Portage National Monument * Great Smoky Mountains National Park * Hohokam Pima National Monument * Hopewell Culture National Historical Park * Horseshoe Bend National Military Park * Hovenweep National Monument * Hubbell Trading Post National Historic Site * Jefferson National Expansion Memorial * Katmai National Park and Preserve * Knife River Indian Villages National Historic Site * Kobuk Valley National Park * Lake Clark National Park and Preserve
* Lava Beds National Monument * Little Bighorn Battlefield National Monument * Mesa Verde National Park (previous feature) * Montezuma Castle National Monument * Natchez Trace Parkway * Navajo National Monument * Nez Perce National Historical Park * Northwest Alaska Areas * Ocmulgee National Monument * Pea Ridge National Military Park * Pecos National Historical Park * Petroglyph National Monument * Pipestone National Monument * Piscataway Park * Poverty Point National Monument * Russell Cave National Monument * Salinas Pueblo Missions National Monument * San Antonio Missions National Historical Park * Shiloh National Military Park * Sitka National Historical Park * Timucuan Ecological and Historic Preserve * Tonto National Monument * Trail of Tears National Historic Trail * Tumacacori National Historical Park * Tuzigoot National Monument * Walnut Canyon National Monument * Washita Battlefield National Historic Site * Whitman Mission National Historic Site * Wupatki National Monument * Yosemite National Park * Yucca House National Monument
[graphic] Learn More
American Indian History Month 2002 For more information about American Indian properties listed in the National Register, please visit this past feature.
Advisory Council on Historic Preservation: Tribal Historic Preservation Officers Visit this website for more information on the 1992 U.S. Congress adoption of amendments to the National Historic Preservation Act (P.L. 102-575) that allow federally recognized Indian tribes to take on more formal responsibility for the preservation of significant historic properties on tribal lands.
Department of the Interior The Department of the Interior provides a Brief History on the Creation of a National American Indian Heritage Month.
Tribal Preservation Program Learn more about the National Park Service (NPS) Tribal Preservation Program that assists Indian tribes in preserving their historic properties and cultural traditions.
Archeology and Ethnology Program NPS cultural anthropologists and ethnographers give voice to living peoples linked to the parks by tradition, deep historical attachment, subsistence use, or other aspects of their culture.
See especially their feature on Ancient Architects of the Mississippi.
Library of Congress: Built in America (HABS/HAER) The Historic American Buildings Survey (HABS) and the Historic American Engineering Record (HAER) collections document achievements in architecture, engineering, and design in the United States, including sites related to American Indian history and culture.
Searches on keywords like "American Indian," or on a specific tribe like the Cherokee, will provide information on an array of associated sites.
Most of the site records have publication-quality drawings, photographs and historical data.
Native American Graves Protection and Repatriation Act (NAGPRA) The National NAGPRA Program develops regulations and guidance for implementing NAGPRA, provides training, assists Indian tribes, Native Hawaiian organizations, and museums with the NAGPRA process, and manages a grants program.
Indian Health Service Visit the Bureau of Indian Affairs website which provides a calendar of events and further links.
National Congress of American Indians The National Congress of American Indians, founded in 1944, is the oldest, largest and most representative national Indian organization serving the needs of a broad membership of American Indian and Alaska Native governments.
American Indian Heritage Foundation The American Indian Heritage Foundation builds bridges of understanding and friendship between Indian and non-Indian people.
Smithsonian's National Museum of the American Indian The Smithsonian's National Museum of the American Indian, scheduled to open in 2004, will help foster, protect and promote an understanding of Native American cultures by collaborating with indigenous peoples across the Western Hemisphere.
Visit the American Indian Heritage Month calendar of events.
Department of the Navy -- Naval Historical Center American Indians have participated with distinction in United States military actions for more than 200 years.
The Navy highlights their involvement online in: 20th Century Warriors: Native American Participation in the United States Military.
American Indian Policy Center The American Indian Policy Center has put together a resources list that provides access to information about US tribal relations, enrollment, sovereignty, and treaties.
It also provides access to more information from the Center.
Index of Native American Resources on the Internet Native American Resources on the Internet provides a wealth of links to learn more about Native Americans on the internet.
Native American History Archive Students (K-12) can visit this Native American History Archive, designed especially for assistance with classroom projects.
Ponca Tribal Self-Help Community Bldg.
| SW Range and Sheep Breeding Lab | Campus Center Bering Land Bridge National Preserve | American Indian Feature Page | NR Home Comments or Questions Last Modified: Thu, Nov 6 2003 11:34:40 am EDT
[graphic] Link to the National Park Service website
