News from Senator John Edwards PROPOSAL BY SENATOR EDWARDS WOULD OUTLAW HOAXES November 9, 2001 WASHINGTON - U.S. Senator John Edwards on Friday introduced legislation that would outlaw terrorist hoaxes, making false threats like anthrax scares federal felonies punishable by up to six years in prison.
"This bill sends a clear message that hoaxers will pay a price for their reckless activity," Senator Edwards said.
"It also makes a distinction between practical jokers and the cowards who seek to use fear as a weapon."
Since September 11, the date on contaminated letters sent to Senator Tom Daschle and NBC News anchor Tom Brokaw, there have been more than 160 anthrax and terror hoaxes across the country.
All hoaxes are disruptive and strain emergency personnel, who are trying to respond to legitimate threats.
In North Carolina, for instance, health workers in Randolph County responded to 80 anthrax scares over the course of two weeks last month.
Although most were innocent cases, the few that were hoaxes added unnecessary burdens to emergency workers and laboratory facilities.
Current federal law prohibits terrorist threats, but does not always treat hoaxes as threats if the perpetrator has no intention or ability to carry out the terrorist acts.
Some scares are meant to provoke fear similar to actual terrorist attacks.
After the initial anthrax letters were identified in New York and Florida, offices and businesses across the country were terrorized by copycat hoaxes.
The Punishing Terrorist Hoaxes Act of 2001 makes it a federal felony to perpetrate a terrorist hoax, and provides for increased prison time for hoaxers whose intent is to cause fear.
Under the law, all hoaxers could face up to two years in prison and be responsible for the costs of the emergency response to their hoax.
In addition, those who use hoaxes to deliberately provoke fear could face up to six years in federal prison.
"Anthrax hoaxes are no laughing matter," Senator Edwards said.
"They waste the time and resources of emergency personnel and inflict fear on innocent people."
Back to Previous Page
