Skip to Main Content.
Cancer.gov Masthead National Cancer Institute, Center to Reduce Cancer Health Disparities
Skip Navigation and Go to Main Content CRCHD SPN HOME CONTACT US
Dictionary Use the letters of the alphabet (A-Z) to help you find the definition of the word in question.
A B C D E F G H I J K L M N O P Q R S T U V W X Y Z A American Indian or Alaska Native A person having origins in any of the original peoples of North and South America (including Central America) and who maintains tribal affiliation or community attachment.
There are more than 500 federally recognized and non-recognized tribes residing in the continental U.S.
This category refers to the following groups: American Indians, Alaska Eskimos (Inuits) Aleuts and Alaska Eskimos are commonly referred to as Alaska Natives.
The term "Native American" has been used recently to represent the same group of individuals designated here.
However, for the present time, the heading "American Indian or Alaska Native" is being used.
Asian A person having origins in any of the original peoples of the Far East, Southeast Asia, the Indian subcontinent, including, for example, Cambodia, China, India, Japan, Korea, Malaysia, Pakistan, the Philippine Islands, Thailand, and Vietnam.
The term Asian refers to persons from the following backgrounds: Chinese, Vietnamese, Pakistani, Filipino, Cambodian, Thailander, Japanese, H'Mong, East Indian, Korean, Laotian, Bangladeshi, Other Asians, Indonesian, Sri Lankan, Other Southeast Asians, Nepalese, Bhutanese, Sikh, Burmese,and Other South Asians.
return to top B Black or African American A person having origins in any of the black racial groups of Africa.
This definition includes: Native-born Black Americans, Africans, Haitians, Residents of non-Spanish speaking Caribbean Islands of African descent.
The terms Black and African American are both used to refer to individuals from this background.
return to top H Hispanic or Latino A person of Mexican, Puerto Rican, Cuban, Central or South American or other Spanish culture or origin, regardless of race.
Hispanic or Latino refers to people born in North, Central, and South America, and in the Caribbean whose language is Spanish.
This definition excludes people born in Europe whose language is Spanish or Portuguese, and non-Spanish speaking people born in Brazil, Belize, French Guyana, Guyana (former British Guyana), and Surinam (former Dutch Guyana) and other non-Spanish speaking territories.
In the United States today the largest groups within the Hispanic community are: Mexican Americans, Puerto Ricans, Cuban Americans, Central Americans., The terms Hispanic and Latino are both used to refer to individuals from this group.
return to top M Medically Underserved Populations Populations that have inadequate access to, or reduced utilization of, high-quality cancer prevention, screening and early detection, treatment, and/or rehabilitation services.
Included are rural, low-literacy, and low-income populations.
An effort to clarify and further define "medically underserved" is currently underway at NIH. return to top N Native Hawaiian or other Pacific Islander A person having origins in any of the original peoples of the Hawaiian Islands or the Pacific Islands.
Native Hawaiian refers to a person having origins in any of the peoples of the Hawaiian Islands.
Pacific Islander refers to a person having origins in any of the peoples of the Pacific Islands.
The term includes: Guamanians, Samoans, Fijians, Polynesians, Tongans, Micronesians, Tahitians, Marshallese, Melanesians, Other Pacific Islanders, and Native Hawaiians return to top P Poor (Low Income) The 1998 DHHS Poverty Guidelines (also referred to as the "Federal poverty level") define a poverty threshold as an annual income of approximately $10,000 for a single individual and an annual income of approximately $20,000 for a family of 4 (Federal Register 63, #36, February 24, 1998, pp 9235-9238). return to top R Racial and Ethnic Categories The U.S. Office of Management and Budget established a federal classification system for race and ethnicity in its Statistical Policy Directive 15 "Race and Ethnic Standards for Federal Statistics and Administrative Report."
The Directive requires all federal agencies to collect and report demographic data according to a limited number of racial and ethnic categories.
There are four categories for race (American Indian or Alaska Native, Black or African American, White, and Asian or other Pacific Islander).
The two categories for ethnicity are Hispanic or Latino and Not Hispanic or Not Latino.
Rural The working definition of rural, taken from the U.S. Census Bureau, is somewhat vague.
"Rural" is defined as territory, populations, and housing units not classified as "urban."
The Census Bureau's definition of "urban" is places of 2,500 or more persons incorporated as cities, villages, boroughs, and towns.
return to top S Special Populations Those ethnic and racial minority groups designated by Office of Management and Budget (OMB) standards as well as elderly, low-income, low-literate, disabled, and rural populations.
The NCI's working definition of "special populations" also includes medically underserved populations, such as rural, low-income, and low-literate individuals.
These groups are generally characterized as experiencing higher cancer incidence and/or mortality rates or are relatively underserved in terms of cancer programs.
[spacer.gif] return to top U Underrepresented Minority For NCI purposes, a person is an underrepresented minority if he or she belongs to a minority group that is underrepresented in biomedical and behavioral science careers, based on their minority group's representation in the total population.
Using this definition and available data on minority representation in the health professions, science, and engineering, blacks, Hispanics, American Indian or Alaskan Native, and Pacific Islanders are classified as underrepresented minorities.
Asians are not considered to be an underrepresented minority.
return to top
Introduction to the SPNs The Current Networks
Skip Footer Links and Go to the Home Page Home Contact Us Dictionary About this Site Privacy Policy Accessibility Cancer.gov Logo- Link to the Cancer.gov Web Site U.S. Department of Health and Human Services Logo- Link to the Health and Human Services Web Site FirstGov Logo- Link to the First Gov Web Site N I H Logo- Link to the National Institutes of Health (NIH)
