text only skip navigation National Cancer Institute Cancer.gov dictionary site map search home cancer information clinical trials statistics research programs research funding about NCI Ovarian Low Malignant Potential Tumors (PDQ®): Treatment printable version Two versions of this document are available.
Select a tab below to switch between versions.
Date Last Modified: 09/17/2003
patient health professional
Ovarian Low Malignant Potential Tumors
* General Information about Ovarian Low Malignant Potential Tumors * Stages of Ovarian Low Malignant Potential Tumors * Recurrent Ovarian Low Malignant Potential Tumors * Treatment Option Overview * Treatment Options By Stage
* Early Stage Ovarian Low Malignant Potential Tumors (Stage I/II)
* Late Stage Ovarian Low Malignant Potential Tumors (Stage III)
Treatment Options for Recurrent Ovarian Low Malignant Potential Tumors
Changes to This Summary (09/17/2003)
To Learn More
About PDQ
return to top
General Information about Ovarian Low Malignant Potential Tumors
Key Points for This Section * Ovarian low malignant potential tumor is a disease in which precancerous cells (cells that may, or are likely to, become cancer) form in the tissue covering the ovary.
* Certain factors affect treatment options and prognosis (chance of recovery).
* In most cases, ovarian low malignant potential tumor can be treated successfully.
Ovarian low malignant potential tumor is a disease in which precancerous cells (cells that may, or are likely to, become cancer) form in the tissue covering the ovary.
Ovarian low malignant potential tumor is considered precancerous (or premalignant), a condition that may (or is likely to) become cancer.
This disease seldom spreads beyond the ovary.
When disease is found in one ovary, the other ovary also should be checked carefully for signs of disease.
The ovaries are a pair of organs in the female reproductive system.
They are located in the pelvis, one on each side of the uterus (the hollow, pear-shaped organ where a fetus grows).
Each ovary is about the size and shape of an almond.
The ovaries produce eggs and female hormones (chemicals that control the way certain cells or organs function).
Certain factors affect treatment options and prognosis (chance of recovery).
The treatment options and prognosis depend on the stage of the cancer (whether it affects part of the ovary, involves the whole ovary, or has spread to other places in the body), the type of cancer, the size of the tumor, and the patientâs general health.
In most cases, ovarian low malignant potential tumor can be treated successfully.
These tumors are usually found early.
Most women, however, survive even advanced stage ovarian low malignant potential tumors.
Patients who do not survive usually die from complications of the disease (such as a small bowel obstruction) or the side effects of treatment, but rarely because the tumor has spread.
return to top
Stages of Ovarian Low Malignant Potential Tumors
After ovarian low malignant potential tumor has been diagnosed, tests are done to find out if cancerÂ cells have spread within the ovary or to other parts of the body.
The process used to find out whether cancer has spread within the ovary or to other parts of the body is called staging.
The information gathered from the staging process determines the stage of the disease.
It is important to know the stage in order to plan the best treatment.
Certain tests or procedures are used to determine stage.
Staging laparotomy (a surgical incision made in the wall of the abdomen to remove ovarian tissue) may be used.
Most patients are diagnosed with stage I disease.
(Refer to the PDQ summary on Ovarian Epithelial Cancer Treatment for information on the stages used for ovarian cancer.)
return to top
Recurrent Ovarian Low Malignant Potential Tumors
RecurrentÂ ovarian low malignant potential tumor is cancer that has recurred (come back) after it has been treated.
The cancer may come back in the other ovary or in other parts of the body.
return to top
Treatment Option Overview
Key Points for This Section * There are different types of treatment for patients with ovarian low malignant potential tumor.
* Two types of standard treatment are used:
* Surgery
* Chemotherapy
Other types of treatment are being tested in clinical trials.
There are different types of treatment for patients with ovarian low malignant potential tumor.
Different types of treatment are available for patients with ovarian low malignant potential tumor.
Some treatments are standard (the currently used treatment), and some are being tested in clinical trials.
Before starting treatment, patients may want to think about taking part in a clinical trial.
A treatment clinical trial is a research study meant to help improve current treatments or obtain information on new treatments for patients with cancer.
When clinical trials show that a new treatment is better than the âstandardâ treatment, the new treatment may become the standard treatment.
Clinical trials are taking place in many parts of the country.
Information about ongoing clinical trials is available from the NCI Cancer.gov Web site.
Choosing the most appropriate cancer treatment is a decision that ideally involves the patient, family, and health care team.
Two types of standard treatment are used:
Surgery
The type of surgery (removing the tumor in an operation) depends on the extent of the disease and the womanâs plans for having children.
Surgery may include the following: * Unilateral salpingo-oophorectomy : A surgical procedure to remove one ovary and one fallopian tube.
* Bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy: A surgical procedure to remove both ovaries and both fallopian tubes.
* Hysterectomy and bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy: A surgical procedure to remove the uterus, cervix, and both ovaries and fallopian tubes.
If the uterus and cervix are taken out through the vagina, the operation is called a vaginal hysterectomy.
If the uterus and cervix are taken out through a large incision (cut) in the abdomen, the operation is called a total abdominal hysterectomy.
If the uterus and cervix are taken out through a small incision (cut) in the abdomen using a laparoscope, the operation is called a total laparoscopic hysterectomy.
* Partial oophorectomy: A surgical procedure to remove part of one ovary or part of both ovaries.
* Omentectomy: A surgical procedure to remove the omentum (a piece of the tissue lining the abdominal wall).
Even if the doctor removes all disease that can be seen at the time of the operation, the patient may be given chemotherapy after surgery to kill any tumor cells that are left.
Treatment given after the surgery to increase the chances of a cure is called adjuvant therapy.
Chemotherapy
Chemotherapy is a cancer treatment that uses drugs to stop the growth of cancer cells, either by killing the cells or by stopping the cells from dividing.
When chemotherapy is taken by mouth or injected into a vein or muscle, the drugs enter the bloodstream and can reach cancer cells throughout the body (systemic treatment).
When chemotherapy is placed directly in the spinal column, a body cavity such as the abdomen, or an organ, the drugs mainly affect cancer cells in those areas.
The way the chemotherapy is given depends on the type and stage of the cancer being treated.
Other types of treatment are being tested in clinical trials.
Information about ongoing clinical trials is available from the NCI Cancer.gov Web site.
return to top
Treatment Options By Stage
Early Stage Ovarian Low Malignant Potential Tumors (Stage I/II)
Surgery is the standard treatment for early stageÂ ovarian low malignant potential tumor.
The type of surgery usually depends on whether a woman plans to have children.
For women who plan to have children, surgery is either: * unilateralÂ salpingo-oophorectomy; or * partial oophorectomy.
To prevent recurrence of disease, most doctors recommend surgery to remove the remaining ovarian tissue when a woman no longer plans to have children.
For women who do not plan to have children, treatment may be: * Hysterectomy and bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy.
Late Stage Ovarian Low Malignant Potential Tumors (Stage III)
Treatment for late stage ovarian low malignant potential tumor may be: * Hysterectomy, bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy, and omentectomy.
A lymph node dissection may also be performed.
Lymph nodes are small bean-shaped structures that are found throughout the body.
They filter harmful substances in a fluid called lymph and help fight infection and disease.
return to top
Treatment Options for Recurrent Ovarian Low Malignant Potential Tumors
Treatment for recurrentÂ ovarian low malignant potential tumor (cancer that has come back after it has been treated) may include the following: * Surgery.
* Surgery followed by chemotherapy.
return to top
Changes to This Summary (09/17/2003)
The PDQ cancer information summaries are reviewed regularly and updated as new information becomes available.
This section describes the latest changes made to this summary as of the date above.
Editorial changes were made to this summary.
return to top
To Learn More
Call
For more information, U.S. residents may call the National Cancer Institute's (NCI's) Cancer Information Service toll-free at 1-800-4-CANCER (1-800-422-6237) Monday through Friday from 9:00 a.m. to 4:30 p.m. Deaf and hard-of-hearing callers with TTY equipment may call 1-800-332-8615.
The call is free and a trained Cancer Information Specialist is available to answer your questions.
Web sites and Organizations
The NCI's Cancer.gov Web site provides online access to information on cancer, clinical trials, and other Web sites and organizations that offer support and resources for cancer patients and their families.
There are also many other places where people can get materials and information about cancer treatment and services.
Local hospitals may have information on local and regional agencies that offer information about finances, getting to and from treatment, receiving care at home, and dealing with problems associated with cancer treatment.
Publications
The NCI has booklets and other materials for patients, health professionals, and the public.
These publications discuss types of cancer, methods of cancer treatment, coping with cancer, and clinical trials.
Some publications provide information on tests for cancer, cancer causes and prevention, cancer statistics, and NCI research activities.
NCI materials on these and other topics may be ordered online or printed directly from the NCI Publications Locator.
These materials can also be ordered by telephone from the Cancer Information Service toll-free at 1-800-4-CANCER (1-800-422-6237), TTY at 1-800-332-8615.
LiveHelp
The NCI's LiveHelp service, a program available on several of the Institute's Web sites, provides Internet users with the ability to chat online with an Information Specialist.
The service is available from 9:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. Eastern time, Monday through Friday.
Information Specialists can help Internet users find information on NCI Web sites and answer questions about cancer.
Write
For more information from the NCI, please write to this address:
NCI Public Inquiries Office Suite 3036A 6116 Executive Boulevard, MSC8322 Bethesda, MD 20892-8322
return to top
About PDQ
PDQ is a comprehensive cancer database available on Cancer.gov.
PDQ is the National Cancer Institute's (NCI's) comprehensive cancer information database.
Most of the information contained in PDQ is available online at Cancer.gov, the NCI's Web site.
PDQ is provided as a service of the NCI.
The NCI is part of the National Institutes of Health, the federal government's focal point for biomedical research.
PDQ contains cancer information summaries.
The PDQ database contains summaries of the latest published information on cancer prevention, detection, genetics, treatment, supportive care, and complementary and alternative medicine.
Most summaries are available in two versions.
The health professional versions provide detailed information written in technical language.
The patient versions are written in easy-to-understand, nontechnical language.
Both versions provide current and accurate cancer information.
The PDQ cancer information summaries are developed by cancer experts and reviewed regularly.
Editorial Boards made up of experts in oncology and related specialties are responsible for writing and maintaining the cancer information summaries.
The summaries are reviewed regularly and changes are made as new information becomes available.
The date on each summary ("Date Last Modified") indicates the time of the most recent change.
PDQ also contains information on clinical trials.
Before starting treatment, patients may want to think about taking part in a clinical trial.
A clinical trial is a study to answer a scientific question, such as whether one treatment is better than another.
Trials are based on past studies and what has been learned in the laboratory.
Each trial answers certain scientific questions in order to find new and better ways to help cancer patients.
During treatment clinical trials, information is collected about new treatments, the risks involved, and how well they do or do not work.
If a clinical trial shows that a new treatment is better than one currently being used, the new treatment may become "standard."
Listings of clinical trials are included in PDQ and are available online at Cancer.gov.
Descriptions of the trials are available in health professional and patient versions.
Many cancer doctors who take part in clinical trials are also listed in PDQ.
For more information, call the Cancer Information Service 1-800-4-CANCER (1-800-422-6237); TTY at 1-800-332-8615.
return to top
______________ Advanced submit search New NCI-FDA Strategic Initiatives Announced CCOP Celebrates 20 Years of Research Past Highlights Press/NewsCenter CIS DIRECTOR'S CORNER [spacer.gif] Welcome Director's Update [bottom_center_dircorner.gif]
Resources Publications Locator and Catalog NCI Calendar of Scientific Meetings NCI Thesaurus Links to Other Web Sites
LiveHelp información en español Text
HOME SEARCH SITE MAP CONTACT US HELP ACCESSIBILITY PRIVACY POLICY National Institutes of Health Department of Health and Human Services FirstGov.gov
