Berkeley Genome Pipeline VISTA Genome Browser - GenomeVISTA - VISTA / rVISTA - Contact - About Us - Cite Us How the genomes were aligned Aligning large vertebrate genomes that are structurally complex poses a variety of problems not encountered on smaller scales.
Such genomes are rich in repetitive elements and contain multiple segmental duplications, which increases the difficulty of identifying true orthologous DNA segments in alignments.
The sizes of the sequences make many alignment algorithms designed for comparing single proteins extremely inefficient when processing large genomic intervals.
We integrated both local and global alignment tools and developed a suite of programs for automatically aligning large vertebrate genomes and identifying conserved non-coding regions in the alignments.
Our method (Couronne et al, 2003) uses the BLAT (Kent, 2002) local alignment program to find anchors on the base genome to identify regions of possible homology for a query sequence.
These regions are postprocessed to find the best candidates which are then globally aligned using the AVID (Bray et al, 2003) or LAGAN (Brudno et al, 2003) global alignment programs.
In the last step conserved non-coding segments are identified using VISTA.
Our methods are fast and the resulting alignments exhibit a high degree of sensitivity, covering more than 90% of known coding exons in the human genome.
The pipeline software is a suite of Perl programs that is buit on a MySQL database platform.
The scheduler gets control data from the database, builds a queue of jobs, and dispatches them to a PC cluster for execution.
The main program, running on each node of the cluster, processes individual sequences.
A Perl library acts as an interface between the database and the above programs.
The use of a separate library allows the programs to function independently of the database schema.
The library also improves on the standard Perl MySQL database interface package by providing auto-reconnect functionality and improved error handling.
1.
O.Couronne, A.Poliakov, N.Bray, T.Ishkhanov, D.Ryaboy, E.Rubin, L.Pachter, I.Dubchak.
2003.
Strategies and Tools for Whole-Genome Alignments.
Genome Research, 13:7.
2.
W.J.Kent.
2002.
BLAT - The BLAST-Like Alignment Tool.Genome Research, 12:656.
3.
N.Bray, I.Dubchak, L.Pachter.
2003.
AVID: A Global Alignment Program.
Genome Research, 13:97.
4.
M.Brudno, C.Do, G.Cooper, M.F.Kim, E.Davydov, E.D.Green, A.Sidow, S.Batzoglou.
LAGAN and Multi-LAGAN: Efficient Tools for Large-Scale Multiple Alignment of Genomic DNA.
2003 Genome Research 13:721.
