Welcome to California California Home Welcome to California - images of Golden Gate Bridge, ocean sunset, waterfall, flowers, and city skyline Department of Consumer Affairs Home Office of Privacy Protection Home Consumer Information (English 
(a) Every person who willfully obtains personal identifying information, as defined in subdivision (b), of another person, and uses that information for any unlawful purpose, including to obtain, or attempt to obtain, credit, goods, services, or medical information in the name of the other person without the consent of that person, is guilty of a public offense, and upon conviction therefor, shall be punished either by imprisonment in a county jail not to exceed one year, a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000), or both that imprisonment and fine, or by imprisonment in the state prison, a fine not to exceed ten thousand dollars ($10,000), or both that imprisonment and fine.
(b) "Personal identifying information," as used in this section, means the name, address, telephone number, health insurance identification number, taxpayer identification number, school identification number, state or federal driver's license number, or identification number, social security number, place of employment, employee identification number, mother's maiden name, demand deposit account number, savings account number, checking account number, PIN (personal identification number) or password, alien registration number, government passport number, date of birth, unique biometric data including fingerprint, facial scan identifiers, voice print, retina or iris image, or other unique physical representation, unique electronic data including identification number, address, or routing code, telecommunication identifying information or access device, information contained in a birth or death certificate, or credit card number of an individual person.
(c) In any case in which a person willfully obtains personal identifying information of another person, uses that information to commit a crime in addition to a violation of subdivision (a), and is convicted of that crime, the court records shall reflect that the person whose identity was falsely used to commit the crime did not commit the crime.
(d) Every person who, with the intent to defraud, acquires, transfers, or retains possession of the personal identifying information, as defined in subdivision (b), of another person is guilty of a public offense, and upon conviction therefor, shall be punished by imprisonment in a county jail not to exceed one year, or a fine not to exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000), or by both that imprisonment and fine.
530.6.
(a) A person who has learned or reasonably suspects that his or her personal identifying information has been unlawfully used by another, as described in subdivision (a) of Section 530.5, may initiate a law enforcement investigation by contacting the local law enforcement agency that has jurisdiction over his or her actual residence, which shall take a police report of the matter, provide the complainant with a copy of that report, and begin an investigation of the facts or, if the suspected crime was committed in a different jurisdiction, refer the matter to the law enforcement agency where the suspected crime was committed for an investigation of the facts.
(b) A person who reasonably believes that he or she is the victim of identity theft may petition a court, or the court, on its own motion or upon application of the prosecuting attorney, may move, for an expedited judicial determination of his or her factual innocence, where the perpetrator of the identity theft was arrested for, cited for, or convicted of a crime under the victim's identity, or where a criminal complaint has been filed against the perpetrator in the victim's name, or where the victim's identity has been mistakenly associated with a record of criminal conviction.
Any judicial determination of factual innocence made pursuant to this section may be heard and determined upon declarations, affidavits, police reports, or other material, relevant, and reliable information submitted by the parties or ordered to be part of the record by the court.
Where the court determines that the petition or motion is meritorious and that there is no reasonable cause to believe that the victim committed the offense for which the perpetrator of the identity theft was arrested, cited, convicted, or subject to a criminal complaint in the victim's name, or that the victim's identity has been mistakenly associated with a record of criminal conviction, the court shall find the victim factually innocent of that offense.
If the victim is found factually innocent, the court shall issue an order certifying this determination.
(c) After a court has issued a determination of factual innocence pursuant to this section, the court may order the name and associated personal identifying information contained in court records, files, and indexes accessible by the public deleted, sealed, or labeled to show that the data is impersonated and does not reflect the defendant's identity.
(d) A court that has issued a determination of factual innocence pursuant to this section may at any time vacate that determination if the petition, or any information submitted in support of the petition, is found to contain any material misrepresentation or fraud.
(e) The Judicial Council of California shall develop a form for use in issuing an order pursuant to this section.
530.7.
(a) In order for a victim of identity theft to be included in the data base established pursuant to subdivision (c), he or she shall submit to the Department of Justice a court order obtained pursuant to any provision of law, a full set of fingerprints, and any other information prescribed by the department.
(b) Upon receiving information pursuant to subdivision (a), the Department of Justice shall verify the identity of the victim against any driver's license or other identification record maintained by the Department of Motor Vehicles.
(c) The Department of Justice shall establish and maintain a data base of individuals who have been victims of identity theft.
The department shall provide a victim of identity theft or his or her authorized representative access to the data base in order to establish that the individual has been a victim of identity theft.
Access to the data base shall be limited to criminal justice agencies, victims of identity theft, and individuals and agencies authorized by the victims.
(d) The Department of Justice shall establish and maintain a toll-free telephone number to provide access to information under subdivision (c). (e) This section shall be operative September 1, 2001.
530.8.
(a) If a person discovers that an application in his or her name for a loan, credit line or account, credit card, charge card, public utility service, or commercial mobile radio service has been filed with any person or entity by an unauthorized person, or that an account in his or her name has been opened with a bank, trust company, savings association, credit union, public utility, or commercial mobile radio service provider by an unauthorized person, then, upon presenting to the person or entity with which the application was filed or the account was opened a copy of a police report prepared pursuant to Section 530.6 and identifying information in the categories of information that the unauthorized person used to complete the application or to open the account, the person, or a law enforcement officer specified by the person, shall be entitled to receive information related to the application or account, including a copy of the unauthorized person's application or application information and a record of transactions or charges associated with the application or account.
Upon request by the person in whose name the application was filed or in whose name the account was opened, the person or entity with which the application was filed shall inform him or her of the categories of identifying information that the unauthorized person used to complete the application or to open the account.
The person or entity with which the application was filed or the account was opened shall provide copies of all forms and information required by this section, without charge, within 10 business days of receipt of the person's request and submission of the required copy of the police report and identifying information.
(b) Any request made pursuant to subdivision (a) to a person or entity subject to the provisions of Section 2891 of the Public Utilities Code shall be in writing and the requesting person shall be deemed to be the subscriber for purposes of that section.
(c) (1) Before a person or entity provides copies to a law enforcement officer pursuant to subdivision (a), the person or entity may require the requesting person to submit a signed and dated statement by which the requesting person does all of the following: (A) Authorizes disclosure for a stated period.
(B) Specifies the name of the agency or department to which the disclosure is authorized.
(C) Identifies the types of records that the requesting person authorizes to be disclosed.
(2) The person or entity shall include in the statement to be signed by the requesting person a notice that the requesting person has the right at any time to revoke the authorization.
(d) As used in this section, "law enforcement officer" means a peace officer as defined by Section 830.1 of the Penal Code. (e) As used in this section, "commercial mobile radio service" means "commercial mobile radio service" as defined in section 20.3 of Title 47 of the Code of Federal Regulations.
Updated January 31, 2003
__________ [BUTTON Input] (not implemented)______
(_) My CA (_) This Site
Image of Arnold Schwarzenegger and a link to his Home Page
Press Releases Upcoming Events Monthly Privacy Tips
Law Enforcement
Recommended Practices
Back to Top of Page © 2003 State of California.
Conditions of Use - Privacy Policy
