Department of Justice Seal FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE CR THURSDAY, APRIL 16, 1998 (202) 616-2 765 TDD (202) 514-1888 THREE INDICTED FOR SETTING FIRE TO AN ARKANSAS CHURCH WASHINGTON, D.C.
-- Three Arkansas residents were indicted by a federal grand jury in Little Rock in connection with a 1995 arson at a church in Shirley, Arkansas, the National Church Arson Task force announced today.
The four count indictment, returned yesterday and unsealed today, charges Michelle Leigh Dunn, 21, Jerry Lynn Jones, 25, and Robert Marion Treece, 24, with conspiring to set fire to the Universal Church of God on May 25, 1995.
Treece also faces charges of intimidating a witness in connection with a subsequent investigation of the incident.
"Today's case underscores our ongoing commitment to find and prosecute those who attack our nation's houses of worship," said James E. Johnson, Treasury Assistant Secretary for Enforcement and Bill Lann Lee, Acting Assistant Attorney General for Civil Rights, Co-Chairs of the National Church Arson Task Force.
The first three counts of the indictment charges the three defendants with conspiring to set fire to a mobile home trailer used by the church as a Christian school in order to intimidate African-American members of the church.
Count four charges Treece with threatening a witness in order to prevent the communication of information about the fire to federal law enforcement officers.
The maximum possible prison term for all of the charges returned against Dunn, Jones, and Treece is forty years in prison.
In addition to prison terms, each defendant could also be sentenced to fines of $250,000 for each count of the indictment.
The indictment was the result of a joint investigation by the Federal Bureau of Investigation and the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms.
The investigation began in August 1997, after the fire at the Universal Church of God.
The Task Force also opened an investigation into an earlier fire at the church that had been set in May, 1995.
The second fire remains under investigation.
More than 600 hundred arsons of houses of worship have been reported to the Church Arson Task Force since January 1995.
Already, 273 suspects have been arrested in connection with 204 arsons.
An indictment is only a charge and is not evidence of guilt.
A defendant is entitled to a fair trial in which it will be the government's burden to prove guilt beyond a reasonable doubt.
# # #
98-183
