Chairman Tauzin Committee News The House Committee on Energy and Commerce W.J.
"Billy" Tauzin, Chairman Link to Committee Tip Line: Fight Waste, Fraud and Abuse
Help
How do I find...?
Contact Us
About The Committee
Search
Menu
Home
Action
Schedule
Members
News
Subcommittees
Issues
Letters
Legislation
Publications
Tauzin Delivers Statement on Human Cloning
Contact: Ken Johnson (202.225.5735)
Washington (March 28) - House Energy and Commerce Committee Chairman Billy Tauzin (R-LA) is scheduled to deliver the following remarks today at an Oversight and Investigations Subcommittee hearing on safety and ethical issues surrounding human cloning:
"Let me congratulate and salute the Subcommittee Chairman, Congressman James Greenwood, for holding this hearing.
Shining the oversight spotlight over an issue of great public concern -- human cloning -- is a great example of how the Congress, especially the House of Representatives, serves as a voice and fact-finder for the American people.
"A religious sect called the Raelian movement and an international group of scientists have recently announced their intent to conduct experiments on human beings to create a cloned baby.
As far as we can tell, both of these experiments allegedly are being or will be conducted outside the scrutiny of governmental regulatory bodies and institutional review boards.
"The issue of human cloning and these announced experiments raise scientific, medical, ethical, moral, and ultimately, policy questions that we as a country must confront.
Cloning may literally threaten the character of our human nature.
We are imperfect beings -- all of us -- and that requires us to develop traits of forgiveness, understanding, love, and character.
How is that all threatened when we produce perfect human beings?
"Other institutions can issue reports, hold meetings, or announce voluntary policies.
But only the Congress -- particularly through this Committee -- can write the laws that could regulate or even ban human cloning.
"This oversight hearing can be the start for an honest appraisal of the science behind human cloning, a fair inquiry to hear from the parties themselves on how they plan to conduct their human cloning experiments, and a thoughtful discussion of the issues.
While I will withhold judgment on legislation, I feel there are problems with human cloning, from a safety, legal, and ethical standpoint.
I believe the burden is on the proponents of human cloning to make a moral and scientific case for these experiments.
Why do we need to do human cloning?
"This hearing must also address whether current federal law and regulation is adequate for monitoring human cloning experiments.
The Food and Drug Administration (FDA) has asserted its authority over human cloning intended to create a human being.
We support the FDA and want to assist the FDA in bringing its considerable skills to overseeing this matter.
However, FDA's jurisdictional claim may suffer from being a `square peg in a round hole.'
FDA says it can regulate human cloning because the agency has interpreted old federal laws to cover new cloning activities.
The FDA argues these old federal laws regulating new drugs cover a human cell or a human fetus.
I frankly do not find it obvious that a human fetus is a drug.
While a court may find this argument facially plausible, I would not want to rely only on this single reed of federal regulation to address experiments intending to create a baby from cloning technology.
"In addition, FDA's authority is based only on safety concerns, not on the ethical or moral concerns.
That leaves open the question whether the FDA would permit cloning a human being if it was satisfied on the safety concerns.
Since the FDA generally does not have the authority to ban cloning on moral and ethical grounds, I am concerned that one day the FDA might be forced to approve a human cloning project if it found it safe.
The Congress may need to pass legislation to ban human cloning or take other actions to firm up FDA's policies or grant enforcement authority to another agency.
"We will deliberate carefully and thoughtfully.
We will hear from some very distinguished scientists and ethicists today.
We will also have controversial witnesses, including those from the Raelian movement.
The media, including Time magazine and the TV show `60 Minutes,' have covered the Raelians' announced efforts to clone a human being.
If the Raelians are to be believed, they are only weeks away from implanting a human embryo in a surrogate mother.
Through this hearing, the public will hopefully learn whether the Raelian experiment is a hoax, or whether as Time magazine reported, this group may be even further along in human cloning than the competition.
"If the facts and a consensus emerge to support legislation to ban cloning experiments intended to make babies, I am prepared to act.
I will work with James Greenwood and every member on the Committee (Republican or Democrat) to legislate a good bill."
####
Related Documents
News Release Tauzin Delivers Statement On Proposals to Ban Human Cloning June 20, 2001
H.R. 1644, Human Cloning Prohibition Act of 2001, and H.R.____, Cloning Prohibition Act of 2001 Hearing by the Subcommittee on Health Wednesday, June 20, 2001 10:15 AM 2123 Rayburn House Office Building
News Release Bilirakis Releases Witness List For Hearing On Proposals to Ban Human Cloning June 19, 2001
Issues Raised by Human Cloning Research Hearing by the Subcommittee on Oversight and Investigations Wednesday, March 28, 2001 12:00 Noon 2123 Rayburn House Office Building
News Release Greenwood Releases Witness List for Human Cloning Hearing March 26, 2001
News Release Greenwood To Hold Congressional Hearing On Human Cloning March 13, 2001
Adequacy Of Federal Oversight Of Clinical Research Using Cloning Technology Letter to Bernard Schwetz Food and Drug Administration March 8, 2001
More On Cloning
Home | Action | Schedule | Members | News | Subcommittees | Issues | Letters | Legislation | Contact
Committee on Energy and Commerce Seal
The Committee on Energy and Commerce 2125 Rayburn House Office Building Washington, DC 20515 (202) 225-2927 Contact Us
Printer Friendly
Comment On This Page
Related Documents
