This talk was presented during the plenary session of a workshop "Making the Most of New Real-Time Information Technologies in Managing Earthquake Emergencies"; on March 12, 1997 at the Pasadena Center, California.
For information about this workshop, click here.
Real-Time Earthquake Assessment Using GPS
[us-gs.gif] Kenneth W. Hudnut, Ph.D. U. S. Geological Survey, Pasadena hudnut@usgs.gov
Text of slides used in presentation
The Global Positioning System (GPS) has matured as an important new technology for earthquake research.
It allows us to measure the deformation caused by an earthquake to within a few millimeters.
These data are then used, either alone or in conjunction with seismological and other data, to understand the source of an earthquake.
The capabilities of GPS technology, and combination of GPS and seismological data, have been developed and applied successfully in earthquake research.
The challenges before us are; 1) to apply these developments to real- time systems, 2) to continue developing new systems that are even better, and 3) to learn from earthquake responders how we can better meet their needs quickly after future earthquakes.
Two strong arguments are made for incorporating high-precision GPS measurements into real-time earthquake information systems.
First, we can potentially tell earthquake responders whether or not infrastructure systems have been tilted or strained.
This would allow them to take actions to avert damage that might otherwise indirectly result from an earthquake.
Those responsible for gravity driven infrastructure systems, such as water, oil, and waste-water lines, may realize the need to quickly know the deformation caused by an earthquake in order to respond appropriately.
If one quickly recognized a large tilt or strain of such a system, it could lead one to store water or re-direct product, potentially averting a flood or spill.
GPS measurements of the static displacement field complement seismological data, and can be used to help model the earthquake source, as done by Wald et al. (1996) for the Northridge earthquake.
As we develop real-time systems for these sophisticated source models, we recognize that the earlier we can provide static displacement data from GPS, the better.
Such source models are useful for early damage assessment estimation, and we recognize the need to incorporate estimation of damages related to static displacements (and their related tilts and strains) to such estimates.
We need to develop systems that relate these types of information effectively, efficiently, and reliably to earthquake responders.
Right now, it would likely take us several days to provide such information.
We recognize the need to provide our GPS results more rapidly, and also the need to discuss with earthquake responders how they may find the information we can provide useful.
Second, we can place instruments onto critical structures, and build GPS systems that directly monitor the displacement of engineered structures.
Such monitoring can be done with continuously operating GPS receivers, real-time telemetry of data, and rapid analysis of the data.
An experimental pilot project with Los Angeles County to monitor Pacoima Dam has demonstrated the feasibility of such a precise GPS monitoring system.
We began monitoring the dam in September 1995, and initiated near real- time production of results in January 1996.
The system has operated well since the pilot study began, with few problems.
Although this system does not operate in real-time, the capability exists to do so.
The Pacoima Dam system is intended to provide the highest accuracies, and a time lag of up to several days is not seen as a severe limitation.
Other applications might tolerate somewhat lower precision from the GPS monitoring system, yet demand results in real-time.
Developments by others on suspension bridge and volcano monitoring have made progress toward lower accuracy GPS systems that are robust and closer to real-time.
As with any development, pushing the highest possible accuracy of GPS as a real-time application, and at the same time assuring robust results, will take committed efforts.
The technology exists, but several fronts need to be pushed forward before high- accuracy, real-time GPS structure monitoring systems will be widely available and affordable.
