Home 
The U.S. Department of Energy's Office of Nuclear Energy, Science, and Technology plans to sign such agreements with all members of the Generation IV International Forum (GIF).
To learn more about generation IV reactors, consult the nuclear issues paper on new reactors.
To learn more about the work of the Office of Nuclear Energy, Science and Technology, consult its web site.
China
January: On January 8, Lingao 2 is connected to the grid.
It becomes the 7th Chinese reactor to go online.^1 July: On July 24, Atomic Energy of Canada, Ltd., (AECL) announced that a second CANDU reactor went on-line at Qinshan, China.
The unit first reached criticality in April 2003.^2
September: On September 16, a formal exchange of diplomatic notes between the U.S. Embassy in Beijing and China's Ministry of Foreign Affairs affirms mutual understandings on nuclear technology exchange between the two countries.
"The understandings enable U.S. firms to use their authorizations under Department of Energy regulations 10 CFR Part 810 to provide technology to the Chinese nuclear power program."
^3
India
September: On September 29th, Anil Kakodkar, the chairman of India's Atomic Energy Commission, announced that design work is completed on India's prototype advanced heavy water reactor.
No construction start date has been established, but the estimated time for construction is 7 years.
On an official visit to Paris, he announced that India is adding 9 reactors to its nuclear program, doubling current capacity by 2008 (from 2,700 MWe to 6,700 MWe).^4 Italy February: Germany and Sweden plan to phase out their nuclear industries, but the experience of the only western European country to have done so is not encouraging.
Following the accident at the Chernobyl Nuclear Power Station in the Ukraine, Italians voted in favor of a nuclear moratorium that shut down all four of ENEL's (the National electric utility) reactors.
Although all three undamaged Chernobyl reactors were all returned to service, none of the Italian reactors have operated since the moratorium was passed in 1986.
A spokesperson for of Sogin (ENEL's nuclear subsidiary), stated that Italians now pay 3 times the cost of electricity in France, and 1.6 times the average European cost, while continuing to import as much as18 percent of their electricity from French nuclear power plants.
Japan April: As reported on the Voice of America website^5, the last of the Tokyo Electric Power Company's (TEPCO) reactors shut down on April 15^th.
All 17 of TEPCO's reactors are undergoing emergency inspections in response to allegations of significant problems and falsified repair records.
The Japanese Trade Minister warned that if the situation continues for long, it could lead to blackouts in Tokyo.
Pakistan
September 29: The National Economic Council approved 28 energy projects, including raising the Mangla dam and the construction of a new reactor at Chasma.
Although Finance Minister Aziz was very enthusiastic about the anticipated impact on economic growth, he emphasized that Pakistan needs to improve the infrastructure essential to maintain this growth.^6 United States February: The U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission (NRC) issues a preliminary finding that performance problems at Ohio's Davis-Besse Nuclear Plant are of "high safety significance."
Under the NRC 4-color classification process, such a finding falls into the "red" category, mandating strong actions by NRC to correct the problem.
Workers at the plant corrosive damage to the reactor vessel head.
May: Energy Information Administration revises its total for capacity of U.S. nuclear reactors.
The revised figure for 2001 (serving as preliminary for 2002 and 2003) is the highest total for nuclear capacity since June 1998.
The change itself is not as significant as the reason behind the change.
With the Nation's reactors already operating at 90.4 percent of capacity (estimated for 2002), there seems little opportunity.
June: The NRC oversight panel^7 conducts meetings on June 3rd with Davis-Besse plant officials to discuss the status and adequacy of remedial actions to correct plant performance.
According to EIA, the plant produced about 7.7 billion kilowatt hours of electricity (1 percent of the National total).
Davis-Besse has been shut down since February 2002.
August: On August 1, the U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission (NRC) announced in a press release that it has approved the re-start of the Nation's second largest reactor.
Leaks in two pipes that penetrate the bottom of the reactor vessel were discovered during refueling.
The reactor has been sidelined since April.
An Ohio reactor, Davis Besse, has been shut down with more serious problems since February 2002.
Efforts to re-start Davis Besse received another setback less than 24 hours before announcement about South Texas.
The NRC issued a preliminary "yellow" warning against Davis Besse on July 31.
August 14th, the lights went out in New York City and much of the northeast.
Nine U.S. and eight Canadian commercial nuclear reactors were shut down, contributing to the Nation's largest-ever power outage.
In Canada, all operational Darlington and Pickering units (each of which is a CANDU reactor) were shut down.
In the United States, the shutdown affected all six reactors in New York, plus Enrico Fermi (in Michigan) and Perry (in Ohio).
As a precaution, a ninth U.S. reactor, Oyster Creek (in New Jersey), was also shut down although is not connected to the same grid.
Site-level summaries of these and all other U.S. reactors appear on the EIA web site.
As noted in Platts Nuclear News Flashes (August 24, 2003), the largest power failure in U.S. history could have been even larger.
The Nebraska Public Power District (NPPD) reported that "when the blackout occurred in the Northeast...NPPD saw a frequency increase of .2 hertz.
Protection systems in the area of the blackout isolated the disturbance from utilities in the rest of the eastern interconnection."^8 November: On November 21, 2003, U.S. Secretary of Energy Spencer Abraham announces that the U.S. Department of Energy (DOE) is moving ahead with the next major phase of the Nuclear Power 2010 program.
DOE will solicit formal applications from nuclear generation companies to work in partnership on licensing activities.
"Nuclear power is clean energy and we want to expand its use," the Secretary stated.
2002
China
February: On February 6, the China Internet Information Center reported that the Qinshan 2-1 reactor, 600 MW(e), was connected to the grid.
More information on Qinshan and other reactors in China is available in the Chinese Nuclear Industry feature on this web site.
May: On May 28, Lingao 1 entered commercial service.
It is the fifth reactor to go on line in China.
August: Framatom, the French national corporation, announced that the Ling'ao 2 reactor reached criticality on August 27th, nine weeks ahead of schedule.
September: On September 22, according to a spokesperson for Atomic Energy of Canada, Ltd., unit 1 of Qinshan 3 reached criticality.
This is China's 7th commercial nuclear reactor, but more are under construction.^9
Egypt
July: On July 1, Egypt announced that it will construct a nuclear power plant northwest of Alexandria.
It will be the first in north Africa and the second on the continent (South Africas Koeberg Nuclear Power Plant, north of Capetown, is the first).^10
Finland
May: On May 24, the Finnish parliament authorized construction of a new commercial reactor.
Although Finland has only 4 reactors, the vote in favor of building a 5^th reactor was regarded as a significant victory for the international nuclear community.
It is the first new reactor to be authorized by a western European nation in more than a decade.^11
North Korea
October: On October 16, the international media reports that North Korea has confirmed a secret nuclear program was being conducted.
In light of the ongoing discussions on this matter, it is not yet possible to discern what impact this will have on the planned construction of two nuclear reactors near Pyongyang under an international agreement.
(Therefore, it would be inappropriate to comment further at this time.)
Iran
May: The United States has expressed concern that the construction of a nuclear power plant in Iran might facilitate a nuclear weapons program.
According to EIA's Country Analysis Brief on Iran, "In May 2002, U.S. Energy Secretary Spencer Abraham met with Alexander Rumyantsev, head of Russia's nuclear agency, and discussed this issue, with Rumyantsev stating the Russian position that Bushehr 'is not a source of proliferation of nuclear material.'
Under the latest contract details with Russia, construction on Bushehr must be completed by March 19, 2004.
Iran reportedly is to decide during 2002 whether or not to purchase a second Russian-built reactor for Bushehr once the first reactor is finished."
Russia
April: On April 30, the oldest nuclear power plant in the world closed down its sole reactor.
The Obninsk reactor was only 5 megawatts (electric) in capacity, but its lifespan far exceeded that of much larger units.
The Obninsk reactor first generated electricity in 1954.
More information on the Obninsk Nuclear Power Station is available in the Unique Reactors feature on this web site.
October: On October 30, Pravda reports that Russia will build the worlds first floating nuclear power plant at Severodvinsk, Archangel.
The projected completion date is in 2008.
Spain
October: On October 15, the Spanish economics ministry announced that it plans to close the Jose Cabrera (also known as Zorita) Nuclear Power Plant in 2006, after 38 years of operation.
Zorita was the first nuclear plant built in Spain, and will be the first to close.^12 United Kingdom
July: The announced closing of eight of the world's oldest reactors (four at Calder Hall and four at Chapelcross) is expected to have a significant financial impact on British Nuclear Fuels, Ltd (BNFL).
On July 14, the British media reported that decommissioning of the Magnox plants will contribute to a record loss of 2 billion British Pounds (approximately 3 billion U.S. dollars, 1 British Pound is equal to $1.55) for BNFL.^13
United States
January: The U.S. nuclear power industry generated more electricity in January 2002 than in any previous month in its history.
The amount of electricity generated by each U.S. reactor in 2002 is reported in the Reactor Level 2002 table on this web site.
March: Workers at the Davis-Besse nuclear power plant discover a cavity in the head of the reactor vessel.
According to the Nuclear Regulatory Commission (NRC), the problem was discovered while repairing the control rod tubes.
These tubes, "which pass through the reactor vessel head, are called control rod drive mechanism nozzles.
Cracks were detected in 5 of the 69 nozzles."
In three of the nozzles, the cracks were so deep that they allowed leakage of reactor cooling water.
The problem will eventually keep the reactor off line for more than a year.
April: On April 11, Dr. Richard A. Meserve, the Chairman of the U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission (NRC), testifies before the House Committee on Energy and Commerce about the status of security at U.S. nuclear power plants.
May: On May 8, the House of Representatives votes a resolution in support of using Yucca Mountain to store the Nations commercial and military nuclear waste.
The Secretary of Energy praises the House for its bi-partisan support of the resolution.
June: On June 7, the NRC renewed the license for Turkey Point units 2 and 3.
July: On July 2, the NRC accepted the application for design certification of the new AP1000 Advanced Rector Design.
On July 9, the U.S. Senate votes 60 to 39 in favor of a national nuclear waste depository at Yucca Mountain, Nevada.
August: On August 5, U.S. Secretary of Energy Spencer Abraham addresses the World Nuclear Association on the Department's policy on nuclear energy.
The Secretary notes that nuclear energy is helping some eastern States meet air quality standards and believes it is a necessary part of the Nation's energy program.
December: (According to a press release from the U.S. Energy Information Administration, the U.S. nuclear industry generated 780.2 billion kilowatt hours of electricity in 2002 (a new record) while utilizing 90.8 percent of capacity (a new record).
2001
Bulgaria
December: Bulgaria ends the year with a new national record for nuclear generation, 19.6 terawatt hours, representing 44.6 percent of the nations total electricity supply.^14
Cuba
July: With the official announcement that work will be terminated, Cubas first and only commercial nuclear power plant became a relic and casualty of the Cold War.
The Juragua Nuclear Power Station was begun as a joint Soviet/Cuban project in 1983.
Although the design included some safety-related innovations not found in previous Soviet models, the nuclear accident at Chernobyl heightened U.S. concerns about construction of a Soviet-built reactor less than 100 miles from Florida.
France
July: According to EIA's Country Analysis Brief on France, "the reorganization of the French nuclear sector commenced with the nomination of a management committee for a new holding company, Topco, that will preside over the country's major nuclear enterprises.
Its nuclear operations will include mining, fuels, treatment, recycling, decontamination and engineering."
Also in July, the United States and France agree to jointly fund research on advanced cycle reactors and on nuclear fuel development.
Germany
July: On July 23, delegates at the COP6 Conference in Bonn, Germany, reached accord on dealing with the greenhouse gas issue.
An agreement was signed (without U.S. participation) that preserved the original targets of the Kyoto Protocol.
The agreement, however, is a setback for the nuclear industry.
Nuclear is not to be included among the flexible mechanisms for reaching emissions targets.
More information on the contribution of nuclear energy to air quality is available in, Impact of U.S. Nuclear Generation on Greenhouse Gas Emissions.
December: Germany is planning to phase out its nuclear industry, but the German nuclear industry will not go quietly.
In 2001, German nuclear power plants generate 171.2 billion kilowatt hours of electricity, eclipsing the 1997 national record of 170.4 billion kilowatt hours.
The Energy Information Administrations (EIA) Country Analysis Brief on Germany reports that nuclear power accounts for 30 percent of that nations domestic energy production.
Iran
January: According to the International Atomic Energy Agency (IAEA),^15 construction began on Irans third and fourth reactors, Bushehr 3 and 4 (gross capacity 440 Mwe each).
March: Iranian President Khatami met with Russian President Putin and came to an agreement on expanding bilateral cooperation on nuclear power.
Russia
December: The Russian nuclear industry continues to do well, exceeding 130 billion kilowatt hours of electricity for the first time since the breakup of the Soviet Union.
The new 2001 record of 134.4 billion kilowatt hours is nearly 6 billion kilowatt hours more than the previous record set in 2000.
Russian annual nuclear generation since 1992 and monthly generation since 1999 is reported in Table 11.4d of EIAs Monthly Energy Review.
Sweden
December: Like Germany, Sweden is planning to phase out its nuclear industry.
Also like Germany, the national nuclear industry will not go quietly.
In 2000, Swedens annual nuclear generation dipped to 57.2 billion kilowatt hours, its lowest level since 1984.
In 2001, however, it climbed over 70 billion kilowatt hours, returning to approximate annual level of the last 5 years of the 20^th century.
Swedens annual nuclear generation since 1992 and monthly generation since 1999 is reported in Table 11.4c of EIAs Monthly Energy Review.
United States
January: On New Years Day, the New Hampshire State Supreme Court upheld the Public Service of New Hampshire (PSNH) restructuring plan, clearing the way for competition to begin for the majority of consumers in New Hampshire.
The plan calls for a 10-percent rate reduction; standard offer rates between 4.4 and 4.6 cents per kWh, increasing gradually over a three-year transition period; and divestiture generation assests, including PSNH's interest in Seabrook nuclear and about 1,200 MW in fossil and hydro plants.
February: Secretary of Energy Spencer Abraham unveiled the Nuclear Power 2010 initiative aimed at building new nuclear power plants in the United States before the end of the decade.
The Secretary announced the Departments latest initiative in remarks before the Global Energy Summit in Washington, DC.
May: The National Energy Plan is published.
The Plan includes a significant role for nuclear power in meeting energy demand and reducing air pollution levels.
June: Arkansas Nuclear 1, with 2 reactors, becomes the third power plant to receive a license extension from the U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission.
July: On July 23, Energy Secretary Spencer Abraham announces that the United States is among the signatories to a formal charter that creates the Generation IV International Forum.
The Forum is to draft a framework for international cooperation in developing the next generation of nuclear reactors.
September: Terrorists strike the United States.
Although nuclear plants were not targeted in the wave of attacks, 9/11 will cause much speculation about their security.
December: The U.S. nuclear industry closes the year with its third straight annual record for generation.
In a press release issued in April 2002, the EIA reports that the U.S. nuclear industry generated a record 768.8 billion net kilowatt hours with a record average capacity factor of 89.7 percent.
2000
Brazil
July: On July 21, Angra 2 is connected to the grid.
Angra 2 is a pressurized light water reactor rated at 1,300 gross MW(e).
The reactor was supplied by Siemens Kraftwerk Union AG, a German corporation.
Angra 2 is larger that any other reactor either built or under construction in South America.
.
Addition data on Brazil, nuclear power and other fuels, is available in EIA's Country Analysis Brief.
Kazakhstan
September: According to the EIA, Kazakhstan had planned to build a new nuclear power station in the east near Lake Balkash, with three units of 640 MW each, but in September 2000 the Kazakh government rejected the blueprints and shelved the project, citing cost and safety concerns, as well as public opinion opposed to the nuclear plant.
Russia
December: Russias annual nuclear generation in 2000 was 128.9 billion kilowatt hours, the highest total since Russia began reporting as an independent state (1992).
Ukraine
December: On December 15, Chernobyl 3, the last reactor still in service at the Chernobyl Nuclear Power Station was permanently shut down.
The shutdown comes 20 years and 12 days after the unit was first connected to the grid.
Of the four reactors, Chernobyl 3 remained in service the longest.
But the Chernobyl reactor that will be remembered operated for only 2 years.
Chernobyl 4 began commercial service on March 26, 1984, and changed the course of history on the day it closed, April 26, 1986.
United States
March: On March 23^rd, the Calvert Cliffs Nuclear Power Plant near Lusby, Maryland, becomes the first nuclear plant to be granted a license extension by the U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission.
As reported earlier by the Energy Information Administration, up until then, no U.S. commercial reactor had operated for the complete duration of its initial licensing period.
May: A few months after Calvert Cliffs becomes the first U.S. nuclear plant to be granted a license extension, the Oconee Nuclear Power Plant in South Carolina becomes the second.
1999
Armenia
September: Armenia conducts its first nuclear emergency drill reflects the substantial improvement in international cooperation since the Chernobyl accident in Ukraine.
More information on Armenias energy industry is available in an EIA feature on the Caucasus.
Belgium
December: In the same year that the Belgian political parties reach agreement on retiring nuclear plants, the Belgian nuclear industry establishes a national record for annual nuclear generation, 49 billion kilowatthours.
Data on Belgian annual nuclear since 1992 and monthly generation since 1999 is reported in Table 11.4c of EIA's Monthly Energy Review.
North Korea
December: A turnkey contract is awarded to South Korea's KEPCO (the Korea Electric Power Corporation to build two pressurized light-water reactors in North Korea.
These reactors are provided by under an agreement negotiated with North Korea by the United States in 1994.
In exchange for the reactors, North Korea agreed to freeze its own nuclear program.
It is impossible to briefly summarize the events leading up to this point or the years that followed, but additional details are in EIA's Country Analysis Brief on North Korea.
India
December: Kaiga-2, a pressurized heavy water reactor (PHWR) with a gross capacity of 220 Mwe, is connected to the grid.
Japan
December: Japanese nuclear power plants generate a (national) record 326.9 billion kilowatt hours (gross)of electricity.
But with an economic crisis building in Asia, nuclear generation and electricity demand will fall significantly in 1999.
The monthly and annual trends for nuclear and other generation are in EIAs Monthly Energy Review.
Kazakhstan
June: Kazakhstans lone reactor, the Soviet-designed BN-350, (rated as 90 gross Mwe in capacity) was permanently shutdown.
The BN-350 is a fast breeder reactor that came on line in July 1973.
Although Kazakhstan has no nuclear generating units in service, its significant uranium reserves virtually assure it of a continued role in the international nuclear industry.
Romania
December: Mochovce-2, a VVER reactor rated at 432 gross Mwe capacity, is connected to the grid.
South Korea
May: On May 21, Wolsong 4 (net capacity 650 Mwe) is connected to the grid.
It is the fifth South Korean reactor to be connected to the grid in 3 years.
United States
January: For the first time in history, the monthly capacity utilization factor (the ratio of electricity that could be generated to the amount actually produced) exceeds 90 percent for the U.S. nuclear industry.
Since monthly capacity utilization factors vary significantly, it is not yet possible to tell whether this is an indicator of a turnaround in the economic fortunes of the nuclear industry, or merely a statistical oddity.
November: AmerGen, a joint venture, acquires the Clinton Nuclear Power Station in Clinton, Illinois.
AmerGen is composed of Exelon, British Energy, and International Power.
Its British component makes AmerGen the first company to acquire a U.S. nuclear power plant with the aid of foreign direct investment.
More information on foreign direct investment in the uranium and nuclear and other energy industries is available in the EIA report published in August 2002.
December: The U.S. nuclear industry sets a record for world annual record for nuclear-generated electricity.
Because no U.S. reactors have come on line since 1996 and no new reactors are projected prior to 2020, many experts believe the record will be permanent.
However, the record will last exactly one year.
1998
Japan
March: On March 3, the 9^th International Conference for Nuclear Cooperation in Asia (hosted by Japans Atomic Energy Commission) met in Tokyo, Japan.
Participants reported that serious economic recession in the region has weakened the nuclear programs of these countries.^16 Although Asia recovers from the crisis shortly after the turn of the century, the crisis persuades Indonesia to refrain from developing its own nuclear program.
Romania
July: Mochovce-1, a VVER reactor rated at 432 gross Mwe capacity, is connected to the grid.
South Africa
December: South Africas Koeberg Nuclear Power Plant generated 14.3 billion kilowatt hours of electricity in 1998.
Since Koeberg is the only nuclear power plant on the continent, it is the national and regional record for annual nuclear generation (and remains so as of July 3, 2002).
Koeberg has two reactors, each rated at 921 net megawatts (electric).
South Korea
January: On January 6, Ulchin 3 (net capacity, 960 Mwe) is connected to the grid.
March: On March 25, Wolsong 3 (net capacity, 650 Mwe) is connected to the grid.
December: With Ulchin 4 (net capacity, 960 Mwe) coming on line on December 28, the South Korean commercial nuclear strategy is moving along rapidly.
United States
June: On June 29^th, the board of directors announces that the Federally-owned United States Enrichment Corporation (USEC) will be privatized through an initial public offering of common stock.
The Government eventually receives nearly $2 billion from the sale of stock.
July: On July 23rd, shares of the USEC begin trading on the New York Stock Exchange.
On July 28^th, the entire USEC is transferred to private ownership.
December: The capacity factor at U.S. nuclear power plants improves from 71.1 percent in 1997 to 78.2 percent in 1998.
A year later, it will exceed 80 percent as American reactors begin to place among the worlds leaders.
Vietnam
December: In December 1998, Nukem 50 reported the results of a three-year study entitled A General Survey for the Introduction of Nuclear Power in Vietnam.
The study recommends the government put into service at least one nuclear reactor between 2010 and 2020 to help meet anticipated increases in electricity demand.
1997
Mexico
December: Mexicos Laguna Verde nuclear power plant, 1,308 Mwe in capacity, produced 10.4 billion kilowatthours of electricity in 1997, a new national annual record for nuclear generation.
South Korea
April: On April 1, Wolsong 2 (650 net Mwe capacity) is connected to the grid.
United States
December: The U.S. nuclear industry is unable to keep pace with the record year of 1996.
Net generation falls from 674,729 million kilowatt hours in 1996 to 628,644 million kilowatt hours in 1997.
The market share falls to 18.0 percent.
Net summer capability is again under 100,000 MW(e).
U.S. Nuclear generation and capacity since 1973 (up to the most current month available) is reported in table 8.1 of the Monthly Energy Review on this web site.
1996
France
August: Framatoms Chooz B1 comes on line in the French Ardennes.
With a net capacity of 1,455 Mwe (and 1,520 gross Mwe capacity), it is the largest reactor ever built.
An equally large twin, Chooz B2, is anticipated in 1997.
Japan
January: Kashiwazaki Kariwa-6, an advanced boiling water reactor (ABWR) with a gross capacity of 1,356 Mwe is connected to the grid.
November: Genkai-4, a light water pressurized reactor (PWR) with a gross capacity of 1,180 Mwe, is connected to the grid.
December: Ohi-1, a PWR (gross capacity, 1,175 Mwe), is connected to the grid.
Romania
July: Cernavoda-1, a pressurized heavy water reactor (PHWR) rated at 706 Mwe gross capacity, goes on line.
Ukraine
November: On November 30, Chernobyl unit 1 is permanently shut down.
Of the four original reactors at the Chernobyl Nuclear Power Station, only unit 3 remains in service.
United States
February: The Tennessee Valley Authority brings on line Watts Bar 1, the last U.S. reactor to go on line in the 20^th century.
Although there were 7 U.S. reactors with construction permits in 1995, EIA projected that none of the other 6 will come on line by 2020.
December: The U.S. nuclear industry generates a record 674,729 million kilowatt hours.
This record, coupled with the news that Watt's Bar 1 has come on line (the first U.S. reactor to come on line in over a decade), gives the industry a badly needed lift in morale.
Watts Bar 1 was one of seven U.S. reactors with construction permits in 1995, EIA did not project that any of the other six will ever come on line.
U.S. annual net summer capability for operable units exceeds 100.000 megawatts (electric) for the first (and to date, the only) time.
Nuclear power accounted for 20.1 percent of the total electricity generated in the United States, tying the record sent in 1992.
But the good news is not expected to continue.
The EIA projects that plant retirements will significantly reduce the nuclear share of the electricity market.
_______________________
^1 "Four nuclear power units go into operation," February 6, 2003, online at http://hoovnews.hoovers.com/fp.asp?layout=query_displaynews
^2 "Commercial Operation for Second Qinshan Phase Three Unit," ed. By Ursula Dinnis, Nuc Net News, http://www.worldnuclear.org , July 24, 2003.
^3 U.S. Department of Energy, "Secretary Abraham and Chairman of China Atomic Energy Authority Affirm Understandings on Nuclear Technology Exchange," Press Release R-03-209, September 16, 2003.
^4 The Times of India, "India makes breakthrough in nukes agenda," on line http://timesofindia.indiatimes.com/cms.dll/xml/uncomp/articleshow?msid= 207406, September 29, 2003, India.
^5 "Japan May Face Power Shortage," by Steve Herman, Voice of America News, online: http://www.voanews.com/ , April 15, 2003.
^6Daily Times, "Mangla, Chasnupp okayed," on line: http://www.dailytimes.com.pk/, September 28, 2003, Pakistan: as cited in UxC News Flashes, September 29, 2003.
^7U.S.
Nuclear Regulatory Commission, "NRC Oversight Panel to meet with Davis-Besse Officials June 3," NRC News Release, May 27, 2003.
^8 "NPPD's Transmission System Reliable," Nebraska Public Power District, online: http://www.nppd.com/ Press Release, August 21, 2003"
^9 Seventh Chinese Nuclear Power Unit Reaches Criticality," by Chris Lewis, September 22, 2002, online at http://www.worldnuclear.org/ .
^10Egypt set to build nuclear energy plant, by Daniel Sobelman, Haaretz Daily, July 2, 2002, online at http://www.haaretzdaily.com/ , Israel.
^11 Finnish Yes Vote: Turning the Tide for Nuclear in Europe? NucNet no. 8, May 24^, 2002, online at http:www.worldnuclear.org/
^12Spains Jose Cabrera N-Plant to Close in 2006, NucNet News No. 327, on-line at editors@worldnuclear.org, October 15, 2002.
^13BFNL in Record L2bn Loss, Oliver Morgan, Guardian Unlimited Observer, July 14, 2002.
^14 Bulgaria Generates New Record, ibid, January 29, 2002.
^15 Nuclear Power Reactors in the World, International Atomic Energy Agency, Vienna, Austria, Table 9, page 20.
^16 Nuclear Industry Struggling to Survive in Asia, Citizens Nuclear Information Center, NEWS WATCH, Nuke Info Tokyo, No. 64, page 5.
