FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE: MARCH 17, 1997 CONTACT MARK WOOLLEY: (516) 893-9010 SEAN CASSIDY: (202) 225-6634 PRESS RELEASE LAZIO SUPPORTS PROBE OF REVERSE MORTGAGE SERVICE PROVIDERS Works With HUD Secretary Cuomo To Protect Senior Homeowners BABYLON, N.Y.
-- Housing Chairman Rick Lazio (R-Long Island) is working with HUD Secretary Andrew Cuomo in the investigation of reverse mortgage service providers who are preying on senior homeowners.
The investigation stems from recent allegations that companies related to the reverse mortgage industry are allegedly charging seniors to provide them with information about reverse mortgages, when that information, by law, should be provided at no cost.
"I know you share my deep concerns regarding the recent charges of fraud involving reverse mortgage service providers," Lazio said in a letter to Secretary Cuomo.
"I am most disturbed that these third-party companies are preying upon our nation's vulnerable population."
According to recent media reports, senior citizens were charged as much as 8.5% of the reverse mortgage loan's value to receive information on these loans from a brokerage house.
The seniors were then encouraged to put the equity from their home into risky annuities.
Chairman Lazio noted that reverse mortgages allow seniors aged 62 and more who are house-rich but cash-poor to borrow against the equity in their homes to help pay for living and medical expenses or crucial home repairs.
Lazio was able to expand and reauthorize the Federal Housing Administration's reverse mortgage program that allows lenders to offer Home Equity Conversion Mortgages until the year 2000.
After speaking earlier today with Secretary Cuomo, Chairman Lazio said they pledged to work together in drafting legislation that would weed out predators who are working against the spirit of the reverse mortgage program.
"It is tragic that such a valuable instrument of security and peace of mind for senior homeowners is being jeopardized by such despicable practices," Lazio said.
"As Housing Chairman, I will do everything within my power to help preserve and protect such an important program for seniors."
###
