Introduction: The Threats Facing Amphibians Worldwide, frog and toad populations are in peril due to habitat loss, disease, and other causes that are yet to be fully determined by researchers.
In addition, malformed frogs, some with extra or missing limbs, are appearing in significant numbers across the United States and in other countries.
The issue has captured the attention of researchers and citizens all over the world but definitive answers on what is causing this situation remain elusive.
Amphibians as Indicators
Frogs are considered a "canary in the coal-mine," or an early warning indicator, for potential human health problems because they are so sensitive to changes in their environment.
Declines in their population's levels or changes in the health of individuals are often the first indicator that things are out of balance in an ecosystem.
Amphibians are particularly sensitive to changes in their environment because of their semi-permeable skin-practically everything they come in contact with passes through their skin and is internalized.
In fact, frogs breathe not only through their lungs, but also by absorbing oxygen through their skin.
Poisons more readily enter the skin of amphibians, unlike other animals, which may have fur, exoskeletons, feathers or scaled skin for protection.
Moreover, the life cycle itself of the amphibian contributes to its exposure to environmental toxins-because most amphibians are both aquatic and terrestrial at various life stages, they are susceptible to both water and soil-borne toxins.
Frogs that spend most of their lives in water-such as the green, mink, and bull frogs-have been shown to have a higher rate of malformities than more terrestrial species such as wood frogs and gray tree frogs.
In addition, green frog and bullfrog tadpoles often overwinter for one to two years before they metamorphose into frogs, extending their exposure to toxins, if present, in the water.
The Global Decline ofAmphibians
Although current media attention has focused on the issue of malformed frogs, the overall decline of amphibian populations is perhaps one of the most significant ecological issues 6f our generation.
This decline was first reported in 1989 at a worldwide gathering of herpetologists (scientists that study amphibians and reptiles).
The issue was so prevalent that another conference, held in California in 1990, was organized to discuss declining frog populations.
At that conference, it became clear that frog populations throughout the world were declining, and, in some places, had disappeared.
Scientists continue to be puzzled by this phenomenon and have yet to determine whether the causes of decline in different locations are correlated.
Frogs and toads have managed to live on this earth for 350 million years-surviving even the disappearance of the dinosaurs-so their current global decline is particularly worrisome.
A potentially larger concern is the fact that amphibians have been disappearing from relatively pristine environments, including the cloud forests of Costa Rica and the mountains of Wyoming and Colorado.
The 1996 Red List of Threatened Animals, published by the International Union for Conservation of Nature (IUCN), lists 156 amphibian species as extinct, critical, endangered, or vulnerable to extinction-representing 25% of all amphibian species on earth.
There are currently 16 amphibians federally listed as threatened or endangered in the U.S. and nine species waiting on the candidate list.
Closer to home, the western chorus frog (Pseudacris triseriata), a Vermont listed endangered species, has not been seen for ten years and is believed to have entirely disappeared from the state.
The declining populations of frogs are believed to be caused by some combination of the following factors:
* Habitat loss and fragmentation, particularly the draining of wetlands; * A deadly fungus; * Toxic contamination from pesticides, insecticides, herbicides, or fertilizers; * Metallic contaminants such as mercury and other heavy metals; * Increased UV-B radiation caused by the decreasing ozone layer; * Global warming; * Acid rain; * Infectious diseases; * Introduction of predatory fish into previously fishless waters; and, * Use of frogs as a gourmet delicacy and for scientific research.
While a few researchers postulate that the declines are part of natural fluctuations of amphibian populations, the general consensus is that the declines are too widespread and affect too many species for the phenomenon to be explained as a natural cyclical occurrence.
Researchers also believe that many of the above factors are working in synergy.
For example, scientists have recently discovered a fungus in Australian and South and Central American rainforest frogs which they believe might be the cause for many of the recent widespread amphibian declines in those countries and elsewhere, including the United States.
The fungus, which may be a mutation, coats the undersides and legs of the frogs and is thought to suffocate them.
Many other scientists, however, note that the amphibians likely evolved with the fungus.
Therefore, some additional factor must cause the weakened immune systems which allow the "chytrid" fungus or other diseases to kill so many amphibians.
Amphibian Malformities
The large rate of malformities discovered across the United States and around the world have received the media spotlight and the majority of public attention.
Since the summer of 1995 when school children in Minnesota found malformed frogs on a school outing, scientists have tried to determine the causes of these abnormalities and the implications for humans.
At first, researchers hypothesized that these abnormalities would turn out to be a natural or cyclical occurrence.
Support for this theory largely dissipated as researchers continued to find malformed frogs in large numbers.
David Hoppe, a herpetologist with the University of Minnesota, recently reported that he is finding abnormalities that are "more frequent, more varied [and] more severe" in 1996 and 1997 than in the previous 40 years.
In Vermont, a 1997 survey of 21 sites in the Lake Champlain Basin lowlands found that 14 of the sites had malformity rates greater than 4%, with one site exhibiting a malformity rate of 45%.
These results are highly significant when com-pared to the expected natural background malformity rate of 1-2% or less.
The theories behind the causes of frog malformities have ranged widely.
The list of causes-many of which are also found on the list of suspected factors contributing to declines in amphibian populations-includes the following:
* Retinoids, a common chemical derived from vitamin A; * Toxic contamination from pesticides, insecticides, herbicides, or fertilizers; * Increased UV-B radiation; * Increased surveying leading to better reporting of malformities; * Naturally occurring parasites, such as trematodes; * Metallic contaminants such as mercury and other heavy metals; * Naturally occurring plant toxins; and, * Deformities caused by predation, misidentified as malformities.
One current theory is that retinoids-compounds derived from vitamin A which regulate key aspects of development in all vertebrates-are the major cause of the gross malformities.
Exposure to excess amounts of retinoids is known to cause birth defects in animals and humans.
Scientists believe that water pollutants that mimic retinoids may be a culprit.
For example, Methoprene, a mosquito and flea control chemical given to cows to control flies on manure, can, when exposed to sunlight, water, and microorganisms, break down into chemicals which mimic retinoids.
Retinoid exposure causes limbs to develop in odd and abnormal ways.
Such exposure disrupts development that is governed by thyroid hormones and retinoids.
It would explain some types of malformities such as the missing and additional limbs that have been found on the malformed frogs.
Retinoid exposure can also affect humans.
Women given Accutane, a retinoid-based acne medication, were warned not to take it when pregnant because of the risk of birth defects.
Dr. David Gardiner, a biologist at the University of California Irvine and a specialist in limb development, believes that the retinoid theory can also explain some of the worldwide decline in amphibian populations.
According to Gardiner, "the kinds of chemicals that would target the development of the limbs would target all organ systems, including the immune system, which would explain why frogs around the world are all falling victim to microbes they have resisted for millions of years."
Dr. Martin Ouellet, a researcher with McGill University in Montreal, is convinced that a major factor in frog malformities is pesticides.
His findings are based on years of research involving the evaluation of over 30,000 frogs along a 150-mile stretch of the St. Lawrence River Valley.
His studies show that the incidence of limb malformities averages 20% in agricultural regions subject to a variety of pesticides and other chemicals and only 1.5% in non-agricultural areas.
On one farm in the St. Lawrence Valley of Quebec, every frog he found was malformed.
Dr. Ouellet's autopsy reports reveled three conditions: frogs that resemble males externally but are actually females; frogs poisoned by clogged and yellowed livers; and, frogs with altered DNA.
Malformed Frogs in Vermont
The Vermont Agency of Natural Resources (ANR) received the first reports of malformed frogs in the late summer of 1996.
Twelve sites in five counties along the Lake Champlain Basin reported finding malformed frogs.
The ANR conducted an initial survey of some of those sites in October of 1996, finding an average malformity rate of 13.
1 % out of the 290 frogs collected.
The malformations were primarily missing or partial hind legs.
Nineteen of the frogs were collected and analyzed for parasites.
Tests showed that these frogs did not have an abnormal parasite burden.
A more extensive study was conducted the following year.
The 1997 frog malformity survey, conducted by the ANR, the United States Environmental Protection Agency (EPA), the United States Fish and Wildlife Service (USFWS), and Middlebury College, found that frog malformity was widespread in parts of Vermont.
The survey of 21 sites, from Alburg to West Haven, in the Lake Champlain Basin, found that 14 of those sites had malformity rates greater than 4%.
Roughly 8% of all collected frogs had some malformity.
Frogs were collected in both July and September, with an overall total of 2,538 northern leopard frogs (Rana pipiens) collected.
The types of malformations found were primarily missing or partial hind limbs and shortened or missing digits.
Laboratory experiments conducted on malformed frog samples from the 1997 sites indicated that the malformities were not caused by viruses, bacteria, or parasites.
Skeletal examinations ruled out trauma or disease.
A Frog Embryo Teratogensis Assay Xenopus (FETAX), a developmental toxicity test, was conducted on water and sediment samples from three of the sites where malformities were found.
Results from these FETAX assays (three from the affected sites and one control test) were positive at the affected sites, showing agreement with the incidence of malformations observed at those sites, and pointing to something in the water or sediment that is altering the development of the frogs.
Preliminary results from FETAX studies at one of these sites indicate that something in the water is inhibiting thyroid activity in the frogs.
In addition, "natural" estrogenic substances (plant materials) were found in the sediment samples.
These substances may be affecting thyroid activity in the frogs as well as their sensitivity to UV radiation and sensitivity to retinoids in the water.
The ANR continued its research in the Lake Champlain lowlands during the summer of 1998.
By mid-September 1998, ANR had collected over 2,200 northern leopard frog metamorphs (frogs that have developed from tadpoles into frogs within the current year).
Out of 12 sites, seven had malformity rates greater than 4%.
The average abnormality rate overall was 5.6%.
The Vermont Public Interest Research Group (VPIRG) conducted an outreach and education program on frogs in 1997 which encouraged citizens to survey their communities for malformed frogs and send the information into VPIRG.
Data from the summer of 1997 showed that 15 towns out of the 60 with returned surveys had found some abnormalities.
VPIRG's survey and outreach campaign continued during the summer of 1998.
This report is courtesy of the National Wildlife Federation.
For more information, visit NWF's Frog Initiative.
