International Information Programs Diversity 27 October 2003 Articles Barrett, David E. Does Culture Matter? Society, vol. 40, no. 1, November/December 2002, pp. 92-96.
According to the author, a professor of educational foundations at Clemson University, professional psychology and education have adopted a strong position on culture that embraces the idea that persons of different cultures differ in their fundamental psychological processes, including how they learn, how they experience and cope with anxiety, and how they respond to the social environment.
This view implies that teachers should consider using methodologies in the classroom depending on the background of the child, he says.
Citing research that shows there is no data supporting the theory that racial or ethnic variables influence which teaching behaviors are most or lease effective, Barrett maintains the current preoccupation with culture, and race in particular, that assumes different races or ethnic groups must be treated differently in clinical practice or in instructional settings, is unethical.
Briggs, Xavier de Souza, ed. Racially and Ethnically Diverse Urban Neighborhoods.
Cityscape: A Journal of Policy Development and Research, vol. 4, no. 2, 1998, pp. 1-269.
This issue is entirely devoted to the study of 14 stable, racially and ethnically diverse urban communities in the United States.
Brown, Sarita et al.
Latinos in Higher Education: Today and Tomorrow .
Change: The Magazine of Higher Learning , vol. 35, no. 2, March/April 2003, pp. 40-46.
Latinos have become the fastest growing ethnic group in the United States -- and a force higher education must address, say the authors, who believe that advocating for Latino achievement in higher education is critical for their success.
Many Latinos in higher education are first-generation college students, with less income and education than their peers.
The authors examine some of the challenges facing Latinos, as well as a number of existing programs designed to assist students.
In conclusion, they present strategies for addressing the needs of Latino students -- including getting the word out on how to prepare for and pay for college.
(Note that in this article the words Hispanic and Latino are used interchangeably.)
Bruffee, Kenneth A. Taking the Common Ground: Beyond Cultural Identity.
Change: The Magazine of Higher Learning , vol. 34, no. 1, January/February 2002, pp. 10-17.
Our institutions today are permeated by "others," says Bruffee.
"Even colleges in small towns are surrounded by communities of Vietnamese, Koreans, African-Americans or Hispanics that maintain -- at least tacitly -- their cultural distinctiveness.
Similarly, most college students, professors, administrators, and staff are immigrants, naturalized citizens or the children or grandchildren of immigrants."
Noting that for the past 30 years multicultural liberal education has acknowledged cultural identity by supporting group-specific living or clubbing arrangements, he argues that our survival now depends less on distinguishing "us" from "them" as on discovering and cultivating greater awareness of our "common ground" -- the common interests of human society as a whole.
Camarota, Steven A. Immigrants in the United States -- 2000: A Snapshot of American's Foreign Born Population.
Spectrum, vol. 74, no. 2, Spring 2001, pp. 1-5.
Analysis of the Census Bureau's March 2000 Current Population Survey shows that 28.4 million immigrants now live in the United States, the largest number ever recorded in the nation's history, and a 43 percent increase since 1990.
Immigrants now account for more than one in ten U.S. residents, the highest percentage in 70 years, says the author.
After briefly surveying the impact of these numbers on U.S. society, Camarota concludes that the large number of immigrants now living in the United States represents an enormous challenge -- and immigration's impact will continue to grow if current trends in immigration are allowed to continue.
Choice Magazine.
Recent 
Choice, vol. 40, no. 6, February 2003.
Conte, Christopher.
Diversity in Action: The First Hmong Senator.
State Legislatures, vol. 28, no. 7, July/August 2002, pp. 44-47.
Mee Moua, who was born in Laos and raised for several years in refugee camps in Thailand before moving to the United States, spent her early years steeped in her native Hmong culture.
In January 2002, Moua was elected to the Minnesota Senate, joining the nearly 100 state lawmakers born outside the United States, in places as diverse as Nigeria, Pakistan and Korea.
Conte discusses Moua's path to the Senate, and the unique perspective she brings to the office, which allows her to "understand and embrace differences among constituents while helping diverse groups see what they have in common" -- valuable skills that help her serve her ethnically diverse district.
Daniels, Cora.
The Most Powerful Black Executives in America.
Fortune, vol. 146, no. 2, July 22, 2002, pp. 60-80.
In ranking the 50 most powerful black executives in America, Forbes looked not only for executives who control huge revenues and employees, but also for people who are wielding power and putting it to active use.
The author notes that the list is a testament to the fact that black men -- and some women -- in corner offices, now control a whole lot of wealth and resources.
Since 1999, three black men have ascended to become CEOs of Fortune 500 companies, and the man ranked number 1 on the list, Merrill Lynch President Stanley ONeal, will probably join them soon.
Some candidates were reluctant to be included on the list, fearing the attention would cause more harm than good to careers so carefully built -- and all of them look forward to the day when a list of top black executives will seem as ridiculous as a list of the top white men in business.
Daniels, Roger.
Asian American History's Overdue Emergence.
The Chronicle of Higher Education, December 7, 2001.
Diversity in a New America.
Brookings Review, Winter 2002.
Series of articles on diversity including discussion on the 2000 census; Hispanics; Arab and Muslims; immigration; affirmative action, ethnic lobbies.
Engel, Margaret.
America's Babel of Ethnic Voices.
World 
As the United States has become more diverse, there has been an explosion of ethnic media -- with new magazines, radio stations, newspapers, TV shows and online services that primarily serve individual ethnic groups.
While these new outlets may help readers and viewers adapt to strange new environments far from their homelands, the author asks if they are "helping to fracture the larger community because the news and views of their one population remain unknown to others? Or is this a healthy flowering of new voices that will ultimately make connections that current barriers of race, income, and geography inhibit?" In the long run, she believes the end result will be a more, not less, informed society.
She notes that Mitchell Stevens, professor of journalism at New York University and author of "History of News," says that the United States grew up in an age when foreign language newspapers were the norm -- and our democracy seems to have survived well, because assimilation eventually occurs.
Frey, William H. Migration to the South Brings U.S. Blacks Full Circle.
Population Today, vol. 29, no. 4, May/June 2001, 2 pp. "Blacks ended the twentieth century by returning to the region that they spent most of the century leaving," reports Frey, of the University of Michigan's Population Studies Center.
Their return reinforces the South's distinct racial profile as a mostly white-black region.
Census 2000 numbers show that during the 1990s the black population of the South grew more than in the other three regions of the United States combined.
Blacks were not only attracted by the South's booming economy, low-density living, and warmer climate, but by historic roots in the region, the existence of a growing black middle class, and an improved racial climate, says Frey.
Frey, William H. Multilingual America.
American Demographics, vol. 24, no. 7, July/August 2002, pp. 20-23.
The number of Americans who speak a language other than English at home is on the rise, and this population is also on the move, with foreign-language speakers concentrated in ten states, mostly in the West and Southwestern United States, says Frey.
Although small, this population is beginning to reach a critical mass in many communities.
According to Frey, "If the United States is to continue to live up to its reputation as a melting pot, this influx of foreign language speakers will require special efforts on the parts of schools, local organizations and grassroots groups to enable these residents to become fully integrated members of their communities.
Frey, William H.; Hicks, Louis; Soper, John C. Taking the Measure of America: Special Report.
The World 
The 2000 Census and other surveys reveal an America more populous, more educated, healthier, and wealthier than ever before and yet still divided by race, nationality, and economic status, say the editors.
In this special report three experts examine the possible economic and political impact of the census findings.
William Frey looks at the migration of middle-class white and African Americans to new areas of the country and the impact of these demographic movements on U.S. politics.
Louis Hicks examines how wisely the United States might use its world dominance in the next century, and John Soper discusses what he believes are the four key issues facing America in the next decade: economic growth, government entitlements, immigration, and education.
Frey, William H. US Census Shows Different Paths for Domestic and Foreign Born Migrants.
Population Today, August/September 2002, pp. 1, 4-5.
Gagnon, Gregory.
Bibliographic Essay: American Indian Studies: Notable Publications 1990-2001.
Choice Magazine, September 2002, pp. 47-57.
Garcia, Susan Vega.
Bibliographic Essay: Latino Reference Resources.
Choice Magazine, November 2002, pp. 399-412.
Includes cites for approximately 100 books and lists of journals and web sites.
Gordon, Dianna.
Legislative Melting Pot.
State Legislatures, July-August 2002, pp. 48-49.
Hervey, Norma.
Newcomers to the United States: Immigrants of the 20th and 21st Centuries.
Choice Magazine, Ocotber 2003, pp. 263-275.
Appropriate for a nation of immigrants, this essay offers a quick survey of early immigration history, then moves on to today's immigrants from Asia, Africa and the Americas, who still confront the ancient religious and ethnic challenges posed by nativism.
The scores of texts reviewed cover acculturation versus ethnic identification in segregated enclaves; upward mobility and personal economic security versus the passive acceptance of first generation immigrants; and unionization and labor movement patterns of ethnic groups in occupational solidarity.
Other subjects include the internal cohesion and integrity of the immigrant community provided by family life and religious tradition, bilingualism, and misperceptions about the contributions and expenses of immigration.
Hong, Terry.
Through the Looking Glass.
American Theatre, vol. 20, no. 1, January 2003, pp. 73-85.
On October 9, 2002, an unprecedented event took place -- nine of New York's most prominent Asian theatre professionals met for a symposium entitled "I Am Going To Like it Here: Asian Americans in New York Theatre."
In this dialogue with Terry Hong, the panelists, who span a wide range of situations, reflect on the opportunity of Asian Americans to constantly play challenging roles and to "tell their own stories, in their own voices, for their own audiences."
The panelists were: Ping Chong, founder and director of his own theatre company; David Henry Hwang, Tony-winning director and playwright; Mia Katigbak, director of the National Asian American Theatre Company; Chiori Miyagawa, director of CROSSING JAMAICA AVENUE; John Nakagawa, producer of contemporary programming at the Lincoln Center; Ron Nakahara, artistic associate at Pan Asian Repertory Theatre; Diane Paulus, co-founder of Project 400; Ralph Pena, artistic director of May-Yi Theatre Company; and Welly Yang, founder and artistic director of Second Generation.
Jost, Kenneth.
Census 2000.
The CQ Researcher, May 1, 1998, pp. 385-408.
Kent, Mary M. and Mark Mather.
Section on Immigration from Population Reference Bureau's Population Bulletin, "What Drives U.S. Population Growth?" , vol. 57, no. 4, December 2002.
[PDF]
Kraut, Alan M. Migration at the Movies: A Sequel.
The Immigration 
"Reflections on the use of movies in courses in immigration and ethnic history."
Martin, Philip and Midgley, Elizabeth.
Number of Foreign-Born Reaches All-Time High in U.S. Population Reference Bureau, June 2003.
This article is excerpted from PRB's Population Bulletin, "Immigration: Shaping and Reshaping America.", vol. 58, no. 2, June 2003.
[PDF]
Mellow, Gail O. et. al.
The Face of the Future: Engaging in Diversity at LaGuardia Community College.
Change: The Magazine of Higher Learning, vol. 35, no. 2, March/April 2003, pp. 10-17.
The profile of the typical undergraduate college student is changing rapidly in the United States.
Today, 30 percent are minorities, 40 percent are part-time students, 40 percent are over the age of 24, 80 percent commute to school, 27 percent are parents, and 43 percent attend community colleges.
This transformation reflects a broader process of social change, as U.S. society becomes increasingly complex and diverse.
LaGuardia Community College, which resides at the center of New York City's immigrant portal, has developed a student body that is astoundingly complex, according to the authors.
"Walking the halls of LaGuardia is an experience of being immersed in a riot of cultures, colors, and languages -- a swirl that mixes traditional heritage with the best of contemporary music and style," they write.
Here they profile LaGuardia, and how it is meeting the challenges of its diversity with innovations that create community and stimulate faculty introspection.
Meyerson, Harold.
The Rising Latino Tide.
The American Prospect, Vol. 13, No. 21, November 18, 2002, pp. 22-25.
The November elections resulted in 25 Hispanics winning seats in the U.S. House of Representatives, setting a high standard for the future of Latinos in U.S. politics.
A new generation, younger and more politically savvy, is paving the way for more changes ahead.
Canvassing Hispanic voters before the election, pollsters found that Latinos were just as concerned as their white neighbors about the hot-button issues of education and the economy.
This change in attitude may eventually affect previously strong white Republican- or Democrat-controlled states, such as Florida, Texas and California.
Nash, Phil Tajitsu.
Reaching Out to Asian Americans and Latinos.
Campaigns 
The author writes that the November 5th elections showed that reaching out to ethnic voters can make a big difference to political candidates.
When reaching out to non-native language speakers, campaigns must consider how to accomplish this and still be respectful, inviting, and educational.
Research shows that not enough campaigns translate their materials into other languages, they do a poor job of translating material, and they fail to translate the material that would educate their target audiences for long-term support.
Tajitsu concludes by saying that 40 percent of foreign-born Americans become citizens, and that the other 60 percent should be considered a long-term asset to those candidates who reach out to them in a thoughtful and deferential way.
Ponnuru, Ramesh.
Tell It! National Review, Vol. 55, No. 2, February 10, 2003, pp. 17-19.
Senior editor Ponnuru discusses a Republican outreach program of radio ads directed toward African-American voters that two conservative activists organized in 2001 and 2002.
This was a new tactic, he says, for dealing with one of the party's longstanding problems: its poor showing among African-American and Hispanic voters.
The spots covered the full range of the Republican platform, not just "minority issues."
It had more success than anything else the party tried, but most Republicans are unaware of this success, Ponnuru adds.
While they didn't increase the percentage of African-Americans and Hispanics who identified themselves as Republicans, they did, however, marginally increase the percentage who voted for Republicans, and they kept a number of potential Democratic voters from casting ballots at all.
Prewitt, Kenneth.
Democracy, Diversity, and Democracy -- The 2000 Census Story Brookings Review, vol. 20, no. 1, Winter 2002, pp. 1-5.
The author documents the unprecedented diversity of the United States, based on the results of the 2000 Census.
Foreign-born residents now comprise ten percent of the U.S. population.
In 1900, nearly 9 out of 10 immigrants were European.
As late as 1960, the figure was three in four.
But today, more than half are from Latin America and more than a quarter from Asia.
Rauch, Jonathan.
Diversity in a New America.
Brookings Review, vol. 20, no. 1, Winter 2002, pp. 4-5.
Many innocent Muslims, American and foreign, died in the September 11 attacks on the World Trade Center in New York.
More than 50 countries lost citizens.
The United States is arguably the most diverse society in the world, says Rauch, and its diversity is increasing so quickly Americans can no longer be sure what is meant by diversity.
Although many countries have diverse populations, Rauch emphasizes that American society is distinguished by the fact that it views its vast diversity not as a problem to be solved, but as something to be embraced for the cultural and economic benefits it brings.
Note that this entire issue of the Brookings Review explores how diversity is changing the United States, and what this means for policy.
In separate articles, scholars explore topics such as diversity in America, Hispanic America, Arab and Muslim America, and Religion in America.
Robinson, Linda.
Hispanics Don't Exist.
U.S. News and World Report, May 11, 1998, pp. 26-32.
This article provides a guide to the nation's 17 major Latino subcultures.
Rodriguez, Gregory.
Mongrel America.
Atlantic Monthly, vol. 291, no. 1, January/February 2003, pp. 95-97.
By 2100 37% of African Americans will claim mixed ancestry as will 40% of Asian Americans; and more than twice as many Latinos (the largest minority group in the nation) will claim mixed ancestry than the number claiming single ancestry.
With the rising rates of intermarriage in the United States, what will race really mean in the future? That is the question posed by Rodriguez in this article, one of a series of 15 essays exploring the real state of the union (see AA03037).
He explores racial attitudes over the last century and concludes that powerful underlying cultural forces are forging a new racial identity.
No longer forced to choose only one race on census forms, Americans are now free to identify themselves as mestizos - thereby endowing racial issues with new complexity and nuance.
Schier, Steven.
From Melting Pot To Centrifuge - Immigrants And American Politics Brookings Review, vol. 20, no. 1, Winter 2002, pp. 16-19 Schier notes that the foreign-born population of the United States is at a peak, but that it differs demographically and politically from that of a century ago.
Today's immigrants are mostly from Latin America and Asia, and that they are not as integrated into the political system as their predecessors because of a variety of factors, including the weakening of political parties.
Noting that few immigrants vote, he calls for reforms to encourage immigrants to vote once they become citizens, including national voter registration and changes to make the voting process easier.
Suarez-Orozco.
Globalization, Immigration, and Education: The Research Agenda.
Harvard Educational Review, Fall 2001, pp. 345-365.
(lead article in HER Special Issue, Immigration and Education)
Tarmann, Allison.
International Adoption Rate in U.S. Doubled in the 1990s.
Population Reference Bureau, December 2002.
This article is excerpted from PRB's Population Bulletin, "What Drives U.S. Population Growth?", vol. 57, no. 4, December 2002.
[PDF]
Ward, Geoffrey C. Mongrel Nation: Time and Again, America has Demonstrated a Resilience that is Rooted in the Remarkable Diversity of Her People.
Smithsonian, vol. 32, no. 8, November 2001, pp. 18-19.
Wellner, Alison Stein.
Capitalist Dreams.
American Demographics, vol. 24, no. 3, March 2002, pp. 36-41.
According to Deirdre Coyle, senior vice president of a Boston think-tank that studies inner-city businesses, there is a more receptive market and environment for minority entrepreneurships today -- partly because minority communities themselves have come to understand the power of entrepreneurship, and are supporting it in their communities.
Noting that, thanks to innovative public and private sector programs, minority entrepreneurship is thriving -- she discusses why these new minority capitalists are particularly well positioned to withstand the current economic downturn.
__________________________________________________________________
This site is produced and maintained by the U.S. Department of State's Bureau of International Information Programs (usinfo.state.gov).
Links to other Internet sites should not be construed as an endorsement of the views contained therein.
Back To Top blue rule IIP Home | Index to This Site | Webmaster | Search This Site | Archives | U.S. Department of State
Sorry, you need a JavaScript capable browser to get the best from this page
