FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE: SEPTEMBER 16, 1997 CONTACT MARK WOOLLEY: (516) 893-9010 SEAN CASSIDY: (202) 225-6634 PRESS RELEASE HOUSE PASSES LAZIO BILL PROTECTING AMERICA'S SENIORS FROM REVERSE MORTGAGE SCAMS WASHINGTON, D.C.
-- The U.S. House of Representatives today passed legislation authored by Congressman Rick Lazio (R-Long Island), Chairman of the House Subcommittee on Housing and Community Opportunity, that will help weed out reverse mortgage providers who are preying upon America's senior homeowners.
Chairman Lazio's bill -- The Housing Programs Extension Act of 1997 -- includes legislative language authorizing the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) to issue regulations protecting senior homeowners from being charged excessive or unnecessary fees in the reverse mortgage application process.
The legislative language initially was part of the managers amendment to Lazio's sweeping housing reform bill, H.R. 2 -- The Housing Opportunity and Responsibility Act of 1997 -- which passed the House in May by a vote of 293 to 132.
"This bill will provide security and peace of mind for senior citizens who want a reverse mortgage, and will help prevent seniors from being scammed by third-party companies," said Lazio, who managed the bill on the House Floor.
"We must no longer tolerate white-collar muggings of America's seniors who want to stay in their homes and in the neighborhoods they care about, and this bill does that."
Chairman Lazio introduced his bill after receiving reports that seniors applying for reverse mortgages were being charged up to 10% of the total loan amount for "estate-planning services" from third-party service providers.
In some cases, this amounted to as much as $10,000 for simply driving homeowners to the bank and sitting with applicants during discussions with the lender.
Lazio initially expressed his outrage concerning these charges in a letter to HUD Secretary Andrew Cuomo and a subsequent HUD investigation confirmed these charges.
"By law, participants in the program are required to attend counseling sessions provided by HUD at no cost," Lazio said.
"I do not accept as legitimate costs for services, fees in excess of 8% of the mortgage amount for what may amount to little more than guiding seniors through these counseling discussions.
The very idea of scamming $10,000 from seniors who are considering a reverse mortgage to offset their financial needs is an abomination."
Reverse mortgages allow seniors aged 62 and more who are "house-rich" but "cash-poor" to borrow against the equity in their homes to help pay for living and medical expenses or crucial home repairs.
For many, the reverse mortgage program provides seniors with the opportunity to remain in their own neighborhoods, close to family and friends, instead of being forced to live in nursing homes.
Last year, Chairman Lazio was able to reauthorize the Federal Housing Administration's reverse mortgage program that allows lenders to offer Home Equity Conversion Mortgages (HECM) until the year 2000, expand the number of available reverse mortgages from 25,000 to 50,000, and make one- to four-family residences eligible.
The program has helped make the American dream of homeownership a continued reality for more than 20,000 eligible seniors.
To illustrate how well the HECM program works, Chairman Lazio met in 1995 with sisters Bessie and Estelle Gwynn of Amityville Long Island who were approved for a HECM loan.
Utilizing the reverse mortgage program, the Gwynns were able to make substantive improvements to their home.
Chairman Lazio was commended by the American Associations of Retired Persons for "moving so promptly to put a stop to the exploitive behavior of those who would prey upon our vulnerable elderly," and by the National Association of Mortgage Brokers for "taking steps to protect senior citizens from excessive and unnecessary costs in obtaining reverse mortgages."
The Housing Programs Extension Act of 1997 also extends certain non-controversial public and assisted housing reform measures for 12 months.
The reforms were initially extended for six months but were extended for a full year at the request of House Banking Committee members.
"The reverse mortgage program in the simplest of terms ensures the quality of life for older Americans who are usually on fixed incomes," Lazio said.
"I commend my colleagues for passing legislation that will keep such a valuable tool for our nation's most vulnerable population from being jeopardized by those who are working against the spirit of the program."
NOTE -- Additional information about the reverse mortgage program may be obtained by contacting the following organizations:
* The National Center for Home Equity Conversion -- (612) 953-4474
* The American Associations of Retired Persons -- (202) 434-2277
* The National Association of Mortgage Brokers -- (703) 610-9009
* Wendover Funding -- (910) 668-7000
* Fannie Mae -- (202) 752-7000
###
