FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE: APRIL 10, 1997 CONTACT MARK WOOLLEY: (516) 893-9010 SEAN CASSIDY: (202) 225-6634 PRESS RELEASE LAZIO INTRODUCES NEW BILL PROTECTING SENIORS FROM REVERSE MORTGAGE SCAMS WASHINGTON, D.C.
-- Housing Chairman Rick Lazio (R-Long Island) today introduced a bill that will help weed out reverse mortgage service providers who are preying on senior homeowners.
Lazio announced his legislation today at a Capitol Hill press conference with Senator Alfonse D'Amato (R-NY), Chairman of the Senate Banking, Housing and Urban Affairs Committee, who has introduced a similar bill in the Senate.
U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development Secretary Andrew Cuomo attended today's press conference and endorsed Chairman Lazio's bill - The Senior Homeowner Reverse Mortgage Protection Act.
Lazio's initiative would reinforce HUD's existing authority to prevent seniors from being charged excessive fees for reverse mortgage information available from HUD.
"This legislation will help weed out these third-party companies that are preying upon our nation's seniors," Lazio said.
"We should be helping those who want to stay in their homes and in the neighborhoods they care about, while at the same time protecting and preserving such an important program for seniors.
Our seniors deserve no less."
Chairman Lazio introduced his bill after receiving reports that companies related to the reverse mortgage industry are allegedly charging seniors up to 10% of the mortgage amount, sometimes as much as $10,000, to provide them with information about reverse mortgages.
Lazio initially expressed his outrage concerning these charges in a letter to Secretary Cuomo last month.
"Our work together over the past few weeks is a shining example of what can be accomplished through such partnership when an issue of such critical importance confronts us," Lazio said.
"And make no mistake, a threat to the most vulnerable of Americans is indeed a threat to us all."
"We will not tolerate white-collar muggings of our parents and grandparents.
We will not allow elderly homeowners who've made mortgage payments for decades to be robbed of thousands of dollars in an instant by smooth-talking con artists," Secretary Cuomo said.
According to media reports, senior citizens were charged as much as 10% of the reverse mortgage loan's value to receive information on these loans from a brokerage house.
Recent media reports indicate that seniors were then encouraged to put the equity from their home into risky annuities.
"By law, participants in the program are required to attend counseling sessions, provided by HUD at no cost," Lazio said.
"We do not accept as legitimate costs for services, fees in excess of 8% of the mortgage amount for what may amount to little more than guiding seniors through these counseling discussions.
The very idea that seniors who were considering a reverse mortgage out of their desperate financial needs were then charged as much as $10,000 for *consulting' fees is repugnant."
Reverse mortgages allow seniors aged 62 and more who are house-rich but cash-poor to borrow against the equity in their homes to help pay for living and medical expenses or crucial home repairs.
Chairman Lazio was able to reauthorize the Federal Housing Administration's reverse mortgage program that allows lenders to offer Home Equity Conversion Mortgages (HECM) until the year 2000, expand the number of available reverse mortgages from 25,000 to 50,000, and make one- to four-family residences eligible.
To illustrate how well the HECM program works, Chairman Lazio met in 1995 with sisters Bessie and Estelle Gwynn of Amityville, Long Island who were approved for a HECM loan.
Utilizing the reverse mortgage program, the Gwynns were able to make substantive improvements to their home.
The seniors that participate in the reverse mortgage program often have nowhere else to turn for financial support.
"This program in the simplest terms ensures the quality of life for older Americans who have paid their dues and deserve peace and security in their retirement," Lazio said.
In addition to working with Secretary Cuomo, Chairman Lazio has been working with Senator D'Amato on legislation to weed out predators who are working against the spirit of the reverse mortgage program.
"Senator D'Amato's commitment to build this coalition of support for such an important program to seniors is indispensable," Lazio said.
"The days of ripping off seniors by charging them outrageous reverse mortgage fees are over.
Excessive reverse mortgage servicing fees are gouging low-income seniors, who are usually on fixed incomes.
I want to thank Representative Lazio and Secretary Cuomo for their leadership in this effort," Senator D'Amato said.
Chairman Lazio expects to bring his bill to the House Floor within the next several weeks.
The Lazio bill will either be attached to the more comprehensive public housing bill in the House, or will be considered under suspension of the House rules in the near future.
The bills introduced by Chairman Lazio and Senator D'Amato have received strong support from the reverse mortgage industry, including Wendover of North Carolina -- the nation's largest administrator of HUD-insured reverse mortgages.
The measures also are supported by the American Association of Retired Persons (AARP) and its thousands of members across the country.
Fannie Mae, a partner in the FHA reverse mortgage program, as well as a provider of their own reverse mortgage program -- Home Keeper -- supports the legislation.
"With the support of Secretary Cuomo, the legislation I have introduced today will help rid these despicable practices and maintain a valuable instrument of security for our nation's senior homeowners," Lazio said.
"I look forward to working with Senator D'Amato to make the American dream of homeownership a continued reality for thousands of seniors across America who otherwise would not have a home to call their own."
###
