[USEMAP:topnav.gif] _______________ submit search njda njda home [Agriculture Links...........]
Annual Report 1996 Division of Dairy and Commodity Regulation Dr. Dhun Patel, Director [transparent.gif]
The Division of Dairy and Commodity Regulation serves many facets of the agriculture industry.
One of its primary goals is to retain a healthy economic environment for a viable, competitive dairy industry where dairy farmers are assured a fair return for milk sold to processors and consumers are assured of adequate supplies of milk at the lowest possible prices.
The Jersey Fresh Quality Grading Program and the commodity inspection and grading programs are among those offered by the Division of Dairy and Commodity Regulation to help ensure a constant supply of high quality, properly labeled fruits, vegetables, eggs, poultry, fish and seafood products for consumers, in New Jersey and elsewhere.
Certificates issued through the inspection and grading program make it possible for Garden State farmers and agribusinesses to sell the inspected commodities in national and international markets.
In addition, the division provides services to New Jersey farmers, consumers and the food industry related to the production, storage, packing, marketing and sale of high quality agricultural products and works to protect these groups from unfair, illegal and improper trade practices.
DAIRY
New Jersey's dairy industry is an important segment of its agricultural economy, supplying almost one-fifth the fluid milk and dairy products used by over 7.5 million residents in New Jersey.
The industry includes dairy farmers, animal breeders, dairy cooperatives, milk handlers, processors, distributors and retail stores, all of which are served by the Division of Dairy and Commodity Regulation.
Milk Production and Consumption
New Jersey consumers purchased over 1.8 billion pounds of fluid milk and milk products during the year, with an estimated retail value of more than $1 billion.
Of this, the state's public schools used over 68 million pounds of milk worth nearly $21 million.
The state's 234 commercial and seven institutional dairy farms produced 298.4 million pounds of milk valued at $42 million.
In addition to milk sales, New Jersey dairy farmers earned additional income from sales of heifers, cull cows, calves, grain, hay and other items produced on dairy farms.
New Jersey dairy farmers are also actively engaged in the fast growing export of dairy breeding supplies such as embryo and semen.
Garden State Milk Quality Initiative
NJDA initiated a joint program with Rutgers Cooperative Extension and New Jersey Farm Bureau to help dairy farmers improve milk production and quality.
Thirty-five dairy farmers throughout the state participated in this, the first year of the program.
After bulk tank samples were collected and cultured to test for quality on participating farms, those results that suggested a health problem in the herd were followed up with samples from each cow.
Participating farmers were asked to pay half of the cost of the herd testing.
To begin the project, average somatic cell counts (SCC), indicators of milk quality and herd productivity, were taken for each herd since high SCC suggests less than optimum milk quality and herd productivity.
By the end of FY96, average SCC among herds in the program had dropped significantly.
Given the improved milk yield resulting from the lowered SCC and 1996 average milk prices, it was estimated that each participating farmer received an average return of $12,000 through the program this year.
Milk quality bonuses given by some cooperatives and processors raised that figure further.
This voluntary program is part of an integrated dairy farm management program which will include whole herd health along with crop, financial and manure management improvements.
Redefining Fluid Milk Products
This year, the state Department of Health (DOH) proposed re adoption of N.J.A.C. 8:21 concerning designated fluid milk products.
At the request of the State Board of Agriculture, NJDA provided comments to DOH requesting a revision of the definitions and product standards for milk so that skim and low-fat milk products would be required to contain at least 11.5 percent total solids.
This would allow more dry milk to be added to fluid milk, making it tastier and increasing consumption of milk to the benefit of the state's dairy farmers.
In addition, NJDA requested the New Jersey Milk Association (NJMA), which represents major processors, to ask its members for comments and support of the suggested change.
Results indicated that most NJMA members did not support the requested revisions.
By year's end, DOH had adopted N.J.A.C. 8:21 without the requested changes but indicated that the request would be considered in future revisions.
Fluid Milk on Commodities Exchanges
Two organizations, the Chicago Mercantile Exchange and the Coffee, Sugar and Cocoa Exchange began to offer fluid milk contracts on their commodity futures markets.
This could enable dairy farmers to lock in a good price for a tanker load of milk to be sold at some future date.
At least one cooperative in New Jersey, Dairylea, already offers this option.
National Dairy Policies Changing
The Federal Agricultural Improvement and Reform Act (FAIR), signed into law near the end of FY96, included several items that will impact national dairy policies in the future.
The Act authorized USDA Secretary Dan Glickman to form a Northeast Dairy Compact if there was a compelling public need.
Although FAIR language included only the New England states, it permitted six other Northeastern states, including New Jersey, to be part of the Compact if it were implemented in an adjoining state.
Since, in effect, this means that New Jersey can join the Compact only if New York does, the department informed Glickman of its support for the Compact so that, if New York does join, New Jersey's interest in membership will be a matter of record.
FAIR also called for merging the current 33 federal milk market orders into not less than 10 and not more than 14.
In this region, six of the larger cooperatives formed a work group and hosted meetings with several states and market order administrators concerning the possible merger of market orders 1, 2 and 4, including the New York and Pennsylvania counties that are not now in a market order.
Although it appeared that New Jersey dairy farmers would not be significantly affected by the market order mergers, NJDA submitted comments to USDA concerning the proposal.
Changes in national dairy policy tend to have a stronger impact in New Jersey than elsewhere since state dairy farmers do not produce the majority of the milk consumed in the state.
Moreover, the Garden State's dairy industry already faces higher production costs than does the industry in most other states.
By the end of the fiscal year, these changes in national dairy policy, together with higher feed prices, prompted the department to explore ways to develop both short- and long-term strategies to help New Jersey's dairy industry.
In the coming months, NJDA will work with Cook College and dairy leadership to create an action plan for the industry.
Dairy Licensing, Bonding and Enforcement
In keeping with the mandate to maintain competition among New Jersey milk marketers, the department licensed over 9,800 milk dealers, milk processing plants and retail stores and collected $372,119 in fees and penalties during FY96.
Among the services provided by the department to New Jersey's dairy industry were the licensing and bonding of milk dealers to assure payments to producers, the dissemination of information needed by the milk industry and the mediation of disputes within the industry.
Field investigators conducted inspections of 3,600 retail outlets to insure that they were licensed and adhering to the milk control laws and regulations, especially with regard to false or misleading advertisements.
Investigators also mediated disputes between stores and milk dealers, assisting in 328 cases of disputes or complaints.
Mediation and enforcement efforts by staff resulted in milk dealers recovering on an average $45,000 monthly from clients who had not paid their milk bills.
Data Collection and Information Dissemination
In order to assess activities in the marketplace and to provide information for program analysis, the department collects, processes and disseminates information on pertinent market data such as prices received by dairy farmers, milk production, milk sales and supermarket milk prices.
New Jersey's public schools are a major market for New Jersey-produced milk.
The department continues to administer the School Milk Purchase Law and assist New Jersey schools with the administration of their school milk contracts.
More than 500 school districts receive a monthly publication which provides milk prices to schools for reconciliation of school milk bills.
Many school districts took advantage of the telephone support that is available from the department to assist with the settlement of milk price disputes.
Dairy Organizations and Activities
The department provided administrative support for the Garden State Milk Council and the Dairy of Distinction Program.
NJDA employees helped judge dairy farms for selection as "Dairies of Distinction," assisted in preparation of the Council's publication, staffed the Council at dairy industry meetings, and served as guest speakers to educate school children on the state's dairy industry
In cooperation with the New Jersey Milk Industry Association, the department also participated in the annual Dairy Day celebration in June.
The event highlighted the variety of nutritious dairy products available to consumers and focused attention on New Jersey's dairy industry.
COMMODITY REGULATION
Jersey Fresh Quality Grading Program
The Jersey Fresh Quality Grading Program is a voluntary program designed to increase the sales of more than 70 fruits, vegetables, salad mixes, shell eggs and cut flowers.
After registering with the Quality Grading Program, growers are permitted to use the Jersey Fresh logo on their packages, indicating that the contents have been inspected and meet quality standards equal to or better than US No. 1.
Any use of the Jersey Fresh logo requires a license from the Quality Grading Program.
This inspection standard adds a quality assurance note to the overall Jersey Fresh marketing program that is welcomed by wholesale produce buyers and consumers who want high quality products uniformly sized and packed.
In addition, the Jersey Fresh Quality Grading Program helps Garden State growers stand out in an increasingly competitive regional and national marketplace.
Commodity Inspection and Grading
With food safety and quality uppermost in consumers' minds, the commodity inspection and grading service offered by the department is particularly important.
Most inspection services provided by the department are paid for by those for whom the inspections are done.
In a time of shrinking state resources, this kind of self-sustaining program is particularly important.
In FY96, the program collected over $1.4 million in fees for services rendered.
Inspections performed for the poultry industry certified 1,134,029 cases of shell eggs as Grade A while 21,653,339 pounds of turkey and 9,641,700 pounds of chicken also met specified standards.
Another 522,656,324 pounds of liquid or frozen egg products and 9,218,099 pounds of dried egg product were processed under departmental inspection supervision.
The division's inspection and grading unit also worked with growers, shippers, receivers and processors of fresh produce marketed through inter- or intrastate commerce.
Inspections were made at shipping point on 11,530,000 pounds of produce including most fruits and vegetables grown commercially in New Jersey, to insure that the products met specific standards.
Terminal market inspections were performed on 31,851,884 pounds of fresh fruits and vegetables received from other growing areas.
Inspections and certifications at two packing houses enabled growers to ship 4,380,079 pounds of blueberries to Canada, a $3.32 million addition to New Jersey's agricultural economy.
Tomato processing facilities also contracted with NJDA for grading of 18,338 tons of tomatoes to insure that they met grower-processor contract specifications.
Even the youngest consumers in the state benefitted from NJDA's inspection efforts as inspectors certified over 1.8 million pounds of diced chicken under USDA specifications for use in the federal school lunch program.
Through the fish and fisheries products inspection program, begun in 1986 and operated in cooperation with the United States Department of Commerce, the department provides a broad range of inspection and grading services to New Jersey's commercial fishing industry, including plant sanitation surveys, product quality grading and export certification.
During FY96, almost 11.3 million pounds of fresh, frozen and canned fish were certified and inspected at the wholesale level.
Commodity Licensing and Bonding
Under the commodity licensing and bonding program, the department offers economic protection for New Jersey farmers who sell perishable agricultural commodities or hay, grain and straw to dealers and brokers on credit basis.
Licenses were issued to 157 produce dealers, 19 hay, grain and straw dealers, 19 shell egg dealers and one live poultry dealer.
Bonds totaling $4,734,000 were received and posted by the division.
More than $26,000 worth of growers' claims against buyers for payment for product delivered were settled.
As a result of a resolution passed at the 1994 State Agricultural Convention proposing changes in the minimum and maximum bonding requirements for perishable agricultural commodities, the department established a committee to evaluate the proposal and make recommendations concerning its implementation.
The committee's primary objective was to insure that New Jersey's growers are protected.
Committee members included farmers, brokers, buyers and representatives of the insurance industry.
The work of the committee continued through FY96.
Agricultural Chemistry
It is estimated that 422,633 tons of animal feed, over 205,773 tons of fertilizers and almost 175,000 tons of liming material were sold in New Jersey last year.
Through random inspection, sampling and laboratory analysis of these products, coupled with enforcement actions against producers of mislabeled or substandard products, the department protects crop yields and promotes animal growth.
This year, 856 feed, fertilizer and lime manufacturers and distributors registered with the division.
Field inspections covered 2,261 lots of feeds, fertilizers and liming materials to determine compliance with labeled guarantees.
Of the 200 feed samples and 202 fertilizer samples collected for laboratory analysis, just over three percent of the feed samples and seven percent of the fertilizer samples failed to meet the minimum nutrient levels stated on their labels.
Of the 23 liming materials sampled, 10 percent failed to meet the nutrient or particle size standards with which they were labeled.
Label or registration violations found during field inspections resulted in those items being removed from sale.
Through the agricultural chemistry program, a total of $64,950 in registration fees and $97,614 in tonnage inspection fees were collected.
In addition, penalties totaling $12,246 were assessed for fertilizer content violations, of which just over $6,820 was refunded to farmers.
Remaining penalty dollars were transmitted to the State Treasury.
[transparent.gif] nj state graphic
