[USEMAP:topnav.gif] _______________ submit search njda njda home [Agriculture Links...........]
Annual Report 1997 [transparent.gif]
Dairy and Commodity Regulation Dr. Dhun Patel, Director
* helps retain a healthy economic environment for a viable, competitive dairy industry where consumers are assured of adequate supplies of milk at reasonable prices; * provides the Jersey Fresh Quality Grading Program and the commodity inspection and grading programs to insure a constant supply of high quality, properly labeled fruits, vegetables, eggs, poultry, fish and seafood products for consumers in New Jersey and elsewhere; * issues certificates through the inspection and grading programs for Garden State farmers and agribusinesses to sell inspected commodities in national and international markets; * provides services to New Jersey farmers, consumers and the food industry related to the production, storage, packing, marketing and sale of high quality agricultural products; and * works to protect against unfair, illegal and improper trade practices.
THE DAIRY INDUSTRY
New Jersey's dairy industry is an important segment of its agricultural economy, supplying almost one-fifth of the fluid milk and dairy products used by the state's eight million consumers.
During the year, New Jersey consumers purchased over 1.8 billion pounds of fluid milk and milk products worth an estimated $1 billion.
Of this amount, 68 million pounds of milk worth nearly $21 million was used by the state's public schools.
The industry includes dairy farmers, animal breeders, dairy cooperatives, milk handlers, processors, distributors and retail stores, all of which are served by the department.
The state's 213 commercial and seven institutional dairy farms produced just over 289 million pounds of milk valued at $43 million.
New Jersey dairy farmers also produced heifers, cull cows, calves, grain, hay and other agricultural items, including breeding supplies such as calf embryos and semen.
Maintaining the Viability of Dairy Farms in the Garden State
The last decade has been an era of extreme economic distress for the dairy industry, nationwide and in New Jersey.
Steadily rising production costs, wildly fluctuating minimum prices set for raw milk at the federal level, and increasing pressures from suburbanization have caused the number of dairy farms here in the Garden State to drop by 44 percent since 1987.
The department has initiated a variety of projects aimed at improving both the short- and long-term viability of this important segment of the agriculture industry.
Whole herd health and management programs, including Johne's disease and mastitis control; financial management training; nutrient and crop management; and waste management improvements are all part of a comprehensive effort on behalf of the state's dairy farmers.
This effort is led by the Dairy Task Force, created in FY97 by NJDA, in cooperation with Cook College, New Jersey Farm Bureau and the Garden State Milk Council.
Approximately 20 farmers, agricultural agents and industry representatives are part of the task force.
In FY97 the department authorized staff support and a $40,000 agriculture business incentive grant to the New Jersey Farm Bureau for the Dairy Self-Help Program for milk producers.
The effort is a continuation of the Garden State Milk Quality Initiative begun in 1995 as a joint effort with Rutgers Cooperative Extension to help dairy farmers improve milk production and quality.
Thirty-five dairy farmers throughout the state participated in the first year of the voluntary program.
In FY96, after bulk tank samples were collected and cultured to test for quality on participating farms, those results that suggested a health problem in the herd were followed up with samples from each cow.
Average somatic cell counts (SCC), indicators of milk quality and herd productivity, were taken for each herd since high SCC suggests less than optimum milk quality and herd productivity.
By the beginning of FY97, average SCC among herds in the program had dropped significantly.
Given the improved milk yield resulting from the lowered SCC and 1996 average milk prices, it was estimated that each participating farmer received an average return of $12,000 through the program this year.
Milk quality bonuses given by some cooperatives and processors raised that figure further.
Dairy Licensing, Bonding and Enforcement
In keeping with the mandate to maintain competition among New Jersey milk marketers, the department licensed 9,469 milk dealers, milk processing plants and retail stores.
The department collected $363,025 in fees and penalties during FY97.
Penalties collected from stores and dealers for a variety of infractions increased by $4,897 over the total for FY96.
Among the services provided by the department to New Jersey's dairy industry were the licensing and bonding of milk dealers to assure payments to producers, the dissemination of information needed by the milk industry and the mediation of disputes within the milk processing and distribution industry.
Field investigators conducted inspections of 2,900 retail outlets to insure that they were licensed and adhering to the milk control laws and regulations, especially with regard to false or misleading advertisements.
Investigators also mediated 139 disputes between stores and milk dealers.
Mediation and enforcement helped milk dealers recover an average of $21,000 monthly from stores which had not paid their milk bills.
Data Collection and Information Dissemination
In order to assess activities in the marketplace and to provide information for program and performance analysis, the department collects, processes and disseminates information on prices received by dairy farmers, milk production, milk sales, supermarket milk prices and other pertinent market data.
Dairy Organizations and Activities
The department continued to provide administrative support for the Garden State Milk Council and the Dairy of Distinction Program.
Department employees helped assess candidates for the Dairy of Distinction awards, assisted in preparation of the Council's publication, staffed the Council at dairy industry meetings, and served as guest speakers at schools around the state to acquaint New Jersey youngsters with the state's dairy industry.
The International Association of Milk Control Agencies held its 60th Annual Convention in Atlantic City this summer.
Over 170 participants representing various states as well as Canada, Mexico, New Zealand, France and the Virgin Islands enjoyed useful, informative business sessions and took a closer look at the state's agricultural diversity during tours of dairy farms, milk processing plants, a fruit packing plant and orchard, the M
Dairy of Distinction Honors Awarded
Seven New Jersey dairy farmers received the Dairy of Distinction award in October.
The honor is awarded annually to those dairy operations that are deemed the best representatives of the industry by virtue of general farm maintenance, farm efficiency, creativity, dedication and achievement in a rapidly changing marketplace.
Honorees included Larry 
&
COMMODITY REGULATION
Through NJDA's inspection and grading programs, growers obtain the certificates they need to sell produce and plants to other states and nations.
The Jersey Fresh Quality Grading Program and the commodity inspection and grading programs are among those offered by the Division of Dairy and Commodity Regulation to help insure a constant supply of high quality, properly labeled fruits, vegetables, eggs, poultry, red meat, fish and seafood products for consumers, in New Jersey, throughout the nation and around the world.
Jersey Fresh Quality Grading Program
The Jersey Fresh Quality Grading Program is a voluntary program designed to increase the sales of New Jersey's more than 70 agricultural products, including fruits, vegetables, salad mixes, fresh herbs, shell eggs and cut flowers.
After registering with the Quality Grading Program, growers are permitted to use the Jersey Fresh logo on their packages, indicating that the contents have been inspected and meet quality standards equal to or better than U.S. No. 1.
The use of the Jersey Fresh logo in any manner requires a license from the Quality Grading Program.
This inspection standard adds a quality assurance note to the overall Jersey Fresh marketing program that is welcomed by wholesale produce buyers and consumers who want high quality products uniformly sized and packed.
In addition, the Jersey Fresh Quality Grading Program helps Garden State growers stand out in an increasingly competitive regional and national marketplace.
The economic benefits of joining the program were reflected in the record 169 growers who enrolled in the program in FY97.
This year more than 79.7 million pounds of product were packed under the Quality Grading Program.
The program was further enhanced by a pilot project that made twist ties bearing the Jersey Fresh logo available to licensees at a reduced cost.
For the first time since the inception of the Jersey Fresh program in 1983, two dairies, Emmons Dairy in Pemberton, Burlington County, and Needmore Farm in Wantage, Sussex County, received department approval for a trial marketing of their milk products under the Jersey Fresh logo.
During this pilot marketing project, NJDA's proposed standards for Jersey Fresh milk, ice cream and ice milk will be reviewed by the New Jersey Milk Association and ultimately published in the New Jersey Register following State Board approval of the draft regulations.
The experiences of the two dairies will be helpful to the department in preparing the final standards.
Commodity Inspection and Grading
With food safety and quality uppermost in consumers' minds, the commodity inspection and grading service offered by the department is particularly important.
Most inspection services provided by the department are paid for by those for whom the grading and inspections are done.
In a time of shrinking state resources, this kind of self-sustaining program is particularly important.
In FY97, the program collected over $1.3 million in fees for services rendered.
Inspections performed for the poultry industry certified 1,188,522 cases of shell eggs as Grade A while 19,175,984 pounds of turkey and 5,929,376 pounds of chicken also met specified standards.
Over 574.5 million pounds of liquid or frozen egg products and more than 9.6 million pounds of dried egg product were processed under departmental inspection supervision.
The division's inspection and grading unit also worked with growers, shippers, receivers and processors of fresh produce marketed through inter- or intrastate commerce.
Inspections were made at shipping point on 4,866,724 pounds of produce, including most fruits and vegetables grown commercially in New Jersey, to insure that it met specific standards.
Terminal market inspections were also performed on 87,611,531 pounds of fresh fruits and vegetables received from other growing areas.
Inspections and certifications at two packing sheds enabled growers to ship over three million pounds of blueberries to Canada, a $3.07 million addition to New Jersey's agricultural economy.
Tomato processing facilities also contracted with the department for grading of nearly 33 million pounds of tomatoes to insure that they met grower-processor contract specifications
.
Even the youngest consumers in the state benefitted from the department's inspection efforts as inspectors at several plants certified over 2.1 million pounds of diced chicken under USDA specifications for use in the federal school lunch program.
The fish and fisheries products inspection program, begun in 1986 and operated in cooperation with the United States Department of Commerce, enables the department to provide a broad range of inspection and grading services to New Jersey's commercial fishing industry, including plant sanitation surveys, product quality grading and export certification.
During FY97, 14,165,260 million pounds of fresh, frozen and canned fish were certified and inspected at the wholesale level.
In response to complaints from industry on the misbranding of produce, department representatives worked with the New Jersey Office of Consumer Protection and the federal Perishable Agricultural Commodities Act staff to establish a procedure that will be followed in the investigation and prosecution of those who violate state and/or federal misbranding laws.
Commodity Licensing and Bonding
Under the commodity licensing and bonding program, the department offers economic protection for New Jersey farmers who sell perishable agricultural commodities or hay, grain and straw to dealers and brokers on credit basis.
Licenses were issued to 141 produce dealers, 23 hay, grain and straw dealers, eight shell egg dealers and one live poultry dealer.
Bonds totaling $4,718,250 were received and posted by the division.
More than $526,000 worth of growers' claims against buyers for payment for product delivered were settled.
Agricultural Chemistry
It is estimated that 438,513 tons of animal feed, over 198,780 tons of fertilizers and 156,079 tons of liming material were sold in New Jersey last year.
Through inspection, sampling and laboratory analysis of these products, coupled with enforcement actions against producers of mislabeled or substandard products, the department protects crop yields and promotes animal growth.
This year, 872 feed, fertilizer and lime manufacturers and distributors registered with the division.
Field inspections covered 1,900 lots of feeds, fertilizers and liming materials to determine compliance with labeled guarantees.
Of the 172 feed samples and 261 fertilizer samples collected for laboratory analysis, just over two percent of the feed samples and eight percent of the fertilizer samples failed to meet the minimum nutrient levels stated on their labels.
Of the 24 liming materials sampled, only two failed to meet the nutrient or particle size standards with which they were labeled.
Label or registration violations found during field inspections resulted in those items being removed from sale.
Through the agricultural chemistry program, a total of $71,000 in registration fees and $98,239 in tonnage inspection fees was collected.
In addition, penalties totaling $9,745 were assessed for fertilizer content violations, of which $4,644 was refunded to farmers.
Remaining penalty dollars were transmitted to the State Treasury.
[transparent.gif]
