[USEMAP:topnav.gif] _______________ submit search njda njda home [Agriculture Links...........]
Report to the State Board of Agriculture by Arthur R. Brown, Jr., Secretary September 1997 [transparent.gif]
NEW JERSEY FARM WINS FEDERAL FARMLAND PROTECTION GRANT
The State Agriculture Development Committee will receive a USDA grant of $200,000 to be used towards the purchase of development easements on the 564-acre River Walk Farm in Pohatcong, Warren County.
The $200,000 represents 10 percent of the total of only $2 million available nationwide under the federal Farmland Protection Program.
New Jersey's application received the highest ranking of any tract proposed for inclusion in the program in the Eastern Region.
Bordered to the west and north by the Delaware River and I-78, respectively, River Walk has tremendous ecological and economic value to the state.
Over 90 percent of its soils are considered prime, unique or of statewide importance and it is home to at least four grassland nesting bird species which are on the state's threatened or endangered species list.
The property is located in an area which the American Farmland Trust calls "the second most threatened agricultural area in the United States" and has been under extreme development pressure since the 1980s.
In addition to the federal funding, state farmland preservation funds, Green Acres money, and contributions from Warren County, the Township of Pohatcong and the Phillipsburg Riverview Organization will be used to purchase the property in fee simple.
It will eventually be returned through a public auction to private ownership with deed restrictions against non-agricultural use.
GOVERNOR CITES FARMLAND PRESERVATION AS TOP AGRICULTURAL ACCOMPLISHMENT
Governor Christine Whitman cited the accomplishment of preserving more farmland last year than in any other year of the Farmland Preservation Program as the main agricultural accomplishment of her administration, during an interview with the New Jersey Farmer.
Whitman said she wanted to build on the achievement, making sure that priority for easement acquisition goes to farms most threatened by development.
The interview covered a number of topics including deer and other wildlife damage; the plight of the state's dairy farmers; aquaculture; and the importance of right to farm protection for farmers engaged in good management practices.
INDIRECT COST EXEMPTIONS APPROVED FOR FY98
For FY98, the department had asked the Department of Treasury to exempt several agricultural commodity councils, advisory boards and commissions from the payment of indirect costs imposed by the Office of Management and Budget.
Indirect costs are those associated with the administration of funds by a state agency.
The department requested the exemption for these groups since the funds are generated by grower "check-off" programs and are used by the groups for commodity promotion, education and research programs.
Recently, the department was advised by Treasury that the requested exemptions for these commodity organizations, as well as for a number of other programs in the department, have been approved for this fiscal year.
Under Treasury regulations, the department will have to request the exemptions each fiscal year.
NATIONAL AGRICULTURE POLICY POSITIONS ADOPTED
The annual meeting of the National Association of State Departments of Agriculture (NASDA) covered the areas of animal health protection and disease control; food regulation and safety; nutrition and food assistance; plant health protection and disease control; pesticide regulation; conservation and resource management; federal land management; agriculture infrastructure; domestic marketing and promotion; rural development; financial security for agriculture; international marketing and trade for agriculture; agriculture research, extension and education; and federal/state cooperative programs.
The policy positions adopted on these topics by NASDA at its meeting are the issues around which NASDA will be focused in Washington in legislative and regulatory arenas.
Of particular importance, the policy positions were amended to support additional funding for farmland preservation and the keep the shipment of wheat from karnal bunt-infected states out of New Jersey.
FARMERS AGAINST HUNGER PROGRAM NOTED AT NATIONAL SUMMIT ON FOOD RECOVERY
The Farmers Against Hunger Program was highlighted this month during the National Summit on Food Recovery 
The summit was sponsored by the USDA, the Congressional Hunter Center, Foodchain, Second Harvest and the Chef and the Child Foundation.
The focus of the summit was to expand the growing national food recovery movement an effective way to feed the nation's hungry.
New Jersey's experience was explored during a workshop on field gleaning.
BIOLOGICAL CONTROL PROGRAM CONTINUES TO PROTECT SOYBEAN CROP
None of the 135,000 acres of soybeans planted in the Garden State this year required chemical treatment for control of Mexican bean beetle (MBB), thanks to the department's biocontrol program.
This year, field releases of the laboratory-raised MBB parasite were also made in Freehold, Monmouth County, the only area of the state with populations of bean beetle that could have caused economic damage.
Last year, the Freehold area was not in the program and the soybeans there were over 50% defoliated.
This year, largely thanks to the parasite, defoliation was reduced to around 10 percent, well below economic thresholds, with some of the defoliation due to Japanese beetle.
Late season field releases reduce the overwintering Mexican bean beetle population lessening the pest pressure for the following season.
WILDLIFE DAMAGE TO BE STUDIED
When she conditionally vetoed A-1932 which made changes in hunting under a deer depredation permit, Governor Whitman directed that an assessment of the deer damage issue be done and solutions developed to the problems the study found.
The report was to be done within a year.
The bill, with the changes she had requested, was signed by the Governor this summer and the study to determine what additional areas needed to be addressed was begun.
This month the Division of Fish and Game met with NJDA and Rutgers University representatives in an effort to provide a completed report to the Governor by next June.
EUONYMUS SCALE POPULATIONS REDUCED IN NURSERY TEST SITES
Field surveys at two commercial nursery sites in Cumberland County showed a reduction in the Euonymus alatus scale populations compared to what was present last with only about one-quarter of the plants showing signs of light scale populations on new growth.
Scale populations were significantly reduced through releases of a small predatory beetle.
CONSTRUCTION-RELATED SOIL EROSION CONTROL ACCOMPLISHMENTS REVIEWED
A 20-year summary report released by the State Soil Conservation Committee at its September meeting showed that nearly 68,000 soil erosion and sediment control plans have been certified for compliance with state standards for construction-related land disturbance on 520,000 acres since the inception of the Soil Erosion and Sediment Control Act in FY77.
During this period, soil erosion and sedimentation from construction and development have been eliminated or reduced to acceptable levels.
The data also showed that significant changes in land use have occurred in New Jersey during these two decades.
New Jersey's program is viewed as a national model and various program concepts have been duplicated in other states.
AGRICULTURAL WATER QUALITY AND NON-POINT POLLUTION CONTROL EVALUATED
More than 50 agricultural and conservation agency and organization leaders met this month to evaluate the impacts of emerging federal and state programs aimed at reducing or preventing nonpoint source pollution.
The proposed establishment of total maximum daily pollution loads on quality impaired water bodies may lead to mandatory regulatory controls on sources including agriculture.
Strong technical and financial assistance programs will be needed to help agriculture deal effectively with new water quality requirements.
Efforts to inform all agricultural interests of this major policy issue will be forthcoming and the general session of the 1998 State Agricultural Convention will be focused on this subject as well.
SIX MILE RUN MEDIATION ENDS
NJDA has been represented on a group established by NJDEP to mediate the issue of agricultural land leases and public access to Six Mile Run.
That mediation process has ended and the final leasing and public access issues are to be handled directly by NJDEP.
NJDA will continue to support the agricultural interests as this activity is brought to a successful conclusion.
SOUTH JERSEY FALL FOOD 
The third annual South Jersey Fall Food 
The event is sponsored by the department, the New Jersey Wine Industry Advisory Council, the Garden State Wine Growers Association, the New Jersey Restaurant Association, the Philadelphia Inquirer, PHILADELPHIA magazine, Cuizine magazine, Garden State cable television and Steppin' Out (The Good News Network).
STATE TOURISM MASTER PLAN UPDATED TO INCLUDE AGRICULTURE
The Division of Travel 
The first update in 17 years, this Master Plan will serve as a blueprint to chart the development and promotion of tourism over the next 10 years.
The document will include rural tourism destinations such as farms, farm markets, pick-your-own farms, wineries, agricultural and seafood festivals, county fairs and equine events among the family-oriented tourism opportunities available in the Garden State.
SPRING FROST REDUCES 1997 PEACH HARVEST
This year's peach harvest is nearly complete with major peach shippers reporting sales of 1,189,000 half bushel cartons of peaches as of September 6.
This is about 20 percent less than the 1,525,500 cartons shipped as of the same date a year ago.
A heavy spring frost is the cause cited most often for the decline.
IT'S A WRAP ON JERSEY FRESH INFOMERCIALS
Five new Jersey Fresh infomercials were completed this month.
Two, nursery and dairy, will air this fall and return in the 1998 growing season along with the three seasonal Jersey Fresh commercials and additional infomercials on spring greens, blueberries, peaches, sweet corn, squash, herbs, tomatoes and peppers.
FDA PROPOSES REGULATIONS FOR CIDER PRODUCERS
The FDA has proposed tighter regulations for the fresh juice industry in a further effort to curb foodborne pathogens such as E. coli.
The proposal favors a phased in, mandatory Hazard Analysis Critical Control Point program although other changes under consideration are more frequent FDA inspections of manufacturers, mandatory pasteurization of juices and Good Manufacturing Practices (GMPs) or sanitation standards to increase juice safety.
Since FDA also sees the need for immediate action, the agency has recommended that unpasteurized juice products, such as apple cider, carry labels warning of possible health risks to consumers.
In light of the FDA's action, the department, in cooperation with the state Department of Health and Senior Services, has developed GMPs for cider production and distributed them to the state's cider producers in providing a safer cider product to consumers.
The GMPs included suggestions for the voluntary labeling recommended by the FDA.
STATE FFAers WIN REGIONAL COMPETITION
The Woodstown FFA team took first place in the dairy team event while the Allentown FFA team won second in the poultry team event at the Eastern States Exposition in Springfield, Massachusetts this month.
Woodstown team members also took individual dairy event honors with Tim Coleman first, Courtney Harris second and Todd Eachus fourth.
Allentown FFA teammates Rachel Chris and Nicole Wisniewski took first and fourth honors, respectively, in the poultry event.
Nine career development event teams from Allentown, Warren Hills, Woodstown and Northern Burlington FFA chapters represented New Jersey at the regionals.
The teams will continue to prepare for the national competition in Kansas City, Missouri in November.
APPLE, FARM MARKET GUIDES AVAILABLE
Over 20,000 AWhere to Find New Jersey Apples" brochures have been distributed around the state through Travel and Tourism highway rest stops, County Cooperative Extension offices and directly to requesting consumers.
The guide is also available on the department's website at www.state.nj.us/agriculture/apples97.htm.
The updated Roadside and Urban Markets Directory will be distributed this month in time for the fall holiday flowers and crops.
The directory is already available on the website at www.state.nj.us/agriculture/dirmkt.htm.
JERSEY FRESH PRODUCE INCLUDED IN FEDERAL COMMODITIES TO SCHOOLS
The first allocation of federal commodities for the 1997-98 school year was offered to 588 school districts this month
.
Included in the offering were 1,670 cases of tomatoes, 1,490 cases of cucumbers and 4,050 cases of peaches grown in the Garden State.
These commodities are part of the $400,000 worth of Jersey Fresh fruits and vegetables the department hopes to distribute to children through the school lunch program this year.
CONFERENCE HELD ON REINVENTING AGRICULTURAL EDUCATION
The department, in cooperation with the state Department of Education and the Kellogg Foundation, sponsored a one-day conference on "Reinventing Agricultural Education for the Year 2020."
The conference was part of a three-year nationwide process to chart a course for food, agriculture, and environmental science education in the decades ahead.
The focus of these efforts is to insure that agricultural education prepares young people for productive careers, offers workers advanced training in their fields of choice, builds public awareness of the industry and develops leadership for the food, fiber, and natural resource systems of the future.
Attending the conference were agriculturists, educators, school administrators, and agribusiness leaders who will help set local education priorities in municipalities around the state.
FARM MARKET MONTH NOTED
Assistant Secretary Sam Garrison and I traveled to two urban (Jersey City and Maplewood) farmers' markets and one suburban (Atlantic Farms, Wall Twp.) farm market this month in observation of Governor Whitman's declaration of September as Farm Market Month.
The two urban markets have both been used as keystones in municipal revitalization plans and are often the scene of family-oriented entertainment in addition to being the best places in town to purchase a wide variety of freshly picked fruits and vegetables and straight-from-the-oven baked goods.
Participating farmers are enthusiastic about the urban markets and often go to two or more during the week.
EQUINE EXPO FEATURED AT GLADSTONE
New Jersey's equine and agriculture industries were highlighted during the 1997 Equine Expo in Gladstone this month.
The event was held in conjunction with the 1997 Gladstone Driving Event.
During the Equine Expo a variety of educational clinics were presented by the department, the New Jersey Equine Advisory Board and the Gladstone Equestrian Association.
These clinics were especially geared towards Girl Scouts' horse lover, horse sense and/or horseback rider badges, Boy Scouts' animal science (horse) badge and to members of pony clubs, 4-H clubs and FFA.
Additional Expo activities for both days include presentations on the different breeds of horses; various workshops covering horse health care, grooming and showmanship; a petting farm; and a face painter and clown.
The 1997 Gladstone Driving Event is the middle jewel in the EquiSilk Triple Crown of Pairs Driving and is the nation's premier equestrian driving competition featuring the US Equestrian Team Pairs Championship.
The three sections of the event are dressage, a horse-and-driver competition in which competitors are formally garbed and are judged on overall impression of suitability and style; marathon, a race against time that follows a pre-set course filled with hazard zones; and obstacles, during which drivers maneuver horse and carriage through a specially designated course.
An important part of the course was a specially-designed Jersey Fresh hazard featuring a red farm market and assorted autumn agricultural products.
NEW DAIRY PRINCESS, TOP DAIRY RECIPE SELECTED
Sindy Ruth Eller of Monroeville, Salem County, was crowned the 1997-98 State Dairy Princess this month.
Jennifer Lynn Koncz of Somerville was chosen as the first alternate with Sarah Jane Hunt, Lambertville, and Meredith Quick, Somerville, as the second alternates.
Josephine Lutz of Sussex County won the first prize in the Jersey Fresh Dairy Recipe Contest with her "Quick and Easy Nutritious Refreshing Drink."
SIRE STAKES UPDATE
The New Jersey Sire Stakes is at the height of the racing season with events nearly every day at The Meadowlands and at the Fairs.
To date there have been 54 Sire Stakes events which split into 118 races at The Meadowlands, Freehold and Garden State with total purses of $3,592,195 and several events still remaining on the schedule.
The Fair Program featured 138 races during the summer for total purses of $599,497.
[transparent.gif] nj state graphic
