[USEMAP:topnav.gif] _______________ submit search njda njda home [Agriculture Links...........]
Annual Report 1997 [transparent.gif]
Markets Dr. Vance Young, Director
* plays a critical role in the marketing and promotion of New Jersey farm products and the development and expansion of markets both here and abroad; * promotes New Jersey's racing and pleasure horse industry; and * coordinates the distribution of federally-donated foods to public feeding sites, schools, hospitals and other institutions.
Markets
MARKETING
Farm Fresh, Jersey Fresh
The visibility of the Jersey Fresh promotional program during the ten- month growing season kept farm-fresh, locally grown products in front of consumers during FY97.
Propelled by a $1.16 million budget allocation, Jersey Fresh television, newspaper and trade publication advertisements reached well into the New England and Eastern Canadian markets, increasing product awareness and supporting the marketing of specific Jersey Fresh commodities in the Northeast.
During FY97, the seasonal 30-second Jersey Fresh television commercials, complemented by five 30-second infomercials, aired on major network and cable stations, reaching almost 46 million households during the year.
The infomercials featured selection, storage and usage tips for a commodity then in season -- spring greens, peaches, corn, tomatoes and peppers.
During the year, similar spots were prepared covering blueberries, greenhouse/nursery and dairy products, herbs and squash.
These will join the rotation next year.
To reinforce the television commercials and help consumers identify Jersey Fresh produce at their favorite markets or farm stands, colorful Jersey Fresh point-of-sale materials were distributed to all 500 major retail chain stores and many farm markets in the tri-state area and to major retail chains in New England.
A survey undertaken this year to measure the success of the Jersey Fresh advertising and promotional program revealed that 38 percent of shoppers in the New York-Philadelphia metropolitan region were aware of the Jersey Fresh program.
Fifty-four percent of all shoppers surveyed indicated that they were more inclined to purchase Jersey Fresh farm products if they are labeled as such at the point of purchase, further underscoring the importance of working with retailers and produce managers to make sure Jersey Fresh point-of-purchase material is displayed.
Jersey Fresh matching grants totaling $150,000 were distributed to 69 agricultural organizations which used the funds to carve out their own promotional or educational Jersey Fresh niche through food and wine festivals, rural tourism guides and other efforts.
As a result, a total of $300,000 worth of welcome publicity was generated by and for the Jersey Fresh program in support of New Jersey agriculture.
Finding new venues for the sale of Garden State agricultural products is another key facet of the Jersey Fresh program which has been particularly successful in recent years.
The department continued its joint participation with the New Jersey Department of Health and Senior Services (DHSS) in the Women, Infants and Children (WIC)/Farmers Market Nutrition Program (FMNP).
Under the program for 1997, approximately $157,000 worth of FMNP checks were issued to over 8,000 Head Start children, pregnant or nursing women.
Those checks were redeemed for fresh fruit and vegetables at more than 97 authorized roadside markets and 41 farmers markets throughout the state.
Because of the success of the WIC/FMNP program, a similar pilot program targeting senior citizens in Cumberland, Hudson, Mercer and Passaic Counties was implemented at the end of the year.
These programs bring additional income to the state's farmers, but, even more importantly, they offer thousands of nutritionally at-risk children, women and senior citizens an excellent opportunity to increase their consumption of fresh fruit and vegetables.
Increasing the consumption of Jersey Fresh produce underscored a local function as part of the national observance of 5-A-Day Week in September.
The New Jersey 5-A-Day Coalition, composed of representatives of both NJDA and DHSS, as well as the state's health and food retail industries, worked with four supermarket chains around the state on a "Home Grown Champions" breakfast.
The event enabled 200 children between the ages of 8 and 14 to have breakfast with five New Jersey Olympians at the Princeton Forrestal Center.
During breakfast, the Olympians emphasized the importance of fruits and vegetables to a healthy diet.
The 5-A-Day Coalition worked throughout the year to encourage New Jersey residents to eat healthier diets including five or more servings of fruits and vegetables daily.
Travelers on the New Jersey Turnpike had a special treat in store for them at four of the busiest rest stops on that heavily traveled route: the James Fenimore Cooper Service Area in Mount Laurel, Burlington County; the Molly Pitcher Service Area in Cranbury, Middlesex County; the Woodrow Wilson Service Area in Hamilton Township, Mercer County; and the Clara Barton Service Area in Oldmans Township, Salem County.
Here travelers can purchase a variety of Jersey Fresh fruits, vegetables and flowers from early summer through November.
Export Development
With the food and agricultural industries supporting a strong positive balance of international trade for the nation, NJDA continued its aggressive program of export development in FY97.
Among the year's highlights was the extremely successful NJDA- sponsored pavilion for small and mid-sized New Jersey food and agricultural companies at the U.S. Food Export Showcase in Chicago, Illinois.
More than 42,000 domestic and international buyers attended the show, resulting in an estimated $916,000 in immediate new sales for the 10 companies that exhibited their products in this pavilion.
Overall, as a result of attendance at this show, the New Jersey exhibitors anticipate more than $9 million in new sales over the next two years.
As an active member of the Eastern United States Agricultural and Food Export Council (EUSAFEC), the department helped New Jersey companies obtain more than $500,000 in federal funds for market development activities through the Market Access Program, a matched funds market development reimbursement program.
Also through EUSAFEC, the department coordinated the participation of a dozen New Jersey food and agricultural companies at international food expositions such as SIAL '96 in Paris, France and ANUGA '97 in Cologne, Germany.
To provide additional information to New Jersey food and agriculture businesses anxious to begin exporting, NJDA published the New Jersey Food and Agriculture Export Marketing Statistics and Directory this year.
The comprehensive and informative publication offers federal and state import/export contacts and a complete listing of all New Jersey firms reporting export sales.
The statistical analysis included in the publication revealed that the Garden State's exports of fresh fruits and vegetables have grown steadily over the last two- and-a-half decades, reaching an annual total of $27,340,000 compared to just $4,206,800 in 1971.
Market News
The Market News Service, a federal-state cooperative venture, provides a readily accessible source of unbiased and reliable agricultural market information for the state's growers and buyers.
Because access to more and better marketing information helps New Jersey growers to be more competitive, the Market News Service collects price and supply information from the Vineland Auction by laptop computer.
This data is then transmitted to Cook College and the Bridgeton Market News Office.
From there, the information goes out to New Jersey growers, farm marketers and county agents via FAX, electronic transmission and voiced telephone recordings.
While the number of calls logged by the Market News Service dropped to 17,000 compared to last year's 18,000 phone inquiries, nearly 20,000 individual reports were faxed to users of the service in FY97, an increase of nearly 18 percent compared to FY96.
Access to this report, and to 700 other USDA Market News reports, also became available this year on the Internet at www.ams.usda.gov/marketnews.htm.
Reports cover local, regional, national and even international markets for fruits, vegetables, grain, livestock, poultry, eggs, dairy, tobacco, cotton and specialty crops.
Fairs and Shows
New Jersey's 21 agricultural fairs, as certified by NJDA, hosted one million visitors during FY97.
New Jerseyans and out-of-state tourists alike enjoyed a unique variety of educational displays, competitions, food and amusements that the fairs offered.
Agriculture and agribusiness played an important part in each fair and NJDA continued to offer fair organizers technical assistance along with special exhibits and promotional materials concerning agriculture in the Garden State.
EQUINE PROGRAMS
Horse Breeding and Development
The New Jersey Equine Advisory Board, a unit of the New Jersey Department of Agriculture, is composed of 48 members representing 14 different breed organizations plus additional agricultural organizations.
This year, the Board offered an extensive youth program of educational clinics and programs, horse care and management seminars, Boy and Girl Scout badge programs, and a variety of equine related activities for children, along with other events designed to enhance the growth of the entire equine industry.
The expanded school programs, available to educators statewide, have been very successful and now include presentations on careers in the industry as well as farm safety.
The Horse Breeding and Development Program supports the state's ever- growing pleasure horse industry.
The New Jersey Bred All Breed Horse Show presented awards valued at $33,500.
The Non-Racing Breeder Awards program was valued at $85,000 this year as a result of the strong continued support of the program and the industry.
Horse Park of New Jersey
The Horse Park of New Jersey is the product of a unique combination of efforts by state government, the horse industry and private not- for-profit groups working together to provide a superior facility for pleasure horse exhibitors.
The Park is operated by the Horse Park of New Jersey at Stone Tavern, Inc., a not-for-profit educational organization under contract with the Department of Agriculture.
In FY97, the Park's ninth year of operation, more than 80 days of activities were scheduled from March through November.
Show dates have already been reserved into 1999, including a Regional Dressage Championship in 1998.
Since its inception, the Park has hosted one million visitors and competitors making it one of the area's most important economic generators.
The Horse Park undertook improvements to the outside hunt course in order to allow the facility to accommodate grand prix jumping and carriage dressage.
The completion of this project will allow the park to serve all equine disciplines and attract larger multi-day events, such as the six-day Middlesex County Horse Show, to the Park.
New Jersey Sire Stakes
New Jersey sired Standardbreds have earned a well-deserved reputation for excellence in the harness racing industry.
In the past 15 years, when Harness Horse of the Year honors were announced by the United States Trotting Association (USTA) in conjunction with the United States Harness Writers Association, 13 of the top harness horses were either New Jersey sired or stallions who later went to stud in New Jersey.
The 1996 racing season proved to be no exception when Hambletonian winner CONTINENTALVICTORY was named 1996 Harness Horse of the Year.
CONTINENTALVICTORY, a sensational three-year-old filly trotter, graduated from the Sire Stakes Program with numerous New Jersey Sire Stakes (NJSS) wins including the $100,000 Championship Final at The Meadowlands.
For the 1996 season, she won nine of 12 starts, earning almost $1.2 million.
In addition to being named Harness Horse of the Year, she was also honored as three-year-old filly trotter of the year and as overall trotter of the year.
CONTINENTALVICTORY is a daughter of VALLEY VICTORY who stands at stud at Southwind Farm in Pennington.
JENNAS BEACH BOY won his second consecutive title as Pacer of the Year in 1996 in addition to capturing the title for Older Pacer of the Year.
Other New Jersey sired divisional winners included MICHELLE's JACKPOT (two-year-old filly pacer), MALABAR MAN (two-year- old colt trotter), C R KAY SUZIE (older trotting mare), HOT LEAD (three-year-old colt pacer), and MYSTICAL MADDY (three-year-old filly pacer).
Overall, NJSS performers captured 10 of 15 categories.
The NJSS program and related programs was worth $11,786,528 in 1997.
Over $7.5 million in purses was available at the pari-mutuel tracks plus another $691,875 in fair events.
The remainder came from restricted overnight (non-stakes) races and breeders awards.
New Jersey sired yearlings continued to bring top dollar at the fall yearlings sales where 1,081 yearlings were sold for a total of $23,716,950, an average of $21,940.
Twelve of the 17 Standardbred yearlings sold for $200,000 or more in 1996 were by New Jersey sires.
Topping the list at $425,000 was MYKINDAVICTORY, closely followed by MEADOWBRANCH MAGIC who sold for $335,000.
Both were sired by VALLEY VICTORY whose 23 yearlings sold at public auction averaged an unprecedented $178,826.
The top-priced pacing colt, JEFFERSON STEIN, a son of first-year stallion PRESIDENTAL BALL, sold for $250,000.
Equine Industry Studies
Through executive order this year, Governor Christine Todd Whitman created a Racing Industry Study Commission to make a comprehensive review of the horse racing industry in New Jersey.
The Commission will study existing statutes and regulations, in-state competition for the gambling dollar and legislation in neighboring states that impacts the economic growth and prosperity of New Jersey's horse racing industry.
The Commission's members include the Secretary of Agriculture as well as representatives from the Thoroughbred and Standardbred associations, the New Jersey Sports and Exposition Authority, race track permit holders and others.
In addition, this year NJDA initiated a survey of the state's equine industry to measure its size and economic impact.
This is the first comprehensive study of the industry in the last decade.
With thousands of New Jerseyans owning horses and ten of thousands of the state's residents employed in industries that serve the equine community, the equine industry has long been recognized as an important contributor to New Jersey's economy.
The study will incorporate data from all facets of the industry, ranging from families who own a horse for recreational use to major Standardbred and Thoroughbred breeding facilities that cater to the state's horse racing industry.
The information gathered will provide an accurate picture of the industry on which to base critical policy and program decisions in the coming years.
FOOD DISTRIBUTION PROGRAMS
The department administers the federally-sponsored donated commodity distribution program which allocates donated federal foods to more than 630 eligible school districts, summer feeding programs, institutions and needy citizens each month.
NJDA accepted New Jersey's fair share entitlement of these federally-donated foods as well as additional offerings in all program categories.
During FY97, food supplies donated under The Emergency Feeding Assistance Program (TEFAP) increased thanks to federal budget increases.
New Jersey's 1997 TEFAP program entitlement was established at $2.96 million, but through innovative program enhancements, that entitlement was increased to $4 million, enabling the state to receive almost seven million pounds of TEFAP food during the year.
This increase of almost four million pounds over FY96 levels was welcomed by the food banks, hot meal sites and pantry feeding sites serving the state's 225,000 neediest citizens.
Distribution of over 40 different items, including canned vegetables, peanut butter, rice, pasta, cereal, fruit juice, frozen beef and canned fruits, was arranged by TEFAP through the state's six non-profit emergency feeding agencies.
In addition, the department distributed to other feeding programs over 20 million pounds of United States Department of Agriculture (USDA) foods worth more than $15 million.
These frozen, canned and dry commodities were particularly important to the more than 2,200 schools feeding over 475,000 students daily through the school lunch program.
Local school districts also welcomed the time and cost savings they realized through a NJDA program that increased the usefulness of federally-donated foods.
Under this program, NJDA contracted with 30 commercial food processors to process approximately six million pounds of bulk foods into easily used, cost-effective, oven-ready products such as hamburgers, sandwich steaks, pizza and a variety of turkey and chicken products.
This year's program introduced a processor selection system, which allowed recipient school districts to select foods to be processed before the start of the school year.
This enabled both the processors and the schools to make better use of the donated foods while encouraging competitive pricing, improving delivery time and better insuring product consistency.
The department again participated in a federal food processing program known as State Option Contract funded by fees assessed of local user agencies.
This federal initiative allowed school districts participating in the school lunch program to receive 196,200 pounds of user-ready foods, such as chicken nuggets, chicken patties and pork products, valued at over $247,000, directly from federal government contract sources.
This program improves quality control and expands product availability to recipient school districts statewide.
In addition, for the second year, NJDA joined with the federal Department of Defense to purchase over 32,000 cases of fresh fruits and vegetables valued in excess of $400,000 for use in New Jersey's school lunch program.
Over 80 percent of these fresh foods were purchased from New Jersey farmers.
NJDA receives, warehouses and distributes all of these federally- donated commodities through a commercial warehouse and trucking system that included two separate warehousing operations and a variety of local carriers to pick-up and deliver these donated foods.
All costs associated with the department's administration of the school lunch commodity warehouse and distribution system are paid for entirely by a per-case user fee that has not increased since FY94.
The division also worked closely with the Division of Administration to ease the transition of the Bureau of Child Nutrition Services from the New Jersey Department of Education to NJDA.
The bureau operates offers a variety of child nutrition programs to public and private schools, residential and non-residential child care institutions, adult and child day care centers, recreation centers and other agencies.
This combination of school lunch and child nutrition programs is the first of its kind in the country and will result in a better program and better service to our clients.
[transparent.gif] nj state graphic
