[USEMAP:topnav.gif] _______________ submit search njda njda home [Agriculture Links...........]
Annual Report 1996 Division of Markets Dr. Vance Young, Director [transparent.gif]
The Division of Markets plays a critical role in the promotion of New Jersey farm products and the development and expansion of markets both here and abroad.
The division also promotes New Jersey's racing and pleasure horse industry and coordinates the distribution of federally-donated foods to public feeding sites, schools, hospitals and other institutions.
FRESH FROM THE GARDEN STATE
Building on the successful media campaign launched last year, the Jersey Fresh program focused on reinforcing the Jersey Fresh message among consumers here in New Jersey and in the important New England and Eastern Canadian markets as well.
In FY96 the Jersey Fresh advertising and promotion program drew on a budget of $1.26 million to create a comprehensive multi-media advertising plan.
From May through November, the Jersey Fresh message was broadcast via three 30-second television commercials on major network and cable stations in the tri-state region, New England and eastern Canada, reaching nearly 47 million households.
The commercials were complemented by five 30-second produce tips featuring New Jersey Agriculture Secretary Arthur R. Brown, Jr.
The spots gave consumers selection and storage information and preparation suggestions for spring greens, peaches, corn, tomatoes and peppers.
Another addition to this year's program, a transit billboard campaign, targeted urban consumers with special signs mounted on the backs of NJ Transit buses.
These mini-billboards were daily reminders to commuters and city residents alike of the availability of fresh, locally-grown produce.
Colorful Jersey Fresh point-of-sale materials in more than 500 retail locations through out New Jersey, Pennsylvania and New York helped consumers locate Jersey Fresh produce.
The popular Jersey Fresh matched grant program distributed $150,000 among 56 commodity groups and agricultural organizations.
The program enables these groups to tailor the Jersey Fresh message to their specific marketing needs and increased the total Jersey Fresh marketing effort by more than $300,000.
Regional festivals, wine tastings and food show events played an important part in presenting the complete Jersey Fresh picture to consumers throughout the season.
For example, more than 10,000 people visited the 12th annual Vineland Jersey Fresh Festival, which celebrates the importance of the agricultural heritage in southern New Jersey.
Thousands of others visited the Summer Art 
"A Celebration of Jersey Fresh," featuring competition among 15 chefs from top restaurants around the state, helped to raise the awareness of state and regional food writers concerning the quality and variety of fruits and vegetables grown in the Garden State.
Participating chefs were required to prepare several different dishes using Jersey Fresh fruits and vegetables and the dishes were judged by a panel of food editors/writers.
Presentations were also made at the New Jersey Restaurant 
The department also continued to develop non-traditional markets for Jersey Fresh products.
As part of the national effort to improve the nutritional content of lunches served in elementary and secondary schools, the department joined forces with the United States Department of Defense (USDOD) to buy fresh fruits and vegetables for distribution to New Jersey schools participating in the National School Lunch Program.
To give the program a Jersey Fresh twist, the department received approval to launch a pilot project using $300,000 of the state's $15 million annual federal commodity entitlement from USDA.
Through USDOD, 20,000 crates of assorted fresh produce, including Jersey Fresh peaches, tomatoes, cucumbers, peppers, sweet potatoes and cabbage, were purchased for delivery to New Jersey schools in September and October.
The trial project supported the goals of the School Meals Initiative for Healthy Children, USDA's comprehensive, integrated plan to update the nutrition standards of school meals and motivate children to make healthy food choices.
The program was so successful that the department hopes to expand it next year.
In conjunction with the Department of Health (DOH), the department expanded the WIC/Farmers Market Nutrition Program (FMNP), now in its third year.
Under the FY96 program, $218,000 worth of FMNP checks were issued to over 14,000 Head Start children, pregnant or nursing women.
The checks were redeemed for fresh fruit and vegetables at more than 100 authorized roadside and farmers markets throughout the state.
The program brings additional income to the farmers of the state but, more importantly, it offers thousands of nutritionally at-risk children and women an excellent opportunity to include fresh fruits and vegetables in their diets.
The department also partnered with DOH to revitalize the state's 5-A-Day For Better Health Coalition.
Comprised of representatives from both agencies, from the health care field and the retail food industry, the coalition helps to promote the nutritional value and health benefits of five or more servings of fresh fruits and vegetables daily.
Another new venue for Jersey Fresh products came in the form of two farmers markets on the New Jersey Turnpike, one in the southern part of the state at the James Fenimore Cooper service plaza near Moorestown and one in the central part of the state at the Molly Pitcher rest area near Hightstown.
The recently renovated and reconstructed Molly Pitcher area is one of the busiest on the Turnpike, serving 30,000 visitors each weekend.
MARKET NEWS
The Market News Service, a federal-state cooperative venture, provides a readily accessible source of reliable agricultural market information for the state's growers and buyers.
Because access to more and better marketing information helps New Jersey growers to be more competitive, the Market News Service now collects price and supply information from the Vineland Auction by computer.
This data is then transmitted to Cook College and the Bridgeton Market News Office.
From there, the information goes out to New Jersey growers, farm marketers and county agents via FAX, electronic transmission and voiced telephone recordings.
The same information is also supplied to the New Jersey Farm Bureau for dissemination on their FAX network.
Market News Service logged nearly 18,000 calls and faxed out over 17,000 individual reports in FY96.
EXPORT DEVELOPMENT
Sustained growth in international trade and an increased interest in the global marketplace continued to drive the program's expansion in FY96.
As an active member of the Eastern United States Agricultural Export Council (EUSAFEC), the department's export development program helped a number of New Jersey companies gain a share of the global marketplace.
Key to this effort is participation in food showcases and expos around the world including ANUGA, the premier export-oriented trade show held in Germany, and the US Food Export/Food Marketing Institute Show in Chicago.
These shows enable New Jersey food processing companies and commodity promotion councils to reach enormous foreign audiences.
With a $110,000 grant from the USDA's Market Product Promotion Program, the department helped nine New Jersey companies to promote American-manufactured ethnic food products in Europe.
Products included a variety of Italian, Tex-Mex, Oriental, African, Indian and kosher foods.
The promotional efforts focused on in-store promotions including consumer brochures, print ads in weekly circulars and colorful, end-aisle displays.
The department worked with EUSAFEC and the New Jersey Blueberry Industry Advisory Council on a project aimed at exporting Jersey Fresh blueberries to the United Kingdom.
Following visits with British importers, retailers and processors, the department hosted a delegation from the United Kingdom who toured New Jersey's blueberry industry, and met with the state's major blueberry growers and shippers.
As a result of the visits, arrangements were made to airfreight 3,000 pounds of blueberries to a group of produce wholesalers in England in mid-July for distribution to selected food stores.
In addition to testing the market for New Jersey berries, the shipment will be a good way to test the clam-shell packaging, transportation temperature and other quality control issues.
HORSE PARK OF NEW JERSEY
The Horse Park of New Jersey is the product of a unique combination of efforts by state government, the horse industry, and private, not-for-profit groups working together to provide a superior facility for pleasure horse exhibitions.
In FY96, the Park's eighth year of operation, more than 75 days of activities were scheduled, a 15 percent increase over the previous year.
In addition, the Park passed the one million mark in attendance, proving itself a strong asset to the area's economy.
In 1996 the Park hosted the National Horse Show Eque-Fest events with a dressage show and a multi-breed "A"-rated horse show.
The events marked the start of a fund-raising effort for the next phase of the master plan which calls for an indoor arena and a covered grandstand for the east ring.
HORSE BREEDING AND DEVELOPMENT
NJDA's Equine Advisory Board is composed of 48 members representing 14 different breed organizations and additional agricultural groups.
They offer a very extensive youth program of educational clinics along with other events designated to enhance the growth of the entire equine industry.
The Board also provides for educational programs, horse care and management seminars, boy and girl scout badge programs, and a variety of equine related activities for children.
The horse breeding and development program supports the state's ever-growing pleasure horse industry.
The New Jersey Bred-All Breed Horse Show hosted some 425 entries vying for $33,500 in prize money.
The non-racing breeder awards program was valued at $85,000 this year as a result of the strong continued support of the program and the industry.
SIRE STAKES PROGRAM
The New Jersey Sire Stakes Program maintained its enviable position at the forefront of North American breeding programs in FY96.
In the past 15 years, 12 horses who were named Harness Horse of the Year by the US Trotting Association, in conjunction with the US Harness Writers Association, were either New Jersey sired or stallions who later went to stud in New Jersey.
FY96 proved to be no exception.
Overall, New Jersey Sire Stakes performers captured 10 of the 14 categories.
CR KAY SUZIE, a three-year-old trotter who graduated from the Sire Stakes Program with numerous wins, was named 1995 Harness Horse of the Year.
For the season she won 10 of 13 starts and earned almost $1 million.
JENNA'S BEACH BOY was named Pacer of the Year and captured the title for Three-Year-Old Pacer of the Year, having set an all time Meadowlands race record of 1:47.3 in mid-June.
Other New Jersey sired divisional winners included A STUD NAMED SUE (Two- Year-Old Colt Pacer), CHIPPIES RULER (Two-Year-Old Filly Pacer), PACIFIC ROCKET (Older Pacing Stallion), ELLAMONY (Older Pacing Mare), LINDY LANE (Two-Year-Old Trotting Colt), and CONTINENTAL VICTORY (Two-Year-Old Trotting Filly).
The New Jersey Sire Stakes Program and related programs were worth almost $11.9 million in FY96.
Over $7 million in purses were available at the pari-mutuel tracks plus another $650,000 in fair events.
The remainder came from restricted overnight (non-stakes) races and breeders awards.
New Jersey sired yearlings continued to bring top dollar at the fall yearling sales where 1,156 yearlings were sold for a total of $25,315,900, an average of $21,900 per animal.
Of the six Standardbred yearlings sold for $200,000 or more this year, five of them were by New Jersey sires.
Topping the list at $210,000 were TIKI BAR (a son of BEACH TOWEL) and YANKEE MISCHIEF (a daughter of VALLEY VICTORY).
FOOD DISTRIBUTION PROGRAMS
The department administers the federally-sponsored donated commodity distribution program, which supplies a variety of foods to eligible schools, institutions, summer feeding programs and needy populations.
The department accepted New Jersey's full entitlement of federally-donated foods as well as bonus amounts offered to New Jersey by the USDA.
During FY96, federally-donated food supplies to The Emergency Food Assistance Program (TEFAP) were cut by one-half due to federal budget cuts.
Because of the reduction, the department eliminated distributions to individuals and channeled the TEFAP foods to the state's food bank and pantry systems which operate feeding sites serving New Jersey's neediest population.
These foods are distributed under contract with seven emergency feeding organizations.
Federally-donated foods included canned beans, peanut butter, corn, frozen beef, raisins and canned pears.
Although New Jersey's FY96 TEFAP program entitlement was established at $1.2 million, innovative program enhancements increased that entitlement to $1.35 million, enabling New Jersey to distribute nearly 3 million pounds of TEFAP food to over 225,000 of the state's neediest citizens.
Through all other food distribution programs, the department distributed over 19 million pounds of USDA foods worth over $14 million.
These surplus foods were particularly important to the school lunch program which provided monthly allocations of frozen, canned and dry foods to more than 2,200 schools feeding over 473,000 students daily.
The department also worked with more than 30 commercial food processors to process over seven million pounds of the donated foods into more easily used, cost-effective, oven-ready products such as hamburgers, sandwich steaks, pizza and a variety of turkey and chicken products.
This planned and monitored conversion of bulk foods increased the usefulness of the federally-donated foods and helped local school districts reduce preparation time and purchase costs.
NJDA again participated in a federal food-processing program which allowed New Jersey school lunch participants to receive over 470,000 pounds of user-ready foods directly from federal government contract sources.
These foods, valued at nearly $400,000, included products such as chicken nuggets and chicken patties, pork and beef products.
This program guarantees recipient school districts uniform product quality control and expanded product availability.
The program is funded by a departmentally-established revolving fund supported by fees charged to user agencies.
FAIRS AND SHOWS
More than one million visitors attended New Jersey's 21 agricultural fairs in FY96 to enjoy the unique variety of educational displays, competitions, food and amusements that these fairs offered.
With agriculture and agribusiness playing an important part in each fair, the department continued its support of the fairs through technical assistance, exhibits and promotional materials.
[transparent.gif] nj state graphic
