U.S. Consulate Lahore Banner U.S. Department of State Seal
MONTHLY BULLETIN AUGUST/SEPTEMBER 2002 About Us
Consular Affairs/VISAS - Citizen Services - AmCit Registration - Travel Warning - Warden Notices
Public Affairs - Democracy Small Grants - Information Resource Center - Press Releases - Urdu Material
Study USA
Commercial Service
Home Page * Articles
* Books
* Web Sites
FOCUS - MUSLIM LIFE IN AMERICA
"Remembering the Victims, Protecting the Nation" will be the theme for activities planned by American Muslims to commemorate the first anniversary of the September 11 terrorist attacks on the United States, according to the Muslim Public Affairs Council (MPAC).
The MPAC, an American Muslim non-profit public service agency, will assist its local chapters throughout the United States in coordinating the participation of American Muslims within their local communities in events of remembrance to be held on September 11, 2002.
"We are planning a series of events to mobilize the Muslim community to be actively involved within their local communities, in prayer services, candlelight vigils or any other events, to honor and remember the victims of September 11," said Nagwa Ibrahim, MPAC's Community Outreach Coordinator.
"There were approximately 300 Muslims who died in the World Trade Center.
As American citizens, the attacks have affected our community as well," Ibrahim noted.
MPAC has been a voice for American Muslims since it's founding in 1988.
It has initiated a wide variety of programs to encourage interaction between its constituents and other organizations across the social and political spectrum.
With the aim of establishing the American Muslim community as a vital element of American pluralism, MPAC's programs address issues related to civil rights, social justice, education, civic participation and interfaith dialogue.
(For more on MPAC, please visit: www.mpac.org).
MPAC also supports American Muslims' participation in the political process by facilitating meetings with presidential candidates, local elected officials, religious leaders, and law enforcement authorities, to provide American Muslims the opportunity to voice their concerns.
The upcoming September 11 commemoration will be an important way for American Muslims to remind all Americans that last year's terrorist attacks were attacks on all Americans including Muslims.
"We are very much a part of American society, and really want to encourage Muslims not be afraid of stepping outside of their homes on September 11 and do what we all want to do, which is honor the victims and mourn with the country on that day," said Ibrahim.
ARTICLES
MUSLIM IN AMERICA By Jane Lampman Christian Science Monitor, January 10, 2002.
The author argues that for Muslim Americans, the months since Sept. 11 have been a wrenching experience that has brought both the best of times and the worst of times--opening the door to broader acceptance in U.S. society, but then in effect slamming it on their fingers at a time when they might be able to make a valuable contribution.
For most immigrants among them, the attacks sharply clarified that America is their home and the place where their primary interests lay, many Muslims say.
The attacks also awoke the moderate Muslim mainstream to its responsibility to actively counter extremism--even in the form of rhetoric.
MUSLIM IN AMERICA By Jeffrey L. Sheler and Michael Metzold U.S. News 
"One indication that many Muslims are feeling more at home in America is their growing involvement in the nation's public life.
During the past five years, Islamic leaders groups like Council on American-Islamic Relations (CAIR), Islamic Society of North America (ISNA), the American Muslim Council, and the Islamic Institute maintained a high visibility Washington presence, working to rally Muslim political activism and acting as media watchdogs.
While American Islamic groups were virtually unanimous in condemning the terrorist attacks on New York and Washington, they remain vociferous critics of U.S. policy in the Middle East."
THE NEW WAR AGAINST TERROR By Murray Hiebert Far Eastern Economic Review, June 6, 2002.
Many analysts believe that Investor Responsibility Research Center's (IRRC) new database, coupled with legislative moves in Congress, could alter the landscape of global investing and prompt U.S. fund managers to unload stocks of companies active in countries involved with terrorism and weapons of mass destruction.
No fund manager in America is going to want to get caught with an article on the front page of a local newspaper reporting that his fund is invested in a company that abetted terrorism.
BOOKS
AMERICAN MUSLIMS: The New Generation By Asma Gull Hasan Continuum, 2002.
While the book provides a lot of basic information about Islam in America--the major beliefs and practices, the different sects, and the great variety of ethnic groups from all over the world that practice Islam, including African Americans-- it is also a personal story.
Hasan depicts the sheer normalcy of American Muslims.
Like other Americans, they appreciate the opportunities for educational and economic advancement that the United States has always afforded new immigrants.
ISLAM IN AMERICA By Jane I. Smith Columbia University Press, 1999.
The book presents a richly textured portrait of the contemporary American Muslim community in the United States.
Beginning with an introduction to Muslim beliefs and practices, the book goes on to place the experiences of American Muslims within the context of Islam's long and varied history, offering biographical sketches of Muslims who have contributed to the formulation of Islam from a variety of cultural and historical contexts.
THE OXFORD HISTORY OF ISLAM Edited by John L. Esposito Oxford, 1999.
The book covers a wide array of subjects, casting light on topics such as the historical encounter of Islam and Christianity, the role of Islam in the Mughal and Ottoman empires, the growth of Islam in Southeast Asia, China, and Africa, the political, economic, and religious challenges of European imperialism in the nineteenth and twentieth centuries, and Islamic communities in the modern Western world.
AFRICAN AMERICAN LITERARY CRITICISM, 1773 TO 2000 Edited by Hazel Arnett Ervin Twayne, 1999.
This book has been designed to deepen appreciation of the African American literary aesthetic and to broaden critical inquiries into the function of African American literary art, the role of the African American writer, and the artistic responsibility of the audience.
Constituting its makeup are creative artists and critics who, in their manifestoes, credos, prefaces, introductions, interviews, and critical essays (1) chronicle four stages of African American literary criticism, (2) posit a continuity of artistic and aesthetic positions with regard to literary form and judgement, (3) identify critical terms, and (4) present an impetus for ongoing discussions about aesthetics, communications, epistemology, and theoretical methodology within African American literary tradition.
WEB SITES
The American Moslem Foundation http://www.oz.net/~msarram/
The American Moslem Foundation (AMF) assists Muslim immigrants and their children and helps American Muslims' create balanced lifestyle in their adopted homeland.
The AMF supports American Muslims efforts to preserve their religious heritage and customs, and create a sense of community amongst American followers of Islam.
Council of American Muslim Professionals http://www.campnet.net/
"A unified community of professional American Muslims from all walks of life and all ethnic backgrounds," CAMP provides opportunities for networking, conducts educational activities, promotes political activism, and organizes community service activities.
Council on Islamic Education http://www.cie.org/
The Council, a diverse body of scholars of history, religion, education, and related disciplines, works with the American educational community to treat Islam in a balanced, comprehensive, and sensitive manner.
The council's activities include sponsoring conferences and workshops, preparing publications and teaching units, offering guest speakers to K-12 and university classes, and hosting international scholars, officials, and dignitaries.
Pluralism Project http://www.fas.harvard.edu/~pluralsm/
Developed by Diana L. Eck at Harvard University, the Pluralism Project studies and documents the growing religious diversity of the United States.
Important features of this page include an extensive list of links to governmental, advocacy, educational resources; a searchable directory of religious centers; and abstracts of current newspaper articles.
Islamic Finder http://www.islamicfinder.org/
This is a comprehensive database of Islamic centers, mosques, and other organizations in the United States.
Searchable by zip code and state, it also provides a local area prayer schedule.
Islam in the United States http://usinfo.state.gov/usa/islam/
This website is a source of official U.S. government texts related to Muslim Americans.
The site includes a photo essay on American mosques as well as links to electronic publications, academic programs, and articles.
Islamic Institute http://www.islamicinstitute.org/
Founded in 1998, this institute's goals focus on creating a better understanding between the Muslim community and American political leaders.
The group works to promote an Islamic perspective on domestic issues, enhance the Muslim community's input in the decision-making process, increase American Muslim participation in elections, and introduce traditional American values to the Muslim community.
Islamic School Addresses in North America http://www.msa-natl.org/resources/Schools.html
Arranged by state and region, this directory provides contact information for secondary and elementary Islamic schools in the United States and Canada.
Muslim Life in America http://usinfo.state.gov/products/pubs/muslimlife/
Islam is considered one of the fastest-growing religions in the United States today.
Modern-day Muslims, like other religious groups, are one of many bright strands that form the intricate quilt of American religious and civic life.
This website is an attempt to capture in photographs, words, and statistics something of the extraordinary range and richness of ordinary Muslim life in this country.
__________________________________________________________________
The U.S. Consulate homepage is maintained by the Office of the Public Affairs in Lahore.
Links to other, non-U.S. Government Internet sites should not be construed as an endorsement of the views therein.
Blue Bar Last Updated: August 15, 2002
Sorry, you need a JavaScript capable browser to get the best from this page
