[USEMAP:topnav.gif] _______________ submit search njda njda home [Agriculture Links...........]
Annual Report 1997 [transparent.gif]
Office of the Secretary Arthur R. Brown, Jr., Secretary
* provides executive leadership to the New Jersey Department of Agriculture's six divisions in the accomplishment of the department's goals and objectives; * oversees policy development and planning; * carries out information and education programs and services as liaison to the executive and legislative branches of state government; and * insures that programs are carried out in compliance with statutory requirements, executive directives and policies established by the State Board of Agriculture.
During FY97, the Office of the Secretary continued to build on the strong policy framework developed by the FARMS Commission in 1995.
The Commission, an interdisciplinary study group, completed an in- depth analysis of the agriculture industry and established an action agenda to keep the industry thriving and profitable in the decades ahead.
The department administered a variety of initiatives with a solid record in support of the industry, including the Jersey Fresh promotion and marketing program, the state Farmland Preservation Program and the farm production efficiency grant program.
In addition, the department implemented new efforts aimed at building a stronger future for the agriculture industry.
Among these were projects to review and strengthen the Right to Farm Act, recycle agricultural plastics, monitor food safety and develop future agricultural leaders.
These programs were complemented by the department's educational and informational programs, legislative initiatives and organizational measures designed to improve animal health and plant laboratory services.
The department also prepared for the relocation of the Bureau of Child Nutrition Services from the New Jersey Department of Education to NJDA, an organizational adjustment that will consolidate the delivery of federally-sponsored feeding programs for school children, residents of state institutions and New Jersey's neediest citizens.
STRENGTHENING RIGHT-TO-FARM PROTECTION
One of the key components of a bright future for agriculture is the protection afforded the industry under the state's Right to Farm Act.
The effort launched by the department last year to review and revise the law was furthered this year when the State Agriculture Development Committee (SADC) developed a right-to-farm case registry and assigned a liaison to work with municipalities, private citizens and farmers to help resolve local conflicts.
A broad-based Agricultural Right-to-Farm Task Force was established to review the Right to Farm Act, draft proposed amendments to the Act, and implement a strategy to strengthen the right-to-farm program.
PRESERVING FARMLAND
FY97 was a landmark year for the state Farmland Preservation Program (FPP) under the direction of the SADC.
Overall, 53 farms covering 8,184 acres were permanently preserved during FY97, the most acreage and greatest number of farms preserved in a single year in the 14-year history of the program.
Both the amount of acreage and the number of farms brought into the program in FY97 exceeded the combined totals of the previous two years and raised program totals to 250 farms on 37,198 acres.
The largest bi-county land preservation project ever undertaken by the SADC focused on the 826-acre Sam Kanach Farm in Readington Township, Hunterdon County, and Branchburg and Hillsborough Townships, Somerset County.
SADC purchased the 328-acre main farm in fee simple and sold it back into private ownership at public auction later in the year.
The remainder of the property joined existing green belts or recreational preserves, enabling the entire farm to be protected from future development.
The SADC also marked the first donation of development easements on an unrestricted farm this year thanks to the owners of Pennfields Farm in East Amwell, Hunterdon County.
The value of the easement donation on the 47-acre horse farm was estimated at $340,000.
In FY97 for the first time the federal government became a partner in New Jersey's farmland preservation efforts with the authorization of a $1 million cost-sharing grant through USDA's Natural Resources Conservation Service (NRCS).
The grant was awarded to the Garden State under the Federal Agriculture Improvement and Reform Act of 1996 which included a new farmland protection program that made $14.5 million available nationwide for easement development purchases on valuable and vulnerable farmland.
The state FPP used the grant to help with the acquisition of development easements on 13 farms in as many counties.
MARKETING AGRICULTURAL PRODUCTS
From July through December of 1996 and from April through June of 1997, the Jersey Fresh message reached almost 46 million households through cable and network television commercials.
To reinforce the television commercials and help consumers identify Jersey Fresh produce at their favorite markets or farm stands, colorful Jersey Fresh point-of-sale materials were distributed to all 500 major retail chain stores and many farm markets in the tri-state area and to major retail chains in New England, a major market for Jersey Fresh products.
These promotional efforts have had a positive effect.
A survey taken this year to measure the success of the Jersey Fresh advertising and promotional program revealed that 38 percent of shoppers in the New York-Philadelphia metropolitan region were aware of the Jersey Fresh program.
Moreover, better than half of the respondents said they were more likely to buy produce identified as Jersey Fresh.
NJDA's four-part educational series of televised public service programs, "Jersey Fresh Food from the Farm," received an Emmy award for outstanding public affairs series from the Mid-Atlantic Chapter of the National Association of Television Arts and Sciences this year.
The 30-minute programs aired frequently during the 1995 and 1996 growing seasons on New Jersey cable stations.
The programs incorporated interviews with farm families and focused on the interdependence of the various facets of agriculture, following the agricultural process from start to finish.
Featured commodities were blueberries, peaches, corn, tomatoes, apples and cranberries.
RECYCLING AGRICULTURAL PLASTIC
This summer NJDA undertook a four-month nursery and greenhouse plastic recycling pilot project to help the industry find a better, more economical way to dispose of clean plastic film.
The nursery and greenhouse industry is the largest segment of agriculture in New Jersey, generating about one million pounds of greenhouse and nursery film annually that must be landfilled.
At the end of the pilot project, almost 45 percent of the greenhouse and nursery plastic film used in the state had been recycled during the trial period.
Although nursery and greenhouse plastics recycling projects have been implemented in California and Florida on a limited basis, New Jersey's effort was broader in scope and the recycling rate exceeded any other four-month film recycling effort in the nation.
TAKING GOVERNMENT TO THE PEOPLE
During a "Cabinet on the Road" visit to Warren County, NJDA coordinated with the New Jersey Department of Education in a distance learning classroom session demonstration held at a dairy farm in Allamuchy.
The event underscored the Governor's emphasis on quality education for New Jersey=s children.
Using milk production as the topic for this important demonstration, the televised lesson covered several specific portions of the new fourth grade core curriculum, including life science, social studies and communication.
INVESTIGATING NEW AUCTION METHODS
Major auction markets in Belgium, Germany and Holland were scrutinized to learn what works well for farmers in other parts of the world.
Included were the REO vegetable market in Belgium as well as vegetable market and research facilities and a cooperative freezer operation, the United Fruit and Vegetable Market and the Pfalzmarkt in Germany.
In Holland stops included the Dutch commodity board for horticulture; Greenery International, a huge cooperative fruit, vegetable and flower auction; and the VBA Flower Auction, the largest flower market in the world.
Throughout the tour participants met with government agricultural officials, producers, buyers, cooperative members and directors to discuss domestic and export marketing strategies and techniques as well as consumer trends and challenges faced by producers.
MAINTAINING FOOD SAFETY
Although America's food supply is the safest in the world, public concern about food safety is rising.
As a result, President Clinton announced this year that he would request that Congress appropriate $43 million to fund a nationwide early warning system for food-borne illness, to enhance seafood safety inspections, and to expand food safety research, risk assessment, training and education.
In another effort aimed at stemming the incidence of food-borne illness, the United States Food and Drug Administration (FDA) determined that an animal on the farm can be considered food-ready for processing, and therefore subject to FDA regulation.
Since many of the organisms that cause food-borne illness in humans can be part of the normal flora of the gastrointestinal tract of food-producing animals without any adverse effects to the animal, the FDA also announced its intention to develop a program to regulate food safety from the farm to the plate.
Through the state's Food Safety Task Force, of which NJDA was a founding member, NJDA will continue to monitor proposed resolutions to food safety problems and work with other federal and state agencies as well as producer groups to increase food safety while avoiding unnecessary costs and regulations affecting farmers.
The task force includes representatives from the New Jersey Department of Health and Senior Services, the New Jersey Department of Environmental Protection and the New Jersey Food Council, an organization of food processors and distributors.
DEVELOPING LEADERS FOR AGRICULTURE=S FUTURE
The first group of 23 representatives from the many facets of the Garden State's agriculture industry who took part in the New Jersey Agricultural Leadership Development Program completed the two-year program this year.
A joint venture between the NJDA, the New Jersey Agricultural Society, New Jersey Farm Bureau and Rutgers University/Cook College, the program's goal is to help those involved in the agriculture industry become better community leaders and industry spokespersons.
During the program, the group studied marketing, resource management, social issues and agricultural economics along with leadership skills such as public speaking and communication, parliamentary procedure and group process.
The group also spent two weeks in Mexico studying socio-cultural issues, the country's governmental process and agricultural practices, politics and international trade issues.
Participants for the second two-year program have been selected and will begin their training in the fall of 1997.
FIGHTING HUNGER
As food programs across the country feel the effects of federal program reductions, NJDA cooperated with the New Jersey Agricultural Society, the Rutgers Cooperative Extension Service, the USDA and the Bonner Foundation to launch the tremendously successful "New Jersey Farmers Against Hunger" effort, a food rescue and recovery program through which edible, nutritious fresh fruits and vegetables were collected from local farms and distributed to needy families in a four-county area.
During its first year, the program developed a solid track record in the fight against hunger.
Throughout the growing season, hundreds of community volunteers moved through fields and orchards, picking up good quality produce that had some small cosmetic flaw, was too large or too small to be sold through usual retail or wholesale channels or was too ripe to withstand the shipping process.
The collected produce was taken to Atlantic, Burlington, Camden and Mercer County churches, shelters and hunger relief organizations which, in turn, distributed the produce to needy families or individuals or used it to enrich the menus of food pantries and soup kitchens.
By the end of the harvest season, 19 farms had participated in the Farmers Against Hunger effort, and including produce donated by Wakefern/ShopRite and RLB Food Distributors, over 405,000 pounds of food was distributed throughout central and southern New Jersey.
SEEING AGRICULTURE AT WORK
This year's two-day farm tour for legislators took more than 55 legislators and staff representatives to Warren County to witness firsthand the county's diverse agriculture.
Included on the tour were a Christmas tree operation in Belvidere; a vegetable, grain and greenhouse operation that offers pick-your-own products and a farm market in the midst of suburban development; a 400-head Holstein farm in Allamuchy; a herb farm recognized as one of the premier herb farms in the nation; a sod farm in Great Meadows which has used farm production efficiency grants from the department to improve its operation; and the Pequest Trout Hatchery where fish are raised for stocking public fishing waters.
The tour was sponsored by the NJDA in cooperation with the New Jersey Agricultural Society, the Warren County Board of Agriculture and the Warren County Board of Freeholders.
[transparent.gif] nj state graphic
