[home.gif] [mnrra.gif]
It is the second longest and largest river in North America, flowing 2,350 miles from its source at Lake Itasca in the Minnesota North Woods, through the mid continental United States, to the Gulf of Mexico.
The longest river in North America is the Missouri at 2,540 miles, a tributary of the Mississippi.
North American Watersheds When compared to other world rivers, the Mississippi-Missouri combination ranks fourth in length at 3,710 miles (5,790 km) following the Nile (4,145 mi/6,670 km) and the Amazon (4,007 miles/6,450 km) and the Yangtze (3,915 mi/6300 km).
The river basin, or watershed is the third largest in the world extending from the Allegheny Mountains in the eastern United States to the Rocky Mountains, including all or parts of 31 states and 2 Canadian provinces.
The river basin measures approximately 1,837,000 square miles (4.76 million sq. km) covering about 40% of the United States and about one-eighth of North America.
The Mississippi River and its adjacent forests and wetlands provide important habitat for fish and wildlife and include the largest continuous system of wetlands in North America.
It is a river of diversity containing over 260 species of fish; compared to 600 freshwater species in all of North America.
And it is home to a huge range of invertebrate species, mammals, birds and insects.
The river supports an array of wetland, open-water, and floodplain habitats, including extensive habitats on national wildlife refuges.
Yet human activities have greatly altered this river ecosystem.
Most of the river and its floodplain have been extensively modified for commercial navigation and other human developments.
Much of the watershed is intensively cultivated, and many tributaries deliver substantial amounts of sediment, nutrients, and pesticides to the river.
Pollutants also enter the river from metropolitan and industrial areas.
Learn More: Just the Facts Measuring the Mississippi
The Mississippi River Watershed is truly an impressive natural force.
But even though it is unique in many ways, in other ways it operates in the same way as other rivers around the world.
River Mechanics The path a river carves during it's journey is directly related to its speed and the volume of water it carries.
What determines the speed of a river is its angle of descent, called gradient.
Gradient is simply the change in elevation over a specific distance such as 5 feet per mile or 1 meter per kilometer.
Throughout its long journey to the Gulf of Mexico the speed and width of the river varies greatly as does the land through which it travels.
Since rivers are constantly in motion they carve out distinct patterns through the landscape that fluctuate from season to season and year to year.
If you travelled the entire stretch of the Mississippi River you would be amazed by the changing characteristics of the river from one section to the next.
The Mississippi National River and Recreation Area is fortunate to be situated on a stretch of the river that shows great change over just 72 miles of river corridor.
The following four definitions relate to these unique characteristics.
Learn More: U.S. Geological Survey Information
Gorges and Valleys Gorges and valleys are formed in sections of a river with a high gradient.
This increases the speed of the river and over time the turbulence of the water carves a V-shaped gorge or valley.
Through these sections the river tends to run in a straight line.
The only example of a gorge on the Mississippi River is located between Minneapolis and Fort Snelling.
Twelve thousand years ago, the River Warren carved a huge river valley now occupied by the Minnesota River.
At its confluence with the Mississippi, it went over a falls now known as the Falls of St. Anthony.
Because of the characteristics of the underlying rock, the river would cut away at the soft sandstone that supported an upper layer of harder limestone and shale.
As the undercut became deeper, the limestone would fall to the bottom of the river channel until eventually the river cut the deep gorge we now see.
The falls itself has retreated from the Fort Snelling area to downtown Minneapolis.
In an effort to keep the falls from further erosion, the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers completed construction of a series of dams and a concrete apron under the falls in 1896.
Learn More: St. Anthony Falls Twin Cities Geology
Braided River A river is braided when a main channel becomes separated by a network of smaller channels that flow around small islands called braid bars.
Because braided sections of rivers are caused by fluctuations in the rivers current, the number and location of the channels and braid bars may change quickly in a braided system.
The following conditions promote the formation of braided channels: * Erodible banks * Rapid and frequent variations in stream discharge.
* Abundant supply of sediment
Learn More: Vermillion River Bottoms
Because modern rivers are frequently channelized and/or dammed, braided river environments are relatively rare.
An excellent example of this type of riparian (river) structure can be found in the Vermillion River Bottoms at the southern end of the Mississippi National River and Recreation Area corridor.
Shallow and trackless, it is both timeless and fragile.
Meander Photo Meandering River As a river flows through flatter territory and has a low gradient, it will form meanders.
Meander is the name for a bend in the river.
As the river flows around a bend, the current becomes strongest at the outside of the curve.
This increased rate of flow encourages erosion and tends to pick up river bottom and soil from the bank and move it downstream.
The current on the inside of the bend is slower and deposits gravel, sand and other solids.
As the erosion on the outside of the bend continues to occur, the deposits of materials on the inside of the bend also continues.
The result is that the bend itself simply continues to move downstream.
These meanders are remarkably similar in all rivers.
In Wildstream (Riparian Press, 2000) Dr. Thomas Waters maintains that "...the development of meanders seems to be controlled in proportion to the width of stream, regardless of its actual size.
On the average, and with remarkably little variation, the radius of a river bend will be about three times the width And a meander will occur, first to one side and then to the opposite, along a stream length equal to about eleven times the stream width."
(p. 36)
Floodplains Floodplains are relatively flat ground adjacent to the river itself.
These unique environments are made up of soil deposited by the river during its flood state.
Flood plains can be narrow strands of land or can extend miles on one or both sides or the river.
Because of the rich soil, easy access to the river for transportation and other natural resources, floodplains are a favorite setting for almost all living things.
Farms, towns and cities are often built on these tenuous landscapes and certain plants thrive in the ever repeating seasonal cycle of flood and relative dryness.
Flood plains near Iowa Over the years, floodplains have frequently been isolated from the river by dikes and levees to allow for cultivation and to protect cities and other structures from devastating flood.
But scientists are learning that floodplains make an enormous contribution to the health of a river.
It functions to slow runoff into the river itself allowing sediments to settle.
This general slowing of the water also allows the earth to act as a sort of sponge lessening the volume of the water flowing in the river and replenishing the water table.
Floodplain ecologies are some of the most diverse on the planet.
Its unique seasonal cycles coincide with spawning habits and reproduction habits of plants and animals.
Learn More: The Flood of 1952
Floodplain forest in Navigation Pool 13 (near Bellevue, Iowa) on the Upper Mississippi River.
Courtesy Y.
Yin, USGS History of Navigation on the Mississippi River
Revised 2/6/01 Comments/Suggestions: Mississippi Webspace
