Jeb in the News Toomey, Hensarling: Iraq Funds Must Come From Cuts By Bill Cahir As Published in the Express Times - October 2, 2003 Congress should make up for the cost of rebuilding Iraq by cutting $20.3 billion in foreign aid over the next five years, U.S. Rep. Pat Toomey said Wednesday.
President Bush is seeking $87 billion for military and civilian projects in Afghanistan and Iraq, including $20.3 billion in fiscal 2004 for reconstruction work in Iraq alone.
Bush also is seeking $1 billion for public works spending for Afghanistan.
Toomey, R-Lehigh Valley, as well as U.S. Rep. Jeb Hensarling, R-Texas, at a Capitol Hill news conference said Congress should provide the cash Bush wants for the rebuilding efforts.
But they asserted lawmakers should offset the $20.3 billion in Iraq funding by making cuts to other foreign-aid programs.
"Our proposal is about prioritizing our foreign aid expenditures in an era of budget deficits," Toomey said.
"Just as we won the war in Iraq, it's vital that we win the peace.
And we believe that funding Iraq's reconstruction will help us win the peace.
But it does not need to come as an additional expense to American taxpayers," he said.
The two congressmen said they would be willing to reduce spending for Bush administration foreign aid programs by about 15 percent.
They proposed slashing money allocated to the United Nations, the U.N. Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization (UNESCO), and the U.S. Agency for International Development, among other cuts.
First lady Laura Bush this week made international news by announcing the United States' determination to rejoin UNESCO for the first time since 1984.
She said the U.N.'s cultural institution "can now help achieve peace by spreading the values that will help defeat terror and lead to a better and safer world."
Toomey and Hensarling did not propose to cut President Bush's $15 billion initiative to improve AIDS care for people in Africa.
But the two lawmakers did not exclude the AIDS program from their list of projects slated for reductions.
"Potentially, it could impact many line items within the foreign operations budget.
And we seek to build a consensus around those items that, although important, may be less important today than successfully fighting the war against terror in Iraq and rebuilding the Iraqi infrastructure," Hensarling said.
President Bush in March 2002 announced what he called his Millennium Challenge Account, by which he proposed to offer $5 billion in economic assistance to developing nations by 2006 and beyond.
Toomey and Hensarling proposed to exempt only aid to Israel, spending on the so-called Andean Counter-Drug Initiative and funding for embassy security from their cuts to the foreign aid budget.
Toomey defended the Bush administration's position that Congress should not structure the $20.3 billion spending in Iraq as a loan.
The Lehigh Valley Republican, a candidate for U.S. Senate, said piling additional debt upon a fledgling Iraqi democracy would make the new state less viable.
Oil revenues are needed to run the Iraqi government, not to pay foreign debt, Toomey said.
"I point to the historical precedent," Toomey said.
"You know, we didn't say the western Europeans had to pay back the Marshall Plan.
We didn't say the Japanese needed to pay back the money that we spent on the reconstruction of Japan.
And frankly, the American taxpayer got a very good return on the funds that were spent that way.
Next Previous Jeb in the News Jeb in the News List Jeb in the News
