Press Release [bar_cyan.gif] FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE Thursday, October 1, 1998 For additional information, contact: Larry Berman (401) 729-5600 KENNEDY SPEAKS OUT ON HOUSE FLOOR AGAINST IMPEACHMENT INQUIRY WASHINGTON -- Congressman Patrick J. Kennedy (D-RI) took to the House floor today to express his objections to the impeachment inquiry to be d
The following is the text of his remarks which he made in two parts:
(First five-minute remarks):
Mr Speaker, I rise today in defense, not of the President, but rather, of the Presidency.
Trent Lott, the Majority Leader of the Senate, has just spun to the press that "bad conduct" is grounds for impeachment.
To me this is shocking.
I actually could not believe that he was serious.
Sadly he was.
Today we are at a turning point in this debate and we have to put this thing in park and take a break.
The removal of a President of the United States is different from the removal of judge, or a member of Congress.
The situation cannot be equated, as it often is, to a CEO or a college president who would be removed for similar types of acts that the President is accused of.
To suggest such an equality would be to paralyze the entire government.
Whereas a judge, a legislator, and certainly not a private citizen does not represent an entire branch of government, the President IS the executive branch of government.
To suggest his removal entails a Constitutional crisis and a disruption of our whole political system.
We have all been slapped in the face by both the President's actions and the Starr inquisition.
And we have been so busy holding our cheeks that we have not even examined the evidence and made a deliberative assessment of it.
I have educated myself about the severity of the Articles of Impeachment.
And I want to share with my colleagues and the American people some of the thoughts that I have learned.
As we all know, the Congress has been down this road only twice before in our history.
And we need to wake up right now as to the severity of today's issue, and what that means to the Republic and this Congress's place in history.
I asked Larry Tribe, perhaps our nation's most renowned Constitutional scholar, to describe the upcoming vote to begin an impeachment inquiry.
His answer captured everything I want to say today.
Professor Tribe likened a vote to simply begin the impeachment proceeding to breaking the glass on a fire alarm that would trigger a mad rush and a state of emergency.
Once the glass is broken and the alarm goes off , we cannot put the pieces back together.
Such an action will make it almost impossible to restore a sense of stability and order in this country.
Impeachment proceedings are just like pulling a fire alarm in a crowded room.
You better think before you pull, lest many people or this nation get hurt in the process.
To be sure, if we are to go down the impeachment road, it must be with a keen sense of understanding and purpose.
Otherwise we will be blind to the consequences of our actions.
And we must begin with what constitutes the grounds for an impeachable offense.
Is it what Ken Starr says it is? Is it what Trent Lott says it is? Is it what Henry Hyde, or I should say, Newt Gingrich, says it is? Or should it be a definition that the entire Congress agrees upon before we begin an inquiry into impeachment?
I like the fact that Chairman Hyde has finally said that we should have hearings on what constitutes grounds for impeachment.
That seems to be the right course to take.
Yet it seems Chairman Hyde and Speaker Gingrich intend to proceed with an impeachment inquiry before such hearings on the working definition of what impeachment really is.
Do they want to make it up as they go along? It sure sounds as though they do.
In my opinion, to make up a definition, or to proceed with an inquisition before we've had the time to understand what truly constitutes impeachment and we have a frame of reference to judge our actions against when we continue with an inquiry, constitutes sounding the fire alarm before we know there is a fire.
And it flies in the face of the due process set forth by our Constitution which says we need to know what to prosecute before we know whether a crime has been committed.
The reason the Majority wants to vote on an impeachment inquiry next Monday before they know what impeachment really is -- is because they would never vote to initiate an inquiry once they really knew what they were talking about.
And once we know what is truly impeachable, then we need to ask one more question.
Is it the kind of offense in which the President's remaining in office is worse for this country than what will happen to this country by removing him from office?
This is no light matter.
We seem to be taking a cavalier attitude to this.
Obviously, a lot has to do with the politics of this season.
What we are embarking on truly goes to the nature of our whole form of government.
I had the opportunity last week as a member of the National Security Committee to go to New York to listen to the President's speech on global terrorism.
I met many diplomats who have a working relationship with our democracies around the world, in Europe and the former Soviet Union, and all of them are perplexed as to what's going on in this country.
A friend of mine, who deals with these countries on a day to day basis, told me that his judgment of why they're so perplexed is that they haven't been at the democracy game as long as we have.
They have been under tyranny of fascism and communism within their own lifetimes.
They know that the miracle of this system of government is not to be messed with.
That is why they feel so strongly that what we're doing in this country is so wrong for the future of our Constitutional form of government.
What we're doing now, by putting the cart before the horse, by saying we're going to have a preliminary inquiry before we know what the definition of impeachment is, to me, violates the fundamental process of due process where you know what the crime is before you begin to prosecute it.
The reason the Majority wants to vote on an impeachment inquiry before they know what impeachment really is, is because they could never vote to initiate such an inquiry once they really knew what they were talking about.
If it was really impeachable, we would have to ask one more question.
Is the impeachable offense, such as perjury, the kind of offense in which the President's remaining in office is worse for this country than the excruciating process of impeachment that it will take to remove him?
We need wisdom to prevail over politics.
We must see past the passions of the moment and look to the true nature of this offense, which in my opinion is better to be judged by God and family than Congress and the media.
What we have is a reckless embarrassing personal act by the President.
It was wrong.
The President was human... he tried to hide it.
That too was wrong.
None of this, however, shows that the President was on a course that was dangerous to the Republic or justifies throwing this democracy into a Constitutional tailspin.
And it will not justify it.
Gifts? Conflicting testimony? Executive privilege? Do these things justify paralyzing our Constitutional form of government?
People say this is about a certain offense -- perjury -- and that we shouldn't let anyone off the hook.
But during the Watergate scandal, President Nixon perjured himself in his tax returns and this was dismissed as not an impeachable offense.
And what about when Casper Weinberger lied to this Congress about a secret war during the Iran-Contra scandal? When asked, he said he had no details of a military offensive.
Republican President Bush pardoned Casper Weinberger, and he did so at the behest of Senator Bob Dole.
I have a concluding couple of thoughts.
Joe McCarthy used details of people's sex lives to extort cooperation from them and from former communists by threatening to expose what happened in their bedrooms.
J. Edgar Hoover tried to get Martin Luther King Jr. to drop out of the civil rights movement by sending his wife, Coretta Scott King, a copy of an illegally obtained illicit tape recording.
It's documented!
Ken Starr has done the same thing.
Through his dump of lurid sexual details, he is trying to embarrass the President so much so that he disrupts our whole Constitutional form of government by forcing him to resign.
To me, this amounts to simply SEXUAL McCARTHYISM.
The bottom line is this.
I would say the Majority needs to heed the words of their own party's President.
Gerald Ford was featured in The Hill newspaper last week.
He said that "an impeachable offense is whatever a majority of the House of Representatives considers to be at a given moment in history."
But that is what President Ford meant with respect to a judge.
But when asked to say what this statement meant with regard to a President, Ford added the removal of a duly elected President in midterm "would indeed require crimes of the magnitude of treason and bribery."
Ladies and gentlemen of the House, we have a Constitutional debate here and I will venture to say that in my whole time in the United States Congress, I will not cast a more important vote than the one next Monday when I vote against such a reckless course that will imperil and permanently damage this Constitution and the definition of what is an impeachable offense.
In my mind, this is a sacrosanct document and what is sacred in it is that it is only used in the most extreme circumstances.
To me, this inquiry does not rise to that level and threshold.
For that reason, I encourage all my colleagues to join with me and put politics aside and say what is right for the Constitution -- and that is to stand with the Constitution and vote against any inquiry down this maddening road.
[bar_cyan.gif]
Back Home
