[clearpixel.gif] [clearpixel.gif]
Television viewers recently were given a revealing peek inside the process and profession of engineering through "Building Big," a five-part series of one-hour programs that highlighted some of history's greatest engineering efforts.
The series, which first aired on public television in October, was produced by PBS station WGBH in Boston with major funding from the Informal Science Education Program in the National Science Foundation's Directorate for Education and Human Resources (EHR).
Each program focused on one type of structure: bridges, domes, skyscrapers, dams, and tunnels.
The fifth episode, on tunnels, featured staff member Dr. Priscilla Nelson, Director of the Civil and Mechanical Systems (CMS) Division in NSF's Engineering Directorate.
Nelson was recruited to the project based on her expertise in underground construction, and through contacts in the American Society of Civil Engineers, for which she has served as President of the Geo-Institute.
Nelson spoke on topics ranging from the advances in drilling and blasting needed for completion of the 4.75-mile railroad tunnel through Hoosac Mountain in western Massachusetts in the mid-1800s, to the ventilation and safety of the tunnel under the English Channel (popularly dubbed the "Chunnel") and others through the Alps undertaken in the 1990s.
Through this range, viewers glimpsed how engineers tackled problems of design and function.
"I think the series' biggest contribution was getting across the idea that there were individual engineers who were in positions of leadership in each of these projects," Nelson observed.
"The idea of what a visionary engineer can do was clear," she noted.
Besides historic projects of the past, the series touched on current challenges that engineers face, and guided viewers to sources of further information.
For example, the Tunnel's episode described Boston's ongoing Central Artery/Tunnel Project (known locally as the "Big Dig"), and noted that, when finished, it will connect the city landscape to its waterfront with green space.
Curious viewers can find more information on the series' website, which describes how engineers solved the problems of tunneling beneath Boston's loose landfill and harbor sediments.
One answer lies in freezing the soil by pumping very cold saltwater through a maze of pipes that draw warmth out of it, and by injecting grout into soil pores.
The website also offers hands-on experiments, views of big structures, and biographical profiles of engineers.
WGBH has also produced a "Building Big" educational package for use in schools.
The series will not be the last view the public gets into engineering, hopes Dr. Hyman Field, NSF's Senior Advisor for Public Understanding of Research.
NSF "is interested in supporting more projects to inform the public about engineering and technology," Field said.
Often, the strongest proposals for such projects come from teams of science educators and engineers.
To learn more about "Building Big," visit the website at [ http://www.pbs.org/wgbh/buildingbig/ ].
For more on NSF support for such programs, email Hyman Field at hfield@nsf.gov .
[ENG Home] [ENG News Front Page]
The National Science Foundation's (NSF) Directorate for Engineering is a leading government organization that is responsible for promoting engineering in the United States.
For Further information about the Engineering News contact: National Science Foundation Arlington, VA 22230 Tel: (703) 292-4611
