Home Page - DefendAmerica [NOTE: Because of increased web traffic, you may experience delays.
Please be patient.]
Jul 28, 2003 _______________ Search Defend America space Homeland Security Advisory System Homeland Security Advisory System space Support For Our Troops Skip Navigation space Government space FirstGov space EPA space FAA space FEMA space Homeland Security space Justice Department space State Department space Treasury Department space White House space space Military space DefenseLINK space Army space Navy space Air Force space Marines space Coast Guard space Reserve Affairs space Army Reserve space Navy Reserve space Air Force Reserve space Marine Reserve space Coast Guard Reserve space National Guard space Air National Guard space Army National Guard space Merchant Marines space space How To Help space Civil Air Patrol space Coast Guard Auxiliary space FBI space Liberty Unites space Red Cross space Salvation Army space USA Freedom Corps space USO space Fisher House space space Transcripts space Defense Department space State Department space White House Humanitarian Aid
Photo, caption below.
space FIBER CABLE -- U.S. Air Force Senior Airman David Perleberg (right) and Senior Airman Claude Winfree, 407th Expeditionary Communications Squadron, check the line of sight in order to extend communications resources until fiber cable is installed in support of Operation Iraqi Freedom, July 19, 2003.
U.S. Air Force photo by Senior Airman Karolina Gmyrek Iraqi Die-hards May Number Around 5,000, Officials Say [hLine2.gif] By Jim Garamone / American Fo
The official spoke on background at the Central Command Forward headquarters here July 27.
The number of Iraqis fighting against the coalition is at best an estimate.
The official said the guess takes into consideration the various different "actions" going on it Iraq.
"Iraq is more than a guerilla war," said a senior CENTCOM official.
"It is a low-intensity conflict where you have to fight terrorists, you have to fight guerrillas, you have to fight criminals and you have to achieve stability.
It's a multifaceted effort, and most of the country is stable."
More Hussein on Lam, Gen. Myers to Check 'Pulse' of Iraq Coalition [hLine2.gif] By Jim Garamone / American Forces Press Service [hLine2.gif]
Spc. Ryan Smith, 372nd MPAD U.S. Army photo by Spc. Ryan Smith, 372nd MPAD DOHA, Qatar, July 27, 2003 -- Saddam Hussein is on the lam and if he is still in Iraq the United States will get him, said Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff Air Force Gen. Richard Myers, yesterday.
Myers is traveling to Iraq to get a feel for the "pulse" of coalition operations in the country.
He said he has been encouraged by reports coming out of Iraq that show political, economic and security progress.
Myers is going to meet with American commanders and troops in the triangular area bounded by Baghdad, Tikrit and Ar Ramadi.
That part of Iraq is a stronghold of the former regime and there are thousands of Baath Party loyalists still in the area.
More than 80 percent of the incidents directed against coalition forces happen in that region.
Myers said he has limited time in the country and that going to such an area will give him a better appreciation of the situation in Iraq.
More
Progress in the Global War on Terrorism space
Go to Operation Tribute to Freedom America Pays Tribute to the Troops star Join the OTF Team star Find an Event
star America Sends Best Wishes star Sign an On-line Thank You Note
space Afghanistan Update space Iraq Update space Iraq's 55 Most Wanted
Coalition Forces Continue Patrols In Iraq BAGHDAD, Iraq, July 28, 2003 -- Coalition forces continued to conduct patrols and raids throughout Iraq, removing former regime loyalist, in support of the effort to create a secure environment, according to U.S. Central Command officials.
The 2nd Brigade Combat Team of the 101st Airborne Division (Air Assault) detained two former regime loyalist brothers confiscating $100,000 to $200,000, 30-40 million Iraqi Dinar and three AK-47s in the process.
While conducting a routine patrol, a unit of the 3rd Armored Cavalry Regiment discovered large caliber ammunition, consisting of several primers and 130 mm rounds, at a house in the area.
Seven individuals were detained for questioning.
More
Army Alerts Two National Guard Brigades WASHINGTON, July 28, 2003 -- The Army announced July 26 that it has alerted two U.S. Army National Guard Enhanced Separate Brigades that may participate in the Army unit rotation plan for Operation Iraqi Freedom.
The units are the 30th Infantry Brigade from North Carolina and the 39th Infantry Brigade from Arkansas.
The 30th Infantry Brigade will be augmented with an infantry battalion from the 27th Infantry Brigade of New York.
The 39th Infantry Brigade will be augmented with an infantry battalion from the 41st Infantry Brigade of Oregon.
The deployment window for these units is between February and April of 2004.
This deployment will last up to one year from mobilization to demobilization.
These National Guard units will provide capabilities necessary to perform the on going mission in Iraq.
Their deployment is part of the Army s unit rotation plan to further provide predictability in the lives of soldiers and their families as they serve the nation fighting the global war on terrorism .
Send E-Mail to Troops at AnyServiceMember. space space Radio space space Air Force Radio AFRTS - Radio Soldiers Radio space space Television space space Air Force TV AFRTS - TV Navy-Marines TV Soldiers Radio
Fallen Warriors
Operation Iraqi Freedom - POW+MIA
Link to Profiles.
Link to DefendAmerica Specials.
Military Systems 
Link to Americans Working Together.
Backgrounders
Coalition Contributions
Remembering Those Who Perished At the Pentagon
Subscribe to DefendAmerica Email News.
Feedback.
Iraqis Providing Info, Attacks Lessening, Commander Says [hLine2.gif] By Sgt. 1st Class Doug Sample, USA / American Forces Press Service [hLine2.gif]
During a video-teleconference briefing from Tikrit, Iraq, Army Maj. Gen. Ray Odierno told Pentagon reporters that recent tips from Iraqis have led to the discovery of several large caches of weapons and the detention of what may prove to be some of Saddam's personal security detachment.
Odierno said that in the past 24 hours his soldiers visited five separate cache sites and have detained or killed at least 60 Iraqi subversives.
The more Iraqi citizens feel coalition forces will act on their tips, the more likely they are to come forward, the general explained.
More Dep. Sec. Wolfowitz: Security 'Real Problem,' but Will Improve [hLine2.gif] By Sgt. 1st Class Doug Sample, USA / American Forces Press Service [hLine2.gif]
Wolfowitz, who just returned from a four-day tour of Iraq, addressed the security situation Sunday during interviews on "Fox News Sunday" and NBC's "Meet the Press" July 27.
"The sacrifices that our troops are making are spectacular," he said on Fox.
"It's difficult conditions, it's dangerous conditions, and it takes a lot of ingenuity to figure out how to do some of these civil-military things they're doing.
But it is a sacrifice that is going to make our children and our grandchildren safer, because the battle to win the peace in Iraq now is the central battle in the war on terrorism.
"Any American death is a terrible thing, but I think the American public understands that when you're fighting a war against terrorists, you're fighting for the security of this country, that sacrifice is something that you've got to expect," he said.
More U.S. and Allies Help Iraqi People Repair Their Health Care System [hLine2.gif]
Dr. William Winkenwerder Jr., assistant secretary of defense for health affairs, noted that Iraq has "an energized and educated medical community that's ready and capable of reestablishing" the country's position as one of the health care leaders in the Middle East.
Back from a recent trip to Iraq to assess the health care situation there, Winkenwerder noted that Hussein preferred to lavish money on palaces, security and weaponry, while ignoring his people's health.
More space Photo Essay - banner image
Pumping Iron in Kandahar (More Photo Essays)
Photo, caption below
Soldiers of Task Force Devil go to let off steam, work up a sweat and stay in shape at the Kandahar gym, July 24, 2003.
The Body Shop, as it is also known, is open 24 hours a day and located on Kandahar Army Airfield in Afghanistan.
U.S. Army photo by Staff Sgt. Leopold Medina, Jr. 6 More Photos space
space space
Practice Makes Perfect
U.S. Coast Guard Seventh Dsitrict Commander, Rear Adm. Jay Carmichael and Army Col. Pete Lennon, Commanding Officer of the 1189th Transportation Terminal Brigade look out over the Georgia Ports Authority's Ocean Terminal in Savannah, Ga., at the thousands of Army vehicles and some aircraft that are being loaded aboard the USNS Mendoca.
U.S. Coast Guard photo by PA2 Danielle DeMarino space SAVANNAH, Ga.
-- Olive-drab Chinook helicopters lined up on the dock like somber sentinels.
Flanked by the flashing red lights of white police cruisers, they seemed to frame lifts used to lower and raise cargo.
A tugboat churned past pushing a 100-foot fuel barge, outlined by large storage tanks with "Savannah" emblazoned across the sides.
Manned entirely by reservists from Marine Safety Office Savannah, a United States Coast Guard 27-foot small boat suddenly cruised into view, blue lights blazing.
Lieutenant Commander Alan Reagan, maneuvered his boat into position near the twin spans of the Talmadge Memorial Bridge, keeping recreational vessel traffic at bay.
Thwap, thwap, thwap...the rotor blades on the imposing helicopters fire up, indicating a sense of urgency.
And that sense of urgency was not wasted on the nearly 200 people from dozens of government agencies who, in mid-July, tested Georgia's emergency response to a homeland security threat.
More space space More News - banner image On Iraq U.S. Will Continue to 'Root Out' Remnants of Former Regime U.S. Troops 'Making A Real Difference' in Iraq, Myers Says Bremer: Reconstuction Head Notes Progress Future Plans Military News ASD for Special Ops, Low Intentsity Conflict Sworn In Officials Announce Plan for Iraq Troop Rotations into 2004 Rumsfeld, Keane Discuss Army Transformation, Troop Rotations National Guard, Reserve Update space
President George W. Bush On the Death of Comedian, Bob Hope
"Today America lost a great citizen.
We mourn the passing of Bob Hope.
Bob Hope made us laugh, and he lifted our spirits.
Bob Hope served our nation when he went to battlefields to entertain thousands of troops from different generations.
We extend our prayers to his family.
And we mourn the loss of a good man.
May God bless his soul."
Remarks at Andrews Air Force Base, July 28, 2003
space Saddam's Iraq: Reign of Terror space
space
Iraqi Freedom bullet U.S. Views -- Quotes by President Bush 
space
space
Profile U.S. Marine Corps Staff Sgt. Eric Alva
space Major General Christopher Cortez (left), Commanding General, Marine Corps Recruiting Command, commends Staff Sgt. Eric Alva, the 2003 recipient of the Heroes and Heritage Award, for his strength and determination.
U.S. Marine Corps photo by Sgt.
Matt Griffin space
AUSTIN, Texas -- Less than four months ago, Staff Sgt. Eric Alva nearly died.
On March 21, while serving with the 3rd Battalion, 7th Marines in Iraq, Alva stepped on a landmine.
He broke his right arm and his right leg was damaged so badly it needed to be amputated.
However, his sufferings haven't dampened his mind and spirit.
This was obvious to all who saw Alva accept the Heroes and Heritage Award July 13, at the National Council of La Raza during a special salute to Hispanics military presentation.
Major General Christopher Cortez, commanding general of Marine Corps Recruiting Command in Quantico, Va., was on stage and presented Alva with his award.
"SSgt.
Alva is a credit to the Corps," said Maj. Gen. Christopher Cortez.
"We are grateful for his faithful service and proud to honor him today."
More space Other Profiles space
space On the Ground In Kuwait space Romanians Get "Perfect 10" for Decontamination Performance space A Romanian soldier cleans a container at the wash point at Port Shuaiba, Kuwait.
space space PORT SHUAIBA, Kuwait (July 21, 2003) -- Standing in formation in the morning Kuwaiti sun, about 40 Romanian soldiers from the 383rd NBC (nuclear, biological and chemical) Defense Company, Bistrita, Romania, accepted certificates from a very appreciative Col. Anthony D'Aquila, deputy chief of staff for the 143rd Transportation Command out of Orlando, Fla., for an outstanding job performing redeployment washing of more than 30,000 containers and vehicles.
The Romanian NBC unit arrived in theater on March 12, eight days before the start of Operation Iraqi Freedom.
The unit is part of the OIF Coalition to provide consequence management capabilities in response to a weapons of mass destruction attack, D'Aquila said.
"If the Iraqis had hit civilians with NBC-based Scud missiles, they would have been able to respond with their decontamination facilities," he added.
More space One Coalition: Romanians and U.S. Team Up space In Afghanistan space space Blood Supply Network Helps Sustain Life Danish Airmen Share Expertise Combined Efforts Clear, Open Bagram Bypass space In Djibouti space High Speed Naval Vessel Surfs African Region Forces Brought Together in Time of Need space In Saudi Arabia space Air Base Equipment Gets Second Chance Reservists Put Troops in Touch with Home space space space 'On The Ground' Archive space space
space
Ballistic Missile Defense | Defense Department Overview | Joint Chiefs of Staff CENTCOM | EUCOM | JFCOM | NORAD | NORTHCOM | PACOM | SOCOM | STRATCOM | SOUTHCOM | TRANSCOM Maps | Recruiting | Today's Military | DoDBusOpps Home | Privacy 
