Home Page - DefendAmerica [NOTE: Because of increased web traffic, you may experience delays.
Please be patient.]
Jul 28, 2003 _______________ Search Defend America space Homeland Security Advisory System Homeland Security Advisory System space Support For Our Troops Skip Navigation space Government space FirstGov space EPA space FAA space FEMA space Homeland Security space Justice Department space State Department space Treasury Department space White House space space Military space DefenseLINK space Army space Navy space Air Force space Marines space Coast Guard space Reserve Affairs space Army Reserve space Navy Reserve space Air Force Reserve space Marine Reserve space Coast Guard Reserve space National Guard space Air National Guard space Army National Guard space Merchant Marines space space How To Help space Civil Air Patrol space Coast Guard Auxiliary space FBI space Liberty Unites space Red Cross space Salvation Army space USA Freedom Corps space USO space Fisher House space space Transcripts space Defense Department space State Department space White House Humanitarian Aid
Photo, caption below.
space RIBBON CUTTING -- Col. Sam Holloway, Division Support Commander for the 101st Airborne Division, and Talal Al-Khalidi, a town councilman, cut a ribbon inaugurating the new athletic stadium in Mosul, Iraq, July 23, 2003.
U.S. Army photo by Sgt. Curtis Hargrave Iraqi Die-hards May Number Around 5,000, Officials Say [hLine2.gif] By Jim Garamone / American Forces Press Service [hLine2.gif]
The official spoke on background at the Central Command Forward headquarters here July 27.
The number of Iraqis fighting against the coalition is at best an estimate.
The official said the guess takes into consideration the various different "actions" going on it Iraq.
"Iraq is more than a guerilla war," said a senior CENTCOM official.
"It is a low-intensity conflict where you have to fight terrorists, you have to fight guerrillas, you have to fight criminals and you have to achieve stability.
It's a multifaceted effort, and most of the country is stable."
More Hussein on Lam, Gen. Myers to Check 'Pulse' of Iraq Coalition [hLine2.gif] By Jim Garamone / American Forces Press Service [hLine2.gif]
Spc. Ryan Smith, 372nd MPAD U.S. Army photo by Spc. Ryan Smith, 372nd MPAD DOHA, Qatar, July 27, 2003 -- Saddam Hussein is on the lam and if he is still in Iraq the United States will get him, said Chairman of the Joint Chiefs of Staff Air Force Gen. Richard Myers, yesterday.
Myers is traveling to Iraq to get a feel for the "pulse" of coalition operations in the country.
He said he has been encouraged by reports coming out of Iraq that show political, economic and security progress.
Myers is going to meet with American commanders and troops in the triangular area bounded by Baghdad, Tikrit and Ar Ramadi.
That part of Iraq is a stronghold of the former regime and there are thousands of Baath Party loyalists still in the area.
More than 80 percent of the incidents directed against coalition forces happen in that region.
Myers said he has limited time in the country and that going to such an area will give him a better appreciation of the situation in Iraq.
More
Progress in the Global War on Terrorism space
Go to Operation Tribute to Freedom America Pays Tribute to the Troops star Join the OTF Team star Find an Event
star America Sends Best Wishes star Sign an On-line Thank You Note
space Afghanistan Update space Iraq Update space Iraq's 55 Most Wanted
Army Alerts 2 National Guard Enhanced Separate Brigades WASHINGTON, July 28, 2003 -- The Army announced July 26 that it has alerted two U.S. Army National Guard Enhanced Separate Brigades that may participate in the Army unit rotation plan for Operation Iraqi Freedom.
The units are the 30th Infantry Brigade from North Carolina and the 39th Infantry Brigade from Arkansas.
The 30th Infantry Brigade will be augmented with an infantry battalion from the 27th Infantry Brigade of New York.
The 39th Infantry Brigade will be augmented with an infantry battalion from the 41st Infantry Brigade of Oregon.
The deployment window for these units is between February and April of 2004.
This deployment will last up to one year from mobilization to demobilization.
These National Guard units will provide capabilities necessary to perform the on going mission in Iraq.
Their deployment is part of the Army s unit rotation plan to further provide predictability in the lives of soldiers and their families as they serve the nation fighting the global war on terrorism.
Iraqi Assistance Center In Baghdad Serves Communities BAGHDAD, Iraq, July 23, 2003 -- An Iraqi man's house was destroyed by a bomb during the war.
It killed his two daughters and his brother.
His wife and sons were injured and still require medical care.
Unsure of where to go for help, he went to the Iraqi Assistance Center at the Iraqi Forum, formerly known as the Baghdad Convention Center.
Staff Sgt. Albert Berlo, a civil affairs specialist with the 352nd Civil Affairs Command, an Army Reserve unit out of Riverdale, Md., assists members of non-governmental organizations at the Iraqi Assistance Center in the Iraqi Forum in Baghdad July 23.
Spc. Ryan Smith, 372nd MPAD U.S. Army photo by Spc. Ryan Smith, 372nd MPAD The IAC is run by soldiers from the 352nd Civil Affairs Command, an Army Reserve unit from Riverdale, Md. Its purpose was originally designed to serve members of non-governmental organizations (NGOs) working in Iraq - providing them with information about anything from security and safety on the roads to humanitarian assistance flights arriving at the Baghdad International Airport.
Their focus is on national-level issues, said Capt. Cameron Sellers, humanitarian assistance flight operations officer for the 352nd CA COM.
More
Send E-Mail to Troops at AnyServiceMember. space space Radio space space Air Force Radio AFRTS - Radio Soldiers Radio space space Television space space Air Force TV AFRTS - TV Navy-Marines TV Soldiers Radio
Fallen Warriors
Operation Iraqi Freedom - POW+MIA
Link to Profiles.
Link to DefendAmerica Specials.
Military Systems 
Link to Americans Working Together.
Backgrounders
Coalition Contributions
Remembering Those Who Perished At the Pentagon
Subscribe to DefendAmerica Email News.
Feedback.
Iraqis Providing Info, Attacks Lessening, Commander Says [hLine2.gif] By Sgt. 1st Class Doug Sample, USA / American Forces Press Service [hLine2.gif]
During a video-teleconference briefing from Tikrit, Iraq, Army Maj. Gen. Ray Odierno told Pentagon reporters that recent tips from Iraqis have led to the discovery of several large caches of weapons and the detention of what may prove to be some of Saddam's personal security detachment.
Odierno said that in the past 24 hours his soldiers visited five separate cache sites and have detained or killed at least 60 Iraqi subversives.
The more Iraqi citizens feel coalition forces will act on their tips, the more likely they are to come forward, the general explained.
More Dep. Sec. Wolfowitz: Security 'Real Problem,' but Will Improve [hLine2.gif] By Sgt. 1st Class Doug Sample, USA / American Forces Press Service [hLine2.gif]
Wolfowitz, who just returned from a four-day tour of Iraq, addressed the security situation Sunday during interviews on "Fox News Sunday" and NBC's "Meet the Press" July 27.
"The sacrifices that our troops are making are spectacular," he said on Fox.
"It's difficult conditions, it's dangerous conditions, and it takes a lot of ingenuity to figure out how to do some of these civil-military things they're doing.
But it is a sacrifice that is going to make our children and our grandchildren safer, because the battle to win the peace in Iraq now is the central battle in the war on terrorism.
"Any American death is a terrible thing, but I think the American public understands that when you're fighting a war against terrorists, you're fighting for the security of this country, that sacrifice is something that you've got to expect," he said.
More U.S. and Allies Help Iraqi People Repair Their Health Care System [hLine2.gif] By Gerry J. Gilmore / American Forces Press Service [hLine2.gif]
Dr. William Winkenwerder Jr., assistant secretary of defense for health affairs, noted that Iraq has "an energized and educated medical community that's ready and capable of reestablishing" the country's position as one of the health care leaders in the Middle East.
Back from a recent trip to Iraq to assess the health care situation there, Winkenwerder noted that Hussein preferred to lavish money on palaces, security and weaponry, while ignoring his people's health.
More Photo Essay - banner image
Wolfowitz in Iraq (More Photo Essays)
Photo, caption below
Deputy Defense Secretary Paul Wolfowitz receives a small bouquet of flowers as a welcoming gift from an Iraqi girl upon his arrival in Salah ad Din in Kurdish-controlled Northern Iraq.
U.S. Army photo by Spc. Kieran Moore, 101st Airborne (Air Assault) Combat Camera Team 10 More Photos space
Franks Predicts Informants Will Turn in Saddam Within 60 Days [hLine2.gif] By Rudi Williams / American Forces Press Service [hLine2.gif]
The general who led international coalitions in Afghanistan and Iraq even predicted the demise of the pair's father.
During a July 23 speech to more than 470 educators, administrators, parents and military personnel during the 5th annual Military Child Education Coalition conference at the Mystic Marriott Hotel here, Franks presaged that if Saddam is alive, informants will turn him in, just as they did his sons.
"I'll even put a timeline on it," said the 34-year veteran who is retiring on Aug. 1.
"I suspect that within 60 days Saddam will be confirmed dead or he'll be in custody."
More space Photo Essay - banner image
Pumping Iron in Kandahar (More Photo Essays)
Photo, caption below
Soldiers of Task Force Devil go to let off steam, work up a sweat and stay in shape at the Kandahar gym, July 24, 2003.
The Body Shop, as it is also known, is open 24 hours a day and located on Kandahar Army Airfield in Afghanistan.
U.S. Army photo by Staff Sgt. Leopold Medina Jr. 6 More Photos space
Pentagon's First Responders Tested in Large-Scale Drill [hLine2.gif] By Sgt. 1st Class Doug Sample, USA / American Forces Press Service [hLine2.gif]
About 80 volunteers were sent through this process, only a few had to be carried by firefighters.
Photo by Sgt. 1st Class Doug Sample, USA WASHINGTON, July 25, 2003 -- "If this was a real event you wouldn't be standing here," the director of the Pentagon Force Protection Agency told reporters being given a close-up view of a large-scale chemical, biological, radiological and nuclear training exercise in the Pentagon's south parking lot July 24.
If this was a real event, John Jester told the reporters, they'd be standing 2,000 yards away.
However, because it was an exercise, reporters were allowed to get right next to the action, to see up close how the Pentagon would respond if this were, indeed, a live emergency.
More space space
Practice Makes Perfect
Photo, caption below PORT INSPECTION -- U.S. Coast Guard Seventh Dsitrict Commander, Rear Adm. Jay Carmichael and Army Col. Pete Lennon, Commanding Officer of the 1189th Transportation Terminal Brigade look out over the Georgia Ports Authority's Ocean Terminal in Savannah, Ga., at the thousands of Army vehicles and some aircrafts taht are being loaded aboard the USNS Mendoca during 24-hour a day operations.
U.S. Coast Guard photo by PA2 Danielle DeMarino space SAVANNAH, Ga.
-- Olive-drab Chinook helicopters lined up on the dock like somber sentinels.
Flanked by the flashing red lights of white police cruisers, they seemed to frame lifts used to lower and raise cargo.
A tugboat churned past pushing a 100-foot fuel barge, outlined by large storage tanks with "Savannah" emblazoned across the sides.
Manned entirely by reservists from Marine Safety Office Savannah, a United States Coast Guard 27-foot small boat suddenly cruised into view, blue lights blazing.
Lieutenant Commander Alan Reagan, maneuvered his boat into position near the twin spans of the Talmadge Memorial Bridge, keeping recreational vessel traffic at bay.
Thwap, thwap, thwap...the rotor blades on the imposing helicopters fire up, indicating a sense of urgency.
And that sense of urgency was not wasted on the nearly 200 people from dozens of government agencies who, in mid-July, tested Georgia's emergency response to a homeland security threat.
More space space More News - banner image On Iraq U.S. Will Continue to 'Root Out' Remnants of Former Regime U.S. Troops 'Making A Real Difference' in Iraq, Myers Says Bremer: Reconstuction Head Notes Progress Future Plans Wolfowitz Relays Impressions Of Soldiers, Civilians in Iraq Commander Details Mission That Killed Hussein's Sons Military News Officials Announce Plan for Iraq Troop Rotations into 2004 Rumsfeld, Keane Discuss Army Transformation, Troop Rotations National Guard, Reserve Update space
Saddam's Iraq: Reign of Terror space
space
Iraqi Freedom bullet U.S. Views -- Quotes by President Bush 
space
President George W. Bush
"A free and democratic and peaceful Iraq will not threaten America and our friends with illegal weapons.
A free Iraq will not provide harbor and money to terrorist organizations which would like to hurt America.
A free Iraq will not destabilize the Middle East.
A free Iraq can set a hopeful example for the entire region.
And as the pursuits of freedom replace hatred and resentment and terror in the Middle East, the American people will be more secure and the world will be more peaceful.
We owe a significant debt of gratitude to the men and women who wear the uniform of the United States of America."
Remarks in Livonia, Michigan, July 24, 2003
Defense Officials Identifies Army Casualties WASHINGTON, July 25, 2003 -- Defense officials announced today that on July 23 east of Baghdad, Iraq, Capt. Joshua T. Byers, 29, of Nevada was killed in action when his convoy hit an explosive device.
Byers was assigned to Headquarters, Headquarters Troop, 2nd Battalion, 3rd Armored Cavalry Regiment, in Fort Carson, Co.
On July 24, three soldiers were killed north of Al Hawd, Iraq, when their military convoy came under enemy fire.
Killed were: Cpl. Evan Asa Ashcraft, 24, West Hills, Calif.
Ashcraft was assigned to the Company A, 1st Battalion, 327th Infantry, 101st Airborne Division, in Fort Campbell, Ky.
Pfc. Raheen Tyson Heighter, 22, Bay Shore, N.Y.
Heighter was assigned to the 2/320th Field Artillery, Fort Campbell, Ky.
Staff Sgt. Hector R. Perez, 40, of Corpus Christi, Texas.
Perez was assigned to Company A, 1st Battalion, 327th Infantry, 101st Airborne Division, in Fort Campbell, Ky.
Sgt. Juan M. Serrano, 31, Manati, Puerto Rico, died on July 24 in Baghdad, Iraq.
Serrano was changing a tire on an M998 vehicle when it fell on him inflicting a fatal head injury.
Serrano was assigned to Headquarters and Headquarters Company, 1st Battalion, 37th Armor, 1st Armored Division, Friedberg, Germany.
space
Profile U.S. Army Spc. Suzan Oliver
space U.S. Army Spc. Suzan Oliver prepares to teach Arabic at the Port of Shuaiba.
She is assigned to the 143rd Transportation Command and works in civil affairs.
U.S. Army photo space PORT OF SHUAIBA, Kuwait -- Soldiers in Kuwait have started studying Arabic twice a week thanks to a fellow American soldier who grew up speaking Arabic in Alexandria, Egypt.
Spc. Suzan Oliver spends Tuesday and Thursday afternoons teaching Arabic to soldiers assigned to the Port of Shuaiba.
" They seem very interested," Oliver said of her students.
"The whole class is pretty responsive."
More space Other Profiles space
space On the Ground In Afghanistan space Blood Supply Network Helps Sustain Life in Afghanistan space BAGRAM, Afghanistan -- Because Afghanistan is a war-torn country where landmines and firearms are an everyday fact of life, casualties are brought to the U.S. Army Hospital on Bagram Air Field on a daily basis.
Most of these casualties are local nationals, said Capt. Scott R. Cvecko, 452nd Combat Support Hospital and commander of the Blood Support Unit.
"The locals step on landmines, get gunshots, motor vehicle accidents, and things of this nature," he said.
"They come through here and require surgery to repair whatever damage that they have."
More space Danish Airmen Share Expertise Combined Efforts Clear, Open Bagram Bypass Salang Tunnel Vital Link To Infrastructure Bagram Hosts Engineering Conference space In Djibouti space High Speed Naval Vessel Surfs African Region Forces Brought Together in Time of Need space In Saudi Arabia space Air Base Equipment Gets Second Chance Reservists Put Troops in Touch with Home space space space 'On The Ground' Archive space space
[ii072503n.jpg]
PHONE HOME -- U.S. Army Staff Sgt. Richard Yohn calls home July 24, 2003, in a telephone morale tent at Tallil Air Base while deployed to Iraq in support of Operation Iraqi Freedom.
U.S. Air Force photo by: Senior Airman Karolina Gmyrek
space
Ballistic Missile Defense | Defense Department Overview | Joint Chiefs of Staff CENTCOM | EUCOM | JFCOM | NORAD | NORTHCOM | PACOM | SOCOM | STRATCOM | SOUTHCOM | TRANSCOM Maps | Recruiting | Today's Military | DoDBusOpps Home | Privacy 
