Whidbey Center Use Team February 18, 2003 Members Present: Jonette, Bob, Shannon, Kathy, Joyce, Sharleen, Terri, Brian Guest: Gary Smith (WorkSource Whatcom).
Agenda:
1.
Customer Comment Card Review.
2.
Vision and Values Review.
3.
Overview of WTS Membership System.
4.
Business Survey.
5.
WorkSource Whidbey- Center Issues * Follow-Up Reports:
.
Membership card update.
.
Website update.
.
Job fair update.
.
Snohomish WS PowerPoint for Business Services.
· New Web Update Article.
· Press Releases Completed for this period.
· New Center Issues.
· New WorkSource Activities.
· CQI Calendar Check
6.
Action Plan- Self Assessment
· Strategic planning- Identify Improvement Strategies
7.
Other
8.
Build Next Agenda - March 4
1) Customer Comment Card Update:
Kathy and Shannon are re-organizing the data for presentation at the next CUT meeting on March 18^th.
Action: Kathy and Shannon will bring information to March 18^th CUT meeting.
2) Vision and Values Review:
Brian will present at the March 18^th meeting.
This will be training for goals, visions, and values of the partnership.
Action: Brian will bring for a future meeting.
3) WTS Membership System:
Gary Smith provided an overview of the new membership system that will be in effect starting Feb. 27^th in Oak Harbor (The new computers will be changed out on Feb 25^th and 26^th).
The new membership system ensures compliance with the state wide system which will enable a more comprehensive and usable database that will tell us who our customers are and what services they are utilizing.
New forms: WorkSource Whatcom initiated a new form that captures the information needed for SKIES.
WorkSource Whidbey will begin utilizing this form on Feb. 27^th for all new membership cards.
The information will be collected and entered into SKIES by Joyce or Bob.
The new form allows us to record the jobs that people are getting and helps our UI customers get credit for job search.
Do not refer to the new membership system as "swipe card" or "tracking" system.
WorkSource Whatcom staff have found that membership system has a more positive connotation and it makes customers feel as though they are a part of our system.
If a customer refuses to provide their social security number, we can provide an alternate form of their membership number.
The formula is as follows:
1) WDA Numeric identifier (i.e. Northwest = 3)
2) First two characters of the last name
3) First two characters of the first name
4) Birth month (2-digit format)
5) Birthday (2 digit format)
6) Gender (M/F)
When/If duplicates occur, append a single digit number (1-9) at the end.
It is imperative that we encourage customers to protect their card as their social security number is embedded into the magnetic strip on the back.
While we can provide them a new card there are machines that can access this information.
Center staff need to double check the daily list of activities to ensure that all activities for that day are listed on the sign-in kiosk.
This is important for proper tracking of activity participation.
The new touch screen kiosk is sensitive to touch and we need to remind customers to use their fingernail or the corner of their card when they are selecting daily activities.
When making membership cards staff need to capitalize first and last names so that the database is uniform.
4) Business Survey:
Bob will distribute updated version (via e-mail) for discussion at next CUT meeting.
Action: Bob will bring updated survey for March 18^th meeting.
5) WorkSource Whidbey - Center Issues:
· Website update:
Joe Hudon had created a separate website as a link to WorkSource Whidbey's calendar of events.
The decision has been made to cancel this site (sponsored by Tri-pod) and create a link from the go2worksource website.
Action: Kathy will work with partnership webmaster to create for Whidbey a site similar to Whatcom.
Kathy will contact webmaster to establish link to new website.
Kathy will let Jonette know when the site is operational and Jonette will cancel tri-pod site.
· Job Fair update:
The job fair will be held on May 22, 2 0 0 3 .
Literature for the fair will go out next month.
We have invited the Navy Transition Assistance Office to be listed as a community partner.
Emily Wetzel will let us know about this at a later date.
All job fair material will go out on NWDC letterhead.
· Snohomish Power Point Presentation for Businesses:
Bob is re-designing and will present during March 18^th meeting.
Action: Bob will review and present at the March 18^th meeting.
· New Web Update Article:
Website article for March - new lobby upgrade.
Action: TBD
· Press Releases Completed:
Calendar to the local papers and also to the local radio station (the local radio station KWDB 111 0 am announces community services available to the public).
They will be announcing the workshops once a week throughout March.
· Center Issues:
Recent vandalism has prompted the landlord to post "no trespassing" signs along both the front and back of our building.
After these signs are posted, we will be able to call the police to have loiterers removed and/or prosecuted for acts of vandalism to the building.
· Mystery Shopper Results:
Mystery shopper results from last year were presented for review.
Recently, Bob Scott and Malinda Bjaaland were recognized for providing outstanding customer service.
· New WorkSource Activities:
None.
· CQI Calendar Check:
On track.
6) Action Plan- Self Assessment
The re-certification application is due March 15^th for submission in April.
While justifications are provided, improvement strategies are needed.
1a.
Leadership demonstrates a belief in integrated service delivery and regularly articulates that belief to staff.
Improvement strategies: Continue to share leadership vision and plan with staff.
Upgrade of lobby resources (new menu of services and tour of services).
Continued action to keep all partners and staff aware of changes and developments within the organization.
1b.
Top administrators are personally visible in efforts to learn about and focus on customers.
Improvement strategies: Continued advertisement of business workshops with an emphasis on meeting their needs and adapting our focus in response to their needs.
Reassessment of our services as business use increases.
Build from CQI calendar and present results and strategies to leadership on a quarterly basis.
Re-evaluation of mystery shopper results and the continued evaluation of customer comment cards.
Categorization of comments from workshops to provide continuous quality improvement strategies to leadership.
2a.
The partnership that is the Workforce Development System sets strategic directions.
Improvement strategies: The Board recently looked at a new goal of economic development.
Leadership will provide training and implement locally.
Continued training on vision and goals by leadership.
2b.
Staffs at the Center know what the strategic plan requires of their daily work.
Improvement strategies: Connect daily work with five partnership goals as a continued item on CQI agenda.
Review strategic plan quarterly.
2c.
Each of the processes that underpin an integrated delivery system is operated in a consistent manner within and across agencies.
Improvement strategy: Integrate small business workshops into overall service delivery on Whidbey Island .
Improved data collection with new membership system.
Continued communication with leadership regarding the results of the reports and how customer service can be improved.
2d.
There are processes and practices in place that foster good communication within the workforce development system.
Improvement strategy: Provide comprehensive community referral guide to staff and partner organizations.
