Prepared Witness Testimony The Committee on Energy and Commerce W.J.
"Billy" Tauzin, Chairman __________________________________________________________________
National Energy Policy: Nuclear Energy Subcommittee on Energy and Air Quality March 27, 2001 1:00 PM 2123 Rayburn House Office Building __________________________________________________________________
Mr. C. Randy Hutchinson Senior Vice President, Business Development Entergy Nuclear on behalf of: Nuclear Energy Institute P.O. Box 32000 Jackson, MS, 39286 __________________________________________________________________
Oral Testimony Discussion
Chairman Barton, Ranking Member Boucher and distinguished members of the Energy and Air Quality Subcommittee, my name is Randy Hutchinson.
I am the Senior Vice President for Nuclear Business Development for Entergy Nuclear.
My staff buys nuclear power plants.
Entergy's customers -- 2.5 million in Arkansas, Mississippi, Louisiana and Texas -- have long benefited from a diverse electric generating portfolio.
Our company has more than 30,000 megawatts of power using a range of fuels -- 29% from natural gas, 26% from nuclear, 17% from coal, 3% from oil and 26% from purchased power -- an almost ideal balanced mix of fuels.
As a result, Entergy's electric customers are not as subject to the volatility of foreign oil and gas prices.
And Entergy will maintain this balanced fuel mix as the company grows.
Entergy Nuclear is headquartered in Jackson, Miss.
Entergy Nuclear Southwest has operated five reactors at four locations in Arkansas, Mississippi and Louisiana going back about two decades.
Entergy Nuclear Northeast in White Plains, N.Y., is our new regional headquarters for that region.
We own and operate the Pilgrim Nuclear Power Station in Plymouth, Mass., the Indian Point 3 plant in Westchester County, N.Y. and the James A. Fitzpatrick plant in Oswego County, N. Y.
We have agreed to purchase the Indian Point 1 and 2 plants from Con Edison and expect to close that transaction in mid-2001.
Indian Point 1 has been in safe storage for 20 years, waiting for decommissioning of the other two operating units.
Entergy Nuclear, the fastest growing nuclear operator in the nation, is now the second largest with nine operating units.
And we are aggressively competing for additional nuclear units wherever they are for sale.
Nuclear power is a principal growth strategy of our corporation.
Indeed nuclear energy is our core competency.
Entergy has built its success on the foundation of a strong safety culture.
When you have invested billions of dollars in nuclear assets as Entergy has, believe me, you are serious about safety at all times and at all levels.
We know a reliable, top performing plant is also a safe plant.
Our operating experience of 25 years shows they go together.
In our view, we are seeing a renaissance of nuclear power for three principal reasons:
· Operators of nuclear power plants have made significant improvements in the performance of their plants.
Capacity factors were around 65% in the 1980s, meaning nuclear plants were producing about 65% of the power they could produce in a year.
Last year, the industry average capacity factor hit 89 percent.
Our plants in Entergy were in the low to mid 90 percent range.
Safety performance has also improved as shown by INPO's performance indicators.
· Secondly, nuclear power is now the lowest cost power in the nation.
Production costs at a nuclear plant are below 2 cents a kilowatt-hour, compared to 3-4 cents at a natural gas-fired plant
· Thirdly, nuclear does not emit the global warming gases and other pollutants that other energy sources do.
Why is nuclear seeing this renaissance now?
We are seeing a confluence of forces.
Natural gas prices have risen dramatically.
Historically gas has been available for prices in the $2-3 per million BTUs range but those prices in the past year have risen to the $4-6 range nationally and even hit $50 and more in California recently.
At the same time, the nation's economy has continued to grow, increasing the demand for electric power across the nation.
Higher fossil fuel prices and growing demand has been a powerful combination of forces.
It is also becoming much clearer to many that nuclear power is the lowest cost power in the nation.
The cost of nuclear fuel has long been relatively stable, not subject to oil and gas price increases.
Nuclear is also being recognized for its environmental advantages.
Nuclear plants do not emit the global warming gases and other pollutants that power plants running on other types of fuel do.
California today is seeing the perfect storm.
Three colliding fronts.
There is too little supply and transmission capacity.
No new power plants have been built in California in a decade.
State deregulation law forced utilities to sell their plants and buy only in the day ahead market.
Long-term power supply contracts were prohibited, a prescription for disaster.
Then natural gas prices rose from $2-4 per million BTUs to $50 and up.
California could really use the Rancho Seco nuclear plant, shut down a decade ago amid much controversy.
Deregulation is allowing and accelerating the consolidation of nuclear power industry that was already occurring and probably would have occurred anyway.
Utilities with only one or two nuclear power plants have been realizing that it would be increasingly difficult to remain competitive without the resources and capabilities of larger operators.
We at Entergy Nuclear recognized the advantages of operating a fleet of nuclear plants three or four years ago and decided to pursue a nuclear growth strategy.
We have now become the nation's fastest growing nuclear operator, and truly a national operator with two fleets of plants - in the South and in the Northeast.
Consolidation in the nuclear industry is bringing several advantages.
You can bring a very focused management to plant operations.
Economics of scale through purchasing can be achieved.
You can spread financial risk over several plants, much like spreading risk when you buy a mutual fund.
You can pool talent and expertise in financial, technical and management areas.
You can respond quickly to a problem at one plant with highly qualified expertise.
You can bring the best practices from all plants to each plant.
And you grow to understand better what the regulatory authorities want and require.
You can easily see why consolidation is occurring.
It is rapidly providing our country with higher levels of safety and reliable performance at lower costs.
Entergy Nuclear bought the first nuclear plant sold by a utility when we purchased the Pilgrim Nuclear Station from Boston Edison in July 1999.
There have been 13 acquisitions of nuclear plants since then, less than two years.
Entergy has been the fastest growing, having almost doubled our five-reactor fleet in the South with four plants bought or under contract in the Northeast.
Five years ago, 46 operators were running the nation's 103 nuclear plants.
Today 24 operators are.
Eventually there probably will be 5-8 principal nuclear operators.
The average nuclear plant operating today is only about 18 years old, far from the expiration of its original 40-year operating license period.
But as some of the earliest plants approach their license periods, we in the industry have realized their useful lives are actually much longer.
As computer systems, instrumentation and other technology has advanced, these whole systems have been replaced in today's nuclear plants.
In many ways, today's operating plants are virtually new.
Many were originally designed with a 60-year life in mind, but were licensed for 40 years to provide an extra margin of safety.
As a result, we are convinced the useful operating life of today's plants can safely be extended through a rigorous license renewal process for up to an additional 20 years.
Several plants are in the relicensing process at present, including one of ours, Arkansas Nuclear One unit 1.
To further demonstrate our commitment to nuclear power, Entergy Nuclear last fall purchased a decommissioning services firm, TLG Services in Bridgewater, Conn., to get world-class technical and scientific engineering expertise in the planning and cost estimating of decommissioning.
And we are now offering complete nuclear life cycle management services to the U. S. industry.
Will new nuclear plants be built? Yes, we think so.
But only if and when we can bring some certainty to the industry.
And you, as our nation's policymakers, can help to establish that certainty.
New nuclear capacity can and will be built when it makes sense to take the financial risk.
The industry must see:
· Certainty in the costs of a new plant
· Certainty in the regulatory permitting process, and
· Certainty in the time required to build.
Much work has already been done to design and obtain regulatory approval of new advanced reactor designs that are simpler than today's operating plants.
Simpler generally means safer.
It also means more competitive in both construction and operating costs.
Much has also been accomplished by the industry and the NRC in developing a streamlined license process.
So that you can depend on actually operating the plant once built.
A new licensing process must be thorough, and result in the issuance of both a construction permit and an operating license.
When today's operating plants were built, a construction permit was issued after much review and another review was required before an operating license could be issued, often resulting in years of additional delay and accumulating costs.
As a result, as much as 20 percent of the total cost of today's plants was actually interest costs that had grown while the plant was waiting to go into operation.
With advanced, simpler reactor designs, an improved construction and operating license process, the time and resulting cost of a new nuclear plant would be better known.
That would translate to less financial risk, an imperative in today's deregulated power marketplace.
It can be done and is well on the way to reality.
Your support as policymakers is critical.
In our view, a new nuclear plant will be built when one can reasonably depend on the cost of that capacity will be in the $1,000 per kilowatt range.
And that cost will be determined by the above circumstances.
We at Entergy and others in the industry have been working together with the NRC to find solutions and bring certainty.
We expect several nuclear operators will announce early site locations later this year to begin the process of keeping the nuclear option open in this country.
The used nuclear fuel problem is, in our view, a political problem, not a technical one.
A decade of science has brought us very close to the selection of a permanent storage facility at Yucca Mountain.
The nation's electric consumers have been paying one mill per kilowatt-hour produced at all nuclear plants into a Nuclear Waste Fund that now totals $16 billion.
The used fuel solution has been paid for.
We are confident the Department of Energy will complete its study and recommend moving forward with the Yucca Mountain facility and the President will agree later this year.
Entergy is committed to nuclear energy.
We firmly believe nuclear will continue to be a safe, reliable and lower cost source of power for our country.
Nationally, nuclear energy is the second-largest source of U.S. electricity, producing one-fifth of all electricity at record levels of safety and efficiency and at production costs lower than coal and natural gas plants.
No other source of electricity can provide large amounts of power reliably and reasonable costs while enhancing our air quality.
Nuclear energy will continue to help meet our nation's public policy goals for energy security, economic growth and environmental protection.
You and your colleagues can make it happen.
I assure you, nuclear will respond with safe, reliable and low cost energy.
Today, and in the future.
With your help, nuclear power can continue to be a critical part of our nation's energy supply.
I hope you find this information helpful.
Thank you for inviting me today.
General Discussion of Energy Policy and Nuclear Energy
Nationally, nuclear energy is the second-largest source of U.S. electricity, producing one-fifth of all electricity at record levels of safety and efficiency and at production costs lower than coal and natural gas plants.
I would like to thank Chairman Barton and this subcommittee for focusing on the importance of national energy policy and the value of America's nuclear power plants to our nation's energy supply and environmental protection.
From an energy policy perspective--the nation is at a crossroad.
The greatest source and constant driver of growth in the United States for the past century has been electricity.
Without vast and steadily increasing supplies of power, this nation could not have become the economic marvel that it is.
Many of the country's most significant advances--technological and societal--would not have been possible without a constant flow of reliable, affordable electricity.
The Nation Needs a Comprehensive National Energy Policy
As the "new" economy converges with traditional economic infrastructure needs, electricity will continue to be the driver of our economic engine, whether to power the Internet or the nation's assembly lines.
As its cornerstone, any national energy policy must increase domestic electricity supply in order to meet this new demand, expected to increase at least 42 percent by 2020^^^(1).
[image001.gif]
To meet future electricity demand and maintain U.S. energy security, a comprehensive national energy policy must:
· Encourage investment in new power plant construction.
· Continue regulatory modernization, including regulatory stability for operating nuclear plants and licensing of new plants.
· Ensure sufficient funding for research, development and swift application of new nuclear energy technologies is consistent with nuclear energy's future role in meeting U.S. energy needs.
· Eliminate discrimination and ensure nuclear energy receives the same treatment as other electricity generating technologies in the marketplace.
· Educate the nation about the excellent safety record of nuclear energy and inject sound science and intellectual honesty into the national energy debate so consumers may make informed energy choices.
· Maintain U.S. leadership and infrastructure to train the next generation of scientists, engineers and technicians required to design, build and operate nuclear power plants.
Our nation cannot meet the demands of our growing population and economy without increased power generation through the construction of new power plants.
We need to maintain the proportion of non-emitting baseload capacity through the construction of new emission-free plants.
This will maintain a diverse energy portfolio for the nation and continue the price stability nuclear energy offers.
Nuclear Energy: Significant Role in the Nation's Electricity Portfolio
To achieve these short and long-term objectives requires an energy policy that supports and encourages a continuing significant role for nuclear power.
More than ever, the nation relies on nuclear energy to meet the country's soaring demand for power.
There is no longer any question that nuclear energy currently plays--and will continue to play--a critical role in providing electricity to the nation.
Today, the nation's 103 nuclear plants produce about 20 percent of our electricity.
More importantly, as plants have increased in efficiency over the last decade, nuclear power's role in meeting consumer demand has grown by nearly 20 percent.
Clearly, nuclear energy is absolutely essential to the integrity of the U.S. electricity grid and to our clean air goals.
Nuclear electricity is generated without producing greenhouse gases or other air pollutants, thus providing Americans with tremendous environmental benefits.
Without nuclear energy, the United States could not meet air quality standards established by the Clean Air Act or international commitments to reduce greenhouse gases, including carbon dioxide.
The reduction of air pollutants or the avoidance of emissions imparts significant health benefits to people across the nation, by reducing respiratory illness, for example.
Nuclear power plants are the nation's greatest emission-free source of electricity--producing nearly two-thirds of all emission-free power.
And, as public demand for clean air and a healthy environment increases in the future, nuclear energy is going to become even more important.
The Emerging Energy Crisis
[image003.gif]
In analyzing recent events in California, as well as looking at increased consumer heating and electricity bills elsewhere, the nation appears to be in the midst of an emerging energy crisis.
There may be debate about the exact variables at the root of problems in California, but there is no debate that rolling blackouts in one of the nation's fastest growing states--the world's sixth largest economy--represent a serious problem.
There is also no doubt that soaring heating and cooling bills for lower income families--including retirees--pose a serious threat to the health and safety of a large number of Americans.
And, with population growth and economic expansion expected to increase the need for new electricity generation capacity by more than 393,000 megawatts by 2020^^^(2), events in California may only be the beginning of a widespread energy shortage.
A few words from Silicon Valley--one of American's great economic success stories--may illuminate not just the crisis, but what two of the world's most forward-thinking executives see as one potential solution.
[image004.gif]
[image005.gif]
Nuclear Energy: A Time-Tested Solution
That nuclear energy is again figuring prominently on policymakers' and business leaders' agendas is no coincidence.
Indeed, this is not the first time the nation has looked to nuclear energy as a solution to its energy woes.
Looking back at recent history to the last energy crisis in the United States, nuclear energy provided the most significant and lasting response.
At the time of the first oil embargo in 1973, about 20 percent of U.S. electricity supply came from power plants that used oil for fuel.
In some parts of the nation--the Northeast, for example--the percentage of oil-fired electric generation was considerably higher.
Just five percent of U.S. electricity was produced at nuclear power plants.
In the subsequent decades, 89 new nuclear reactors began operating, effectively replacing oil as a fuel source for electricity, and making nuclear energy one of the most successful energy security programs.
Today, nuclear power reactors continue to provide a reliable hedge against volatile fuel prices and energy supply disruptions, protecting American businesses and homes from wildly fluctuating energy costs and providing a reliable supply of electricity.
Nuclear energy answered the call then, and the industry is answering that call now.
It must be remembered that nuclear's role in avoiding emissions also has significant implications for domestic economic development.
If a state is not complying with Clean Air Act regulations, it will be constrained when it comes to building new conventional power plants as well as other industrial and manufacturing facilities.
Without nuclear energy, there will be difficult choices on the horizon as we try to balance economic development, electricity needs and environmental goals.
New power plants will not come on line in the future without serious consideration of their environmental impact.
Again, California's woes clearly show that energy, the environment and economic development are inextricably linked.
Nuclear energy is the only expandable form of electricity generation that meets all three criteria.
Status of U.S. Nuclear Energy: Power for Today and Tomorrow
The United States has the largest commercial nuclear power industry in the world.
The 103 nuclear power reactors generate enough electricity to serve 67 million Americans, or the equivalent of the nuclear electricity needs of France and Japan combined.
The industry's safety record is unparalleled among the world's energy providers, and nuclear power plant efficiency and production have improved steadily during the last decade and today are at record levels.
In 2000, nuclear power plants in 31 states produced a record amount of electricity--754 billion kilowatt-hours.
[image006.jpg]
The industry's safety record has laid the foundation for this strong operational performance.
Safety and excellence are at the very core of the industry, and safety is essential to its continued success in the competitive electricity market.
As the industry moves forward, safety and low-cost power will continue to go hand-in-hand.
[image009.gif]
[image011.gif]
The increase in electricity generation at U.S. nuclear power plants during the 1990s was equivalent to adding twenty-three 1,000-megawatt power plants to our nation's electricity grid.
That's enough to meet 30% of all new electricity demand during that time.
This dramatic increase in electricity production by nuclear power plants is one the most successful energy efficiency programs of the last decade.
Safe, outstanding performance at nuclear power plants, especially during the transition to competitive electricity markets, is one reason why a growing number of policymakers, financial analysts and the public are rediscovering the benefits of nuclear energy.
Outstanding operational performance is also a major reason why Entergy and other energy companies are extending the operating licenses at existing reactors for an additional 20 years.
In 1997, some energy forecasters were predicting that dozens of nuclear power plants would shut down prematurely and that many more would shut down at the end of their 40-year licenses, issued by the Nuclear Regulatory Commission.
However, many of those same analysts today have reassessed the situation and now predict only a handful of plants may close prior to the expiration of their licenses.
They now recognize that the vast majority of plants will extend their operating licenses beyond the initial 40-year period.
[image013.gif]
And, it is also why the industry is looking at innovative partnerships for building advanced reactor designs that will be necessary to meet the future demands of a power-hungry digital economy and improve our air quality.
The Energy Information Administration, in its 2001 annual energy outlook, forecasts higher nuclear power production.
"In 2020, nuclear generation is projected to be 34 percent higher than forecast last year, due to lower estimated costs for extending the life of current reactors and higher projected natural gas prices."
Energy Information Administration
Energy Outlook, 2001
Even with this two-fold production and environmental advantage, nuclear power plants are the lowest cost electricity generators.
In 2000, the average production cost of electricity generated by nuclear power plants was 1.83 cents per kilowatt-hour, making nuclear power the most affordable electricity in the United States.
[image014.gif]
Nuclear Energy's Long History of Protecting our Air Quality
The environmental value of nuclear energy was recognized early by policy makers.
In Shippingport, Pa., over 50 years ago, nuclear energy's clean air value tipped the scales in favor of construction of the first demonstration nuclear power plant.
Beginning in the 1940s, Pittsburgh began instituting strict smoke control programs as part of urban redevelopment plans--well ahead of the rest of the nation.
At the time, Duquesne Light Company was petitioning to build a coal-fired plant on the Allegheny River.
They were encountering a great deal of resistance from the area's citizens, who were fearful of air pollution from the plant.
The main reason that Duquesne chose to bid on the nuclear project was because it offered power without pollution.
That benefit is being rediscovered today, and promises to be of prime importance in the future.
Energy and the environment are increasingly being linked both locally and globally.
Yet, nuclear energy's clean air benefits--its ability to avoid the emission of harmful air pollutants while producing vast amounts of electricity--is still undervalued.
In the process of generating electricity, nuclear plants produce no carbon dioxide, sulfur oxide or nitrogen oxides.
Between 1970 and 1990, the increased use of nuclear energy alone eliminated more nitrogen oxide emissions than direct industry action taken to comply with the Clean Air Act.
Nuclear energy, by avoiding additional emissions as electricity output grows, acts as a vital partner in Clean Air Act compliance.
[image015.gif]
To meet more stringent Clean Air Act requirements and effectively manage carbon risk in the future, the United States must increase its percentage of non-emitting sources of electricity--such as nuclear energy, solar, hydro and wind--above the current baseline of 30 percent.
Of these electricity production technologies, nuclear energy generates two-thirds of all emission-free electricity today, and is the only expandable, large-scale electricity source that avoids emissions and can meet the baseload energy demands of a growing, modern economy.
Industry Planning is Already Underway for New Nuclear Energy Plants
Although the average age of U.S. nuclear plants is only 18 years, we must begin planning now to enhance these services through increases in production capacity, improved efficiency, and license renewal.
That's why the industry is working now to set the stage for construction of new advanced-designed nuclear plants that will have more automatic safety systems and will be even more reliable and economical.
The industry is working together to lay the groundwork for new plants.
Three advanced designs have already achieved certification by the NRC, having gone through extensive, multi-year safety reviews.
Of the three designs, two have been built and are setting world-class performance records in Japan, while others are being built in Korea and Taiwan.
Additionally, two more advanced designs are undergoing NRC review.
One involves a review of changes to an existing approved design, uprating it from 600 to 1,000 megawatts.
The other is a new reactor--known as the Pebble Bed Modular Reactor--now in preliminary review by the NRC.
The NRC's licensing process for new nuclear plants will ensure that safety, design and site-related issues are resolved before large capital investments are made.
A new licensing process will allow the NRC to issue a single license to construct and operate a new nuclear plant.
Industry executives have come together--contributing personnel, funding and guidance--to develop a plan that will mark out a clear path for new nuclear plant orders.
This plan for the future considers safety standards and objectives; NRC licensing requirements; policy and legislative implications; capital investment needs and changing business conditions.
Nuclear Energy: Balancing the Nation's Energy Needs
Our nation cannot meet the demands of our growing population and economy without increased power generation through the construction of new power plants.
We need to increase the proportion of non-emitting baseload capacity through the construction of new emission-free plants.
This will maintain both a diverse energy portfolio for the nation, and the price stability that nuclear energy offers.
In order to do this, comprehensive national energy policy must
· Encourage investment in new power plant construction.
· Continue regulatory modernization, including regulatory stability for operating nuclear plants and licensing of new plants.
· Ensure sufficient funding for research, development and swift application of new nuclear energy technologies is consistent with nuclear energy's future role in meeting U.S. energy needs.
· Eliminate discrimination and ensure nuclear energy receives the same treatment as other electricity generating technologies in the marketplace.
· Educate the nation about the excellent safety record of nuclear energy and inject sound science and intellectual honesty into the national energy debate so that consumers may make informed energy choices.
· Maintain U.S. leadership and infrastructure to train the next generation of scientists, engineers and technicians required to design, build and operate nuclear power plants.
In a competitive marketplace, the nuclear energy industry has the primary responsibility for ensuring the viability of nuclear technology.
However, the industry values the important role that can be played by the federal government in preparing the way for new nuclear power plants.
Protecting our air quality and our environment, as well as improving our energy security, are among the reasons why two-thirds of Americans favor nuclear energy as one way to generate electricity.
One reason for the steady support for nuclear energy is that the public views nuclear energy as a fuel of the future and believes it is important for future generations.
Americans consider solar and nuclear energy as primary sources of energy for the future.
In addition, there is broad support for the continued operation of nuclear power plants (76 percent) as well as for maintaining the option to build more nuclear power plants in the future (73 percent).^^^(3)
And, a January survey by Bisconti Research Inc., shows an increase in those who favor building more nuclear power plants.
Fifty-one percent of those polled said that the United States should "definitely" build more nuclear power plants in the future--compared with 42 percent in October 1999.
The increase in favorability for building new nuclear plants was largest in the West, where those in favor increased from 33 percent in October 1999 to 52 percent in the January survey.
Clearly, the California crisis is impressing upon the public the need for new electricity supplies.
[image017.gif]
Used Nuclear Fuel: Sound Science Supports Yucca Mountain
Federal legislation mandates a centralized geologic repository.
The Nuclear Waste Policy Act of 1982 and its 1987 amendments require or authorize the U.S. Department of Energy to locate, build and operate a deep, mined geologic repository for used nuclear fuel.
To pay for the permanent repository, the Nuclear Waste Policy Act established the Nuclear Waste Fund.
Since 1982, electricity consumers have paid into the fund which now totals more than $16 billion.
Based on scientific information gathered from several sites, Congress in 1987 selected Yucca Mountain as the location for further study to determine if the desert ridge is a suitable location for the federally operated underground repository.
And, the industry fully expects that the Energy Department will forward a science-based decision on Yucca Mountain to the President later this year.
A decade of science has been completed and will lead to a draft report this spring.
A decision document is expected to be finalized in the fall, following hearings that will take place in Nevada.
It is important that DOE and the Administration move ahead on schedule with the site recommendation process, leading to a decision by the President on site suitability late this year.
This decision allows DOE to prepare documents to submit to the NRC to license a disposal facility.
Most used fuel is stored in steel-lined, water-filled vaults at nuclear power plants.
However, Entergy Nuclear and other nuclear power plant owners are absorbing the cost of on-site storage of spent nuclear fuel, despite the fact that they have already paid the government to perform this service.
Other electric companies must build additional storage facilities for used nuclear fuel at nuclear power plant sites until a federal repository is operating.
Less than six percent of commercial reactor fuel is stored in additional "dry" storage facilities today, but by 2010, approximately 30 percent of used fuel will be stored in these costly storage containers.
Steps must be taken now to avoid a forced shutdown of any nuclear power plant due to a lack of used fuel storage,
Universal Application of Nuclear Technology Saves and Protects Lives
For five decades, the United States has been the global leader in the use of nuclear technology to benefit society.
America's high-tech digital economy and high standard of living simply would not be possible without the use of nuclear energy.
In addition, nuclear technology is used in scores of consumer products--both necessities and conveniences that enhance our daily lives.
Among the necessities is nuclear energy, which provides one-fifth of our nation's electricity and is our largest supply of emission-free electricity, and nuclear medicine, which is used in one of every three medical diagnoses and treatments.
Ten million Americans are diagnosed and treated every year using nuclear medicine.
Radioactive isotopes also are essential to the biomedical research that seeks causes and cures for diseases such as AIDS, cancer and Alzheimer's disease.
Nuclear technology also is used agricultural applications, industrial manufacturing and environmental protection.
The use of nuclear technologies in the field of agriculture improves crop varieties, controls pests and preserves food.
The use of irradiation in food safety continues to grow in the United States and has been used for decades in Europe.
In fact, food irradiation has been approved to control food loss and to improve sanitation for more than 100 kinds of food in 41 countries.
These uses of nuclear technology make significant contributions to our quality of life.
The associated economic benefit of the use of nuclear technology and nuclear materials on the economy is significant, accounting for more than $400 billion in revenues (6 percent of the gross domestic product) and 4.4 million jobs.
Conclusion: Nuclear Energy Powers America's Future
One of the most prominent environmental protection programs in the industrial sector during the last three decades has been America's increased reliance on nuclear energy to power economic growth.
No other source of electricity can provide large amounts of power while enhancing our air quality.
Policymakers should maximize nuclear energy's potential to improve our air quality while providing low-cost electricity to fuel our economy.
Continued research and development funding, streamlined business regulation, implementation of a federal waste management program, and equal access to business incentives will ensure that nuclear energy will continue to help meet our nation's public policy goals for energy security, economic growth and environmental protection.
1.EIA, Annual Energy Outlook 2001
2.
EIA, Annual Energy Outlook 2001
3.
Nuclear Energy 2000: Public Support Remains Strong, Ann Stouffer Bisconti, Ph. D., Perspectives on Public Opinion, April 2000.
__________________________________________________________________
The Committee on Energy and Commerce 2125 Rayburn House Office Building Washington, DC 20515 (202) 225-2927 Feedback
