Human Rights are Universal Human Rights are Universal Human Rights are Universal Human Rights are Universal Human Rights are Universal Human Rights are Universal Congressional Human Rights Caucus Congressional Human Rights Caucus Congressional Human Rights Caucus Congressional Human Rights Caucus Congressional Human Rights Caucus Congressional Human Rights Caucus Congressional Human Rights Caucus Legislation Briefs Caucus Events Caucus Letters Caucus Members Home Contact CHRC Human Rights Links 
Two years ago, during Amnesty International's campaign to promote human rights in Saudi Arabia, the Caucus demonstrated courageous leadership in organizing a briefing on human rights in Saudi Arabia when the rest of the world was silent.
Promoting human rights in the Middle East is central to the success of US foreign policy and to long-term US national security.
Protecting human rights represents the best way to combat hate-filled ideologies and to promote social justice in the region.
The people of Saudi Arabia, and for that matter the people of all the countries and territories of the region, deserve to live with the dignity that comes from a genuine commitment to human rights by their governments, and by the government of the United States.
In recent years, Saudi Arabia has acceded to a number of United Nations human rights conventions.
Amnesty International has welcomed these steps as a recognition by the Saudi Arabian government that human rights are indeed indivisible and universal.
Most recently, in September 2000, Saudi Arabia acceded to the Convention for the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination Against Women (CEDAW).
But actions speak louder than words, and almost two years later, there is little evidence that Saudi Arabia is taking its obligations under this treaty seriously.
The status of women in Saudi Arabia has changed very little, if at all.
Women continue to face innumerable forms of discrimination and restrictions on their behavior, as documented in Amnesty's twenty-five page report, "Saudi Arabia: Gross Human Rights Abuses Against Women."
Laws discriminate against women in almost all aspects of life, including decision-making, employment, education, and family relationships.
Women are not allowed to go out in public without being accompanied by a male relative or leave the country without the written permission of a male relative.
There is an official ban on women driving.
Outside the home, women face particular abuse from the Committee for the Propagation of Virtue and the Prevention of Vice, known as the "religious police" or Mutawa'een.
This organization, separate from the regular police and security forces, is charged with guarding the Kingdom's morals, and is given a wide berth to interpret laws regarding public behavior and dress codes and to act accordingly.
In March of this year fourteen schoolgirls died in a fire, reportedly because the Mutawa'een refused to allow them to exit uncovered.
Amnesty International has called for an independent investigation, with the results made public.
Yet while the government pledged to initiate an investigation, to our knowledge no sufficiently transparent investigation has taken place, and certainly no definitive results of any such investigation have been provided to the Saudi Arabian public.
Women are also at risk in the criminal justice system and at home.
All women, both Saudi Arabian and foreign nationals, are vulnerable to, and have no safeguards against, domestic abuse.
Foreign domestic workers, particularly those from Asia and Africa, are the most vulnerable of all.
According to the Saudi Arabian Ministry of Labour, the phenomenon of "runaway maids" (domestic workers fleeing abuse at the hands of their employers) continues unabated, with thousands of cases reported.
The Saudi Arabian government should heed the recommendations of the UN Committee on the Rights of the Child, which called on them to establish "hotlines and shelters staffed by women, for the protection of women and children at risk of or fleeing abuse " Women are discriminated against in education and work.
A man may divorce a woman instantaneously, while a woman must satisfy that one of the defined "causes" is met.
Since the CEDAW ratification, the Saudi government has made media statements about the unique and positive role of women in Saudi Arabian society, and has taken extremely minor steps such as the proposed issuing of identification cards for Saudi Arabian women.
This is not enough to meet the requirements of CEDAW.
In fact, there are few places in the world today where women face more restrictions or more pervasive discrimination than Saudi Arabia.
Not only women suffer human rights abuses in Saudi Arabia, and violations against them occur in the larger context of lack of rule of law.
Ironically, under the guise of protecting women, in the past year hundreds of male Saudi teenagers have been summarily and publicly flogged by the Mutawa'een for allegedly bothering or harassing women.
These floggings, many of which took place on the spot of the alleged offense, without a trial or even an arrest, are in flagrant contradiction of the UN Convention on the Rights of the Child (CRC), another human rights treaty Saudi Arabia has acceded to and pledged to uphold
Saudi Arabia has also acceded to the UN Convention Against Torture (CAT).
Saudi Arabia has submitted its first report to the UN Committee Against Torture, but in November of 2001 they failed to make their scheduled appearance before the Committee.
Amnesty's April 2002 report, "Saudi Arabia Remains a Fertile Ground for Torture with Impunity," demonstrates that torture continues to be practiced with impunity.
Holding those arrested in incommunicado detention, without judicial oversight, facilitates the use of torture, as does the reliance on confessions as opposed to other forms of evidence in criminal trial proceedings and politically charged cases.
As with most human rights violations, foreign workers and women, those who face the most discrimination, bear the brunt of these abuses.
Women have difficulties negotiating the alien environment of the criminal justice system, which is run exclusively by Saudi Arabian men, in which they have little support.
While women and foreign nationals in Saudi Arabia remain trapped in a web of discrimination and isolation, the government also continues to arrest its Shiite citizens and imprison them without charge or trial.
For example, Sheikh Ali bin Ali al-Ghanim, a prominent Shiite scholar, was arrested in August 2000 and then was reportedly tortured.
He was ultimately sentenced to 5 years and 500 lashes after a secret trial.
The charges in the conviction against him still have not made public.
And earlier this year, Ahmad Turki al-Saab and two other Shiite Isma'ilis were arrested after talking with a Wall Street Journal reporter about the April 2000 confrontation between Saudi Arabian security forces and members of the Shiite Isma'ili community in Najran province.
All three remain in prison.
A heavy cloud of secrecy still hangs over this Najran affair, and explanations of what exactly happened in April 2000 and its aftermath remain inadequate.
Discrimination on the basis of religion is not limited to the Shiite community.
Discrimination against non-Wahhabi Sunni Muslims, and arrests and deportations of Christian foreign workers continue to occur on a regular basis.
Perhaps most at risk are those found guilty of practicing sorcery or witchcraft, and authorities carried out executions for this charge as recently as the year 2000.
In addition to discrimination based on gender, nationality and religion, there is in Saudi Arabia absolutely no tolerance for lesbians, gay men, bisexual and transgender people.
In January of this year, three men were put to death for homosexual acts.
Supplementing these many layers of discrimination, and underlying most of the human rights violations that take place in Saudi Arabia, is the secretive and arbitrary criminal justice system.
From the incommunicado detentions that promote the use of torture, to the unfair trials shrouded in a secrecy that facilitates biased and arbitrary judgments, human rights violations abound.
This lack of transparency in the legal system is a fundamental flaw, not only for the honest pursuit of criminal justice, but also for membership in international organizations like the World Trade Organization (WTO), to which Saudi Arabia currently has an application pending.
Amnesty International recommends that Saudi Arabia vigorously pursue reforms that will provide for much greater transparency and accountability throughout the legal system.
Currently the only thing public about Saudi Arabian criminal justice are the corporal punishments (floggings, amputations and even surgical eye-removals) and executions (beheadings with a sword).
Amnesty International considers the aforementioned corporal punishments to be a form of torture, as described in the United Nations Convention Against Torture, and Amnesty International remains opposed to any use of the death penalty.
At a minimum, until the massive flaws in the Saudi Arabian criminal justice system are fixed, Saudi Arabia should implement a moratorium on corporal punishments and executions, to protect the innocent from enduring such irreversible penalties.
In this past year, a new law defining the role of lawyers in the criminal justice system was introduced.
Until now, lawyers have been excluded from the judicial process, to the tremendous detriment of the rights of the accused.
Along with Amnesty International, Saudi Arabian lawyers and media have welcomed this step.
However, the details of this new law, and how well it is implemented, remains to be seen.
In another hopeful sign, the Saudi Arabian media has been more assertive in the past few years in covering human rights issues.
In March of this year, responding to public outrage, the media was aggressive in pursuing the schoolgirls case.
Yet there were stern public statements from some government officials warning the media not to go too far.
Around that same time a poet, Abdul Muhsin Musalam, was arrested after his poem critical of Saudi Arabian judges appeared in the newspaper al-Madinah.
The newspaper editor was fired and Abdul Muhsin Musalam remains in prison.
It is clear that the people of Saudi Arabia, both men and women, yearn for a government that respects their human rights.
It is also clear from at least some of their statements in the press and to the public that the Saudi Arabian government is aware of this.
The Government of Saudi Arabia should implement CEDAW in law and practice, as well as amend the Basic Law, to provide for non-discrimination of women and protection of women from all forms of violence, including sexual violence.
The Government of Saudi Arabia should establish an agency to monitor human rights complaints, including those made by women.
The Government of Saudi Arabia should also establish shelters, staffed by women, for the protection of women at risk or fleeing abuse.
The Government of Saudi Arabia should implement the United Nations Convention Against Torture, including prohibiting torture and domestic violence as punishable crimes.
The U.S. Congress and the Bush Administration should press the Government of Saudi Arabia to improve its human rights situation, calling at a minimum for a more fairly administered legal system and to end discrimination against women.
The Bush Administration should not imply that tacit support for the Saudi regime's human rights abuses will be offered in exchange for Saudi Arabia's cooperation in "anti-terrorist" measures.
The US Congress and the Bush Administration should also encourage the Government of Saudi Arabia to make good on its offers to Amnesty International and other non-governmental organizations to visit the Kingdom.
Amnesty International continues to look forward to such a visit, and we urge the Saudi Arabian government to work with international human rights groups, and UN human rights agencies such as the Special Rapporteur on the Independence of Lawyers and Judges, and the Special Rapporteur on Torture, so that actions taken to improve human rights can match the words.
APPENDIX:
Amnesty International Report, " Saudi Arabia Remains A Fertile Ground for Torture with Impunity," April 2002, http://web.amnesty.org/ai.nsf/Index/MDE230042002?OpenDocument
Amnesty International Report, "Saudi Arabia: Gross Human Rights Abuses Against Women," September 2000 http://web.amnesty.org/ai.nsf/Index/MDE230572000?OpenDocument
'all human beings are born free and equal in dignity and rights' - Universal Declaration of Human Rights
