Human Rights are Universal Human Rights are Universal Human Rights are Universal Human Rights are Universal Human Rights are Universal Human Rights are Universal Congressional Human Rights Caucus Congressional Human Rights Caucus Congressional Human Rights Caucus Congressional Human Rights Caucus Congressional Human Rights Caucus Congressional Human Rights Caucus Congressional Human Rights Caucus Legislation Briefs Caucus Events Caucus Letters Caucus Members Home Contact CHRC Human Rights Links 
June 4, 2002
Representative Morella and Members of the Caucus:
On behalf of the U.S. Commission on International Religious Freedom, on which I serve, I wish to thank the Caucus for inviting me to testify before you today on Saudi Arabia.
The Commission, created under the International Religious Freedom Act of 1998, advises the Congress and Administration on issues related to the promotion and protection of international religious freedom.
One of the Commission's major concerns is to monitor respect for religious freedom worldwide and to recommend to the Administration those countries which meet the statutory guidelines for "countries of particular concern" (CPCs) - where there is evidence of systematic, ongoing, and egregious violations of religious freedom abroad.
For the last two years, the Commission has recommended that Saudi Arabia be designated by the President as a "country of particular concern," a particularly severe violator of religious freedom, subject to U.S. action under the International Religious Freedom Act (IRFA) of 1998.
The Commission regrets that to date this designation has not been made by the U.S. government.
The findings from the State Department's own human rights reports support CPC status for Saudi Arabia.
Indeed, the Department has tersely summarized the situation in Saudi Arabia in its annual reports on international religious freedom as follows: "Freedom of religion does not exist."
The Commission concurs.
We urge the Administration to take the steps mandated in that legislation to begin to use the instruments of American diplomacy and policy to advance religious freedom, in the words of the IRFA, "standing for liberty and standing with the persecuted, to use and implement appropriate tools in the U.S. foreign policy apparatus, including diplomatic, political, commercial, charitable, educational and cultural channels to promote respect for religious freedom by all governments and peoples."
Further, the Commission believes that the concern of this Congress, expressed in the adoption of this landmark legislation, can be communicated not only by these hearings, but by the members of this Caucus asking the Administration to explain its rationale, on the one hand, of identifying that "freedom of religion does not exist" and, on the other, of failing to designate Saudi Arabia as a CPC.
This is the first time since September 11 that this Caucus is holding a hearing on Saudi Arabia.
The Commission has expressed, in its just-released annual report, concern about activities that are financed or supported by the Saudi government to promote its interpretation of Islam outside of Saudi Arabia.
Such activities raise some troubling questions about that government's role in promoting religious intolerance in other countries.
There have been reports that some members of extremist and militant groups that promote intolerance and even violence targeting others on the basis of their religion in several countries have apparently been trained as clerics in Saudi Arabia.
The role of the Saudi authorities in these training activities or the content of such training is not clear from the information currently available to the Commission.
As recommended in the Commission's 2002 Annual Report, the U.S. government "should pay close attention to activities undertaken by the Saudi government that have detrimental effects on the protection of religious freedom in countries outside of Saudi Arabia.
It should report on such activities and take further action as appropriate."
Violations of Religious Freedom
The right to religious freedom is affirmed in the Universal Declaration of Human Rights and several treaties and related instruments adopted since then.
This right has three major components: First, the right to believe, which includes the right to maintain, adopt or change one's belief - the key factor is the role of individual choice, of individual freedom.
Second, is the right to manifest that belief - to manifest it externally, in teaching, practice, worship, and observance, whether alone or together with others, and in public or private.
And third, the right to freedom of religion contains a specific provision that a person can not be coerced in a way that would impair his or her freedom to have or adopt a religion of one's choice.
International human rights bodies have interpreted this component -- the non-coercion rule - as consisting of many elements.
This is defined by the authoritative General Comment of the Human Rights Committee, a treaty-supervisory body, as "The use or threat of force or penal sanctions to compel believers or non-believers to adhere to their religious beliefs and congregations, to recant their religion or belief, or to convert."
It goes on: "Policies or practices having the same intention or effect, such as for example, those restricting access to education, medical care, employment or the rights guaranteed by Article 25 [to vote, be elected, take part in public affairs] and other [human rights]
The United Nations Special Rapporteur on Freedom of Religion has identified the most common kinds of violations of freedom of religion globally.
They include (1) physical attacks (including torture); (2) limits on proselytizing and possessing religious articles; (3) closing or destroying places of worship and limiting religious publications; (4) discrimination in education, employment, housing, the right to own property, access to credit, etc; (5) forced exile and expulsion of local religious believers; and (6) excessive limitations on freedom of expression and assembly.
All of these violations can be - and have been - identified in Saudi Arabia.
Indeed, they affect both women and men.
Of particular interest to the Caucus today is how women and girls are affected by human rights violations.
Abuses of the right to freedom of religion in Saudi Arabia are extensive and affect every aspect of women's lives and their human rights - to hold an opinion, to express it, to make choices, to travel, etc.
Among the common violations faced by women in Saudi Arabia as cited by the State Department in its 2001 country report are: physical spousal abuse; foreign national domestic workers who are subjected to forced confinement, withholding of food, beating and other physical abuse, including rape; limited educational access at the university level by being excluded from studying such subjects as engineering, journalism and architecture; the fact that daughters receive only half the inheritance awarded to their brothers; and the fact that women "must demonstrate legally specified grounds for divorce, but men may divorce without giving cause."
These examples demonstrate that the violation of religious freedom in Saudi Arabia impacts with particular severity on the lives of women.
In fact, the way religious law is interpreted and enforced within Saudi Arabia affects every aspect of women's lives and causes serious violations of their human rights.
These limitations apply differently to women than men: For example, women cannot freely choose a spouse because they are prohibited from marrying non-Muslims.
The same limitation does not apply to men, who can choose whether to marry Muslims, Christians, or Jews.
Women have no liberty of movement within the country.
In fact, women need to receive written permission from a male relative to travel inside the country and cannot drive motor vehicles.
Further, they can only ride a vehicle driven by a close male relative or an employee or otherwise risk arrest by the mutawaa (Committee for the Prevention of Vice and Promotion of Virtue or religious police).
Further, women need permission by a close male relative to travel outside the country.
The discrimination that affects women's rights sometimes has other consequences: For example, it jeopardizes their right to health.
In fact, women can only be admitted to hospital for medical treatment upon consent of a male relative.
Regarding education, while women have access to free (though segregated) education, they are prohibited from studying such subjects as engineering, journalism, and architecture.
Yet according to the Department of State, "some female citizens are able to study abroad and return to work in professions such as architecture and journalism."
Further, while women formally own 20 percent of the businesses, they must deputize a male relative to represent them in financial transactions.
Religiously based directives limit women's right to choose employment because, for instance, women may not accept jobs in rural areas if there are no adult male kin present with them with whom they may reside.
Women are not granted the same legal personality as men.
In particular, in the country's Shariah courts, the testimony of one man equals that of two women.
As a consequence, any sort of abuse against women has a much higher evidentiary standard, with the likelihood of conviction that much lower.
With particular regard to domestic violence, however, it is not even regarded as a crime under Saudi law.
The government of Saudi Arabia denies religious freedom and vigorously enforces this prohibition against all forms of public religious expression other than the government's interpretation and presentation of the Hanbali school of Sunni Islam.
Islamic practice generally is limited to that of the Wahhabi doctrine expounded by Muhammad Ibn Abdul-Wahhab and his followers.
The Saudi government enforces this particular interpretation of Islam - to the exclusion of all others - and uses that interpretation as a justification for comprehensive restrictions on religious freedom.
The Commission believes that religious beliefs standing alone cannot prevail as a justification for these government violations of internationally protected human rights.
Women's Equal Right to Religious Freedom
Members of the U.S. Commission on International Religious Freedom have affirmed the importance of the equal right of both women and men to religious freedom.
The Universal Declaration of Human Rights proclaims, in Article 18, that "Everyone has the right to freedom of thought, conscience, and religion."
This formula, "everyone" is used throughout the declaration.
Clearly, "everyone" means every person - and that means women, too.
If anyone has doubts, look at the final document of the Vienna World Conference on Human Rights which, after recognizing anew that "every individual has the right to freedom of thought, conscience, expression, and religion," called on "all governments ... to counter intolerance and related violence based on religion or belief, including practices of discrimination against women" (VDPA, II, 22) and also called for "the eradication of any conflicts which may arise between the rights of women and the harmful effects of religious extremism."(II, 38)
Yet in Saudi Arabia, force is used to threaten or compel believers - especially women - to act in ways the government's version of Shariah law and its religious police prescribe.
This is particularly true with regard to beatings and physical punishments meted out by religious police and other officials.
The Committee Against Torture, a United Nations treaty-monitoring body, recently reviewed the first Saudi report on compliance with the Convention against Torture, which was ratified in 1997.
The Committee expressed concern over the "vagueness of the legal provisions" governing the powers of Saudi religious police officials "to proscribe conduct that they identify as in violation of public morality and safety."
Elsewhere the Committee stated its concern over "the sentencing to, and imposition of corporal punishments by judicial and administrative authorities, including in particular flogging and amputation of limbs, that are not in conformity with the Convention."
Further, expressing concern that the activities of the mutawaa may violate the Convention, the Committee recommended that the mutawaa officials exercise their powers without discrimination and in a manner regulated by law and subject to judicial review.
It goes without saying that all the limitations on women's conduct in public renders them particularly vulnerable to the physical coercion exercised by these officials, who patrol the streets monitoring, among other things, women's conduct or dress.
What renders the situation worse is the difficulty of obtaining judicial redress because of loopholes in the system such as the one mentioned above on the lower value of women's testimony.
While the right to practice one's religion publicly and freely is a protected right under international law and promoting that right should be viewed as our long-term goal, the Commission calls upon the U.S. government to consistently press the Saudi government, at a minimum, to expand and safeguard the freedom to worship privately of non-Muslims and of those Muslims who do not follow the government's interpretation and presentation of Islam.
Official guidelines as to what is permitted as private worship and what is not are vague, and restrictions appear to differ based on one's nationality and other factors.
These guidelines should be clarified and religious freedom should be secured without discrimination for all residents of Saudi Arabia, and should include permission for clergy to enter the country and perform private religious services for Saudi residents.
The fact that foreign clergy are not permitted in Saudi Arabia creates particular hardship for those foreign workers who are Roman Catholic.
According to the U.S. Department of State, some 600,000 Filipinos workers are in Saudi Arabia, 90 percent of whom are Roman Catholic.
Many of these workers are women in domestic service.
As a first step in protecting religious freedom, private religious practice should not be treated as a crime.
Non-Muslims and some Muslims face great difficulties in practicing their religion in private.
Private worshippers have been harassed, arrested, abused and beaten by the mutawaa (religious police) and forced to conduct their activities in secrecy for fear of detection and punishment by the authorities.
The mutawaa should be adequately trained to respect the right of private worship, and should be held accountable if they violate it.
One recent example that gained international attention was the controversial role of the mutawaa in a fire that broke out at an all-girl's school in Mecca.
On March 11, 15 girls were killed and at least 50 injured in that fire.
Press reports, - including those of the government-controlled Saudi Press Agency - [START HERE] human rights groups and others accused the mutawaa of not allowing girls to leave the burning building because many of them were "not covered" according to the strict Saudi dress code for females.
The chief of police in Mecca initially was quoted as saying that the mutawaa may have been responsible for "trying to interfere" in allowing the girls to escape.
Interior Minister Prince Naïf ordered a subsequent full investigation that reportedly cleared the mutawaa of any wrongdoing in a published report.
However, the investigation was anything but transparent and the report was far from thorough in its findings.
The U.S. government should urge the Saudi government to engage in dialogue with the international leaders of those religious communities represented in Saudi Arabia.
Working with others in the international diplomatic community, the U.S. government should identify mechanisms to facilitate such dialogue.
The U.S. government should encourage the Saudi government to promote religious tolerance and respect toward all religions in its education system, in line with its own stated policies and relevant international instruments.
The Saudi government, in its first report after becoming a signatory to the Convention on the Rights of the Child, has affirmed that religious tolerance is "a fundamental requirement for the achievement of more effective protection of human rights," and that Saudi Arabians attach great importance to the principle of tolerance.
We note that the Saudi government has not yet ratified the International Covenant on Civil and Political Rights and continuously expresses doubts as to the application of human rights that they argue would contradict their interpretation of Islam.
In September 2000, however, Saudi Arabia ratified the Convention on the Elimination of all Forms of Discrimination Against Women.
They have yet to report on how they comply with its provisions.
The Saudi government has publicly taken the position in recent years that citizens and residents of Saudi Arabia - both Muslim and non-Muslim - have the right to practice their religion in private.
Despite the Saudi government's expressed policy of permitting private religious worship, numerous Christians and Shi'a Muslims (including Ismaili Shi'a) continue to be detained, beaten, imprisoned and deported.
Approximately 1 million Saudi citizens are Shi'a and a significant number of the 7 million foreign workers are Christians.
Last summer, fourteen Christians of various nationalities were imprisoned in Jeddah in what appears to be a crackdown on a loose network of private Christian "home fellowships."
All were arrested and detained without charge.
Several reported harsh prison conditions and were subject to repeated interrogations.
All were deported by March 2002 after, in some cases, more than six months in prison.
None of the detainees was permitted to communicate with family, legal counsel, or consular officials of their respective embassies.
The State Department subsequently confirmed that on May 18 two more Filipino Christians were deported for engaging in religious activities.
There also continues to be institutional discrimination against Shi'a Muslims.
The Shi'a live mostly in the eastern province although a large population also can be found in Medina in the west.
The Saudi government continues to arrest and detain a number of Shi'a clerics without charge.
Several remain in prison and have been reportedly beaten.
Also Ismaili Shi'a clerics have been arrested and detained for allegedly practicing sorcery in Najran, in the southwest corner of Saudi Arabia.
Unrest between governmental officials and Ismailis has been reported and variously attributed to public Shi'a observance of Ashura for the first time in many years (a practice the Saudi government discourages), the closure of an Ismaili mosque, the arrest of Ismaili clerics, and tensions along Saudi's border with Yemen.
This recent spate of harassment, arrests, and deportations appears to be a serious breach of the Saudi government's commitment to permit private religious worship - a commitment that, even if upheld, falls far short of international norms of religious freedom.
Finally, the U.S. government should urge the Saudi government to grant access to human rights investigators from international and non-governmental organizations (including extending an invitation to the UN Special Rapporteur on Freedom of Religion or Belief) and journalists to visit the country and to examine and report on the conditions of religious freedom there.
In 2000, Saudi Arabia was chosen to be a member of the UN Commission on Human Rights (UNCHR) for the first time.
Despite its intention to play a role in the international community on human rights issues, the Saudi government has not permitted human rights monitoring in its own country.
This concludes my formal remarks.
I would like to request that they be included in the record.
I look forward to any questions you might have.
Thank you.
'all human beings are born free and equal in dignity and rights' - Universal Declaration of Human Rights
