Traveller Food, Fun and Friends! Pack Your Bags! What is the Peace Corps? Make a Difference Explore Your World Food, Friends, and Fun! Tell Me a Story Home Celebrations in Guatemala Here are holidays that kids in other countries celebrate.
Ecuadorian Carnaval
Mardi Gras, Ash Wednesday, and Easter in Guatemala
Todos Santos and Patron Saint Days in Guatemala
Tihar in Nepal
Ramadan in Mali
Lunar eclipse in Mali
Tabaski in Mali
New Year's in Russia
Elaine (Elena) Krumpelman was a Peace Corps Volunteer in Guatemala from 1997 to 1999.
She served in Aldea Encino Gacho, Jutiapa, which is 136 km southeast of the capital in the direction of El Salvador, and 16 km from the nearest pueblo, El Progreso Jutiapa.
Here is her report on one of the celebrations in Guatemala.
In Guatemala, there is a large percentage of Catholics, and they celebrate many of the church holidays.
Last February I was caught by surprise by how they celebrate what we call Mardi Gras and Ash Wednesday.
A week before Mardi Gras, I noticed many young kids decorating empty egg shells, or cascara.
They colored them in Tiko, or Kool-aid plus water, and let them dry.
Then they put a few handfuls of confetti in the egg shell and covered the egg with a small piece of crepe paper.
I was unsure what they were doing with the eggs, but on Mardi Gras (I am not sure what the day is called in Spanish) I was invited over to talk to some friends, and when I wasn't looking, another girl came up behind me and broke the egg shell on my head so the confetti fell in my hair.
So that was the reason why so many young children had confetti in their hair on Mardi Gras!
On Miercoles de Ceniza (Ash Wednesday), the custom is to throw harina or flour in someone's face.
All the young children, including myself, went around with flour in a little plastic sack, and when your friends were not looking, you tried to paint them white with flour.
It was a fun activity and I am looking forward to next year.
David Bell was a Peace Corps Volunteer in Guatemala from 1993 to 1996.
He served in Aldea Timiluya, San Agustin Acasaguastlan, El Progreso, about a two-hour bus ride and two-hour hike northeast of the capital.
Here is his report on another of Guatemala's religious celebrations.
By far the most amazing celebration in Guatemala is that of Easter, or La Semana Santa as it is called there, in the town of Antigua.
The festivities begin on Holy Thursday, when men dress up as Roman soldiers, mount horses, and race through the cobblestone streets and alleyways yelling in triumph, pretending to have captured Jesus.
Then, early Friday morning, the families gather in front of their homes and construct detailed and elaborate "alfombras," or carpets, out of dyed sawdust.
The designs are quite complex, made using cut-out templates, usually representing some symbol of the holy week such as a chalice or dove.
The carpets can be as long as 40 or 50 feet and span the entire width of the street.
Families work through the morning and into the afternoon on their alfombras.
The processions begin sometime in the mid-afternoon.
Parades of people walk, beginning in the various cathedrals of Antigua and strolling on set routes, carrying massive floats.
The floats represent various scenes of the Passion of Jesus (carrying his cross, hanging on the cross, followed by Mary and the disciples).
The floats weigh hundreds of pounds and typically require 60-80 people to carry them.
Those in the parade sing somber hymns, burn incense, and pray throughout the procession.
As one might guess, the carpets are trampled throughout the course of the afternoon and evening so that what remains is nothing more than the scattered remains of the beautiful colored designs.
The remainder of the weekend is spent with close family and friends.
The families attend church together, eat large meals (no meat), and stroll through Antigua's streets and parks.
It is both a festive and fascinating celebration.
Learn more about Guatemala
Food, Friends and Fun More Food, Friends and Fun from Around the World
