aphis.usda.gov [APHIS Services....................................]
jump over main navigation bar About APHIS Programs News Hot Issues FOIA Jobs Search
News
Press Releases
Publications
Videos
Art 
Email Us
jump over repetitive sidebar navigation Privacy Statement EEO Statement USDA | MRP
Return to Home Page
Press Releases
Ed Curlett (301) 734-3256 Robin Porter (301) 734-3265
USDA AGENCY HELPS SOLVE PROBLEMS BETWEEN HUMANS AND WILDLIFE
SACRAMENTO, Calif., June 5, 1998--The U.S. Department of Agriculture has a program in California that manages conflicts between humans and wildlife using effective and environmentally safe strategies.
The wildlife services program provides the state government, local municipalities, agricultural producers, and citizens with expertise in managing inevitable conflicts between humans and wildlife.
"When wild animals cause damage to property, threaten public health and safety, feed on valuable crops, kill livestock and pets, or harm endangered species, we're here to provide safe and responsible assistance," said Gary Simmons, state director for the WS program of the Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service, a part of USDA's marketing and regulatory programs mission area.
Statewide, wildlife damage incidents involving agriculture increased from 7,992 incidents in 1992 to 22,937 incidents in 1997.
The total number of wildlife-related damage incidents rose from 13,246 to 30,968 over the same period.
These statistics include damage incidents related to human health and safety (155-percent increase), natural resources (359-percent increase), and property (145-percent increase).
"These totals only cover incidents reported to WS," Simmons said.
"The actual number of incidents is much higher."
WS assistance is available in every state from professional wildlife biologists and specialists who are trained in handling a variety of situations.
WS activities in California include:
Protecting threatened and endangered species.
From 1980 to 1991, the threatened and endangered California clapper rail population had dropped from 1,500 to 300 birds because of predation by red fox and feral cats.
The predators were pushing the species toward extinction by eating eggs and adults.
In 1991, WS was asked to selectively remove a number of red foxes and feral cats using padded leg-hold traps and cage traps.
While cage traps are effective for feral cats, red foxes avoid them, making padded leg-hold traps vital to the effort.
Biologists estimate that the population of the California clapper rail is currently between 500 and 600.
WS has been protecting threatened and endangered species in California for more than 10 years," said Simmons.
"Besides the California clapper rail, we protect the light-footed clapper rail, San Clemente Island loggerhead shrike, California least tern, western snowy plover, least Bell's vireo, southwestern willow flycatcher, salt marsh harvest mouse, California red-legged frog, and island lizard."
Managing wildlife hazards at airports.
WS provides technical and direct assistance to 16 airports in California, reducing bird and wildlife strikes to aircraft.
WS efforts at Sacramento International Airport over the past five years, reduced bird strikes by about 60 percent.
Typically, WS will evaluate an airport and recommend the use of frightening devices, electric fences, and habitat modification.
WS also conducts capture and removal programs when requested by airport authorities.
Protecting human health and safety.
Over the last six years, human health and safety incidents involving bears and mountain lion attacks on humans have increased dramatically.
Between 1992 and 1997, bear incidents increased from 3 to 76 incidents per year.
Mountain lion incidents rose from 32 to 236 incidents per year.
"The progressive movement of people into rural subdivisions is one of the reasons for the increase, along with a growing population of predators," Simmons said.
In 1997, WS provided assistance after two black bears in Los Angeles county entered a home through a kitchen window, threatening the safety of the homeowner and causing more than $4,000 in damage.
In Tulare county, a mountain lion threatened a USDA Forest Service employee and attacked his dog.
The dog was severely injured (treating its wounds cost $1,200).
WS helped by briefing local Forest Service employees on precautions they should take in case the lion returns.
In Nevada county, a mountain lion attacked and killed a pet German shepherd tied to the front of a trailer at a local summer camp for handicapped children.
The camp manager watched in horror as the lion tried to pull the pet out of its leash.
The lion was scared off with a warning shot from the camp manager's shotgun but returned five minutes later.
WS tracked and removed the lion four days before the camp opened.
Coyote attacks are also on the rise.
A 6-year-old girl was attacked by a coyote in a suburban area near Lake Tahoe.
The girl survived the attack but needed stitches on her face and neck, where she suffered more than 30 punctures and lacerations.
The coyote was shot by police officers at the scene.
Skiers at a Tahoe resort reported being chased by coyotes, and a number of other coyotes have been seen following students to bus stops and stalking pets in the area.
"The problem here seems to stem from people feeding the coyotes and the coyotes becoming accustomed to humans," Simmons said.
WS has met with communities in the area to discuss the urban coyote problem and distribute information on preventing the problems.
Working in cooperation with local officials, WS employees used traps to capture animals that posed an immediate threat to people
.
Rabid animal attacks are also a threat to human health and safety.
An 86-year-old woman called WS reporting that a gray fox attacked her outside her home.
She kept the rabid fox at bay with her cane.
Upon arrival at the immediately.
WS trapped the fox, and it later tested positive for rabies.
In Burney, Calif., a man letting his cat out was attacked by a raccoon.
The raccoon bit the man repeatedly on the ankle, causing him to lose his balance and fall.
Although the raccoon continued biting the man on his leg, he was able to kick it out the door.
But when he tried to get to his car to go to the hospital, the raccoon chased him back inside.
Eventually, he was able to drive to the hospital, where he received treatment for bite wounds and began rabies shots.
WS trapped and removed the raccoon.
Wild animals can be a threat to California's fresh water supply.
For example, in Colusa county, beavers have caused about $80,000 worth of damage to levees and irrigation canals this year.
"This figure does not capture the full scope of the damage because it does not include the value of crops flooded when the levees failed," Simmons said.
The beavers also damaged several power line poles, setting up a serious electrical hazard.
WS alleviated the problem by trapping a number of beavers.
