[es_small.gif] Portland, Or Metro.
Waste Reduction Div.
Annual Report
[tspiralc.gif]
Solid Waste Department 600 NE Grand Ave Portland, OR 97Z32-2736 (503) 797-1650 Fax (503) 797-1795
Background
WASTE REDUCTION DIVISION ANNUAL REPORT-- FY1993-94 Printed on recycled paper.
please recycle!
In 1989, Metro set an ambitious waste reduction goal of 56% of the current waste stream generated in the Portland Metropolitan area.
The goal was adopted along with a menu of programs in the Waste Reduction chapter of the Regional Solid Waste Management Plan (RSWMP).
Since that time, the Waste Reduction Division of the Solid Waste Department has worked to implement programs outlined in the Plan.
Recycling Legislation, variable markets for recyclable materials and coordination among local government programs are all factors that have made increasing levels of waste reduction and recycling a major challenge.
As can be seen from the summary of successes for Fiscal year 1993-94 described below, the Waste Reduction Division has responded to these changes in a positive way and facilitated many advances in locating recycling opportunities and reducing the amount of waste going to landfills.
"Creative Leadership in Resource Management for a Sustainable Future"
The Waste Reduction Division has been effective in identifying resources, building coalitions and initiating programs that have been successful efforts toward attaining a very ambitious goal.
Budget Summary (1989-90 to Present)
The Waste Reduction Division budget was increased significantly in FY88-89, the year the RSWMP was adopted, to initiate many waste reduction programs outlined in the document.
Since that time, the Division has been the conduit for dollars to local governments for implementing many of the programs outlined in the 5-Year Plan for Waste Reduction Programs for Local Governments.
Waste Reduction Strategic Plan
During FY93-94, Fe Waste Reduction Division began the work necessary to update the Waste Reduction chapter of the RSWMP, as well as to develop targeted generator strategies for immediate implementation in the commercial sector.
Staff researched national and international trends in waste reduction and recycling and analyzed these trends to see how they would apply to local conditions.
From this information, staff developed an exhaustive list of potential means of increasing waste reduction and recycling in the Metro area, and held two public roundtables to get the reactions to potential changes in the system from the public and the business sector.
The two waste reduction roundtables proved valuable in helping staff prioritize the most favored solutions and weed out those considered unworkable.
"...the division established targeted generator strategies for immediate implementation."
The information gleaned from research and public input was then directed down two paths.
For the commercial sector, it helped the division establish targeted generator strategies for immediate implementation during FY94-95.
The information was also used to develop long range options that will be reflected in the update of the RSWMP.
Working in tandem with Planning 
The Waste Reduction chapter update will continue in FY94-95.
Metro Challenge Grants
Since fiscal year 1990-91, Metro has allocated funds to local governments through the Metro Challenge grant program.
The funds assist with development and implementation of local waste reduction programs that help meet state and regional waste reduction and recycling goals.
During FY93-94, the fourth year of the program, Metro distributed a total of $350,000 in Metro Challenge funds.
Metro Challenge Grant Allocations see table in original
Annual Cleanup Grant Program
The Annual Cleanup Program was revised during FY93-94 to allow jurisdictions to make better use of available funds and to simplify the application process.
Changes were designed to allow local jurisdictions to use funds for any costs directly associated with the organization, administration and implementation of the events.
The revised payment structure allowed for reimbursements, grants, or credit accounts at Metro transfer stations.
As a result of the changes, Metro grant funds utilized for local cleanup programs increased from $14,767 in FY92-93 to $31,259 in FY93-94; a 47% increase in use of the funds.
The number of jurisdictions participating in dean up events rose from 13 to 26 in the same time period.
Although cleanup programs rely heavily on volunteer labor and donated materials and services, the events continue to be expensive.
Metro's objective for the program revision was to help alleviate some of the financial burden on local governments for these valued community service events.
Metro helped to fund 45 separate cleanup events involving 26 area local governments during FY 1993-94.
Twenty-nine of these events were held in the City of Portland involving 514 volunteers, forty- one neighborhoods, 200 senior citizens and 2,203 separate households.
Washington County continued its successful bulky waste collection day, Clackamas and Multnomah County Departments used funds to clean up public lands, post signs and increase preventative measures at chronic problem sites.
Clackamas County also provided funds to two non-profit organizations for assistance with independently organized cleanups.
Many of the region's smallest cities continued to use funding for yard debris collection and cleanup events.
Multi-Family Recycling Container Grants
All Metro area local governments have been working towards providing multi-family housing complexes with recycling containers by July 1, 1995.
A year-long Metro inventory project found that nearly 78 percent of the region's multi-family residences have some degree of on-site recycling service available to them.
The inventory involved personal site visits to nearly all of the region's 4,021 complexes to verify information including whether the complex recycles, and what materials they recycle.
Data from the inventory will be further refined and used by the region's local governments and Metro to assist in the assessment and subsequent completion of the multi-family recycling container provision program.
Metro provides matching grant funds to assist with the provision of container systems at multi-family residences.
It is expected that FY94-95 will be the final year for grants.
Multi-Family Matching Grant Allocations [SEE SOURCE DOCUMENT]
Grocery Waste Minimization
The Waste Reduction division continued its targeted generator studies to develop industry-specific recommendations for waste reduction and recycling.
Among the targeted groups in FY93-94 were grocery stores, who were known to generate a large amount of organic waste.
Four stores in the Metro region participated in the waste minimization project conducted by Metro and Steinberger 
Staff and consultants performed comprehensive waste audits to determine the nature and relative amounts of waste generated by the stores.
Initial results of the characterization showed that food waste comprises anywhere from 18% to 54% of their total waste stream.
Paper packaging, including regular and waxed corrugated cardboard, polycoated paper, and mixed recyclable paper came in a close second at 17% to 26%.
Other paper and plastic packaging rounded out the top four materials disposed.
"The division continued its targeted generator studies to develop industry-specific recommendations for waste reduction and recycling."
Metro and Steinberger 
A resource guide, still being developed, will provide information on source reduction, alternatives to disposal, options for returning packaging to distributors, and setting up a recycling system.
An additional guide will provide resources for food donation, gleaning, reuse and waste exchange options for hard goods.
Green Plate Restaurant Recycling
The Green Plate restaurant recycling project was developed through a 1% Well Spent! grant awarded to Palermini 
Portland General Electric provided energy audits and the City of Portland assisted with sewer and water usage evaluations for each restaurant.
For a one-month period, pre- consumer vegetative waste was diverted to a hog farmer for use as feed, reducing one restaurant's waste by over 80 percent.
Permitting issues led to a halt in hog feed trials but other similar options will be explored in the future.
Waste Reduction staff assisted throughout the Green Plate project and will continue financial and staff assistance to the program during FY94-95.
Yard Debris Diversion
The Regional Yard Debris Recycling Plan required Metro area local governments to have weekly curbside collection of yard debris, or an equally effective alternative program, in place by July 1, 1994.
As an ongoing means of estimating the effectiveness of the plan, the amount of yard debris disposed in the garbage was measured in a joint Metro/local government project in May, 1993.
Results of the study are illustrated in the accompanying table.
Regional Yard Debris Study Results Descriptive Statistics by Program [SEE SOURCE DOCUMENT]
Analysis of disposal and recycling participation data shows that every-other-week collection of yard debris is not as effective as weekly collection, and depots or on-call service are generally less effective than bi-weekly.
Analysis and appropriate action will be developed in fiscal year '94-95 to continue to increase yard debris collection and improved service.
Thrift Recycling Credit Program
The Thrift Recycling Credit program was established in 1990 to provide recycling credits and disposal cost relief to charitable agencies.
The three agencies that qualify for the program are Goodwill, St. Vincent de Paul and the Salvation Army, have reported recycling rates of 63%, 63% and 57% for FY93-94.
The program provides thrifts with incentives to recycle materials such as books, upholstery and scrap metals that were formerly disposed as solid waste.
During FY93-94, Waste Reduction staff examined different means of providing non-monetary assistance to thrifts in order to reduce illegal dumping and increase overall material recovery.
Assistance with illegal dumping was provided by the newly formed Solid Waste Enforcement unit, that observed several chronic illegal dumping sites and gave recommendations on how to reduce drop off of unwanted materials.
Staff also met regularly with the coalition to identify ways to reduce discards.
Site visits will be followed up with comprehensive waste audits and further assistance in FY93-94.
Construction / Demolition Waste Recycling Program
During FY93-94, the Recycling Section of the Waste Reduction Division continued its aggressive approach to expand construction/demolition recycling and salvage programs within the region.
Other projects focused on the infrastructure required for greater access to construction debris recycling.
Five contracts for services were completed with a total dollar value of $54,000.
These included the following projects:
* Waste reduction curriculum for construction industry
* Training video emphasizing savings through recycling
* 15 case studies documenting actual savings on various projects
* Display booth used at six tradeshows to raise public awareness
* Development of recycling trailer with Oregon Remodelers Association
Other construction/demolition related projects by Waste Reduction staff included revision of the popular Construction Site Recycling Guide, and incorporation of construction/demolition efficiency in the Metro Code.
A priority is continuing the development of industry based programs with the Earth-Wise Building Committee, a group consisting of representatives from the Homebuilders Association, Oregon Remodelers Association, American Institute of Architects, Associated General Contractors, Oregon Sanitary Services Institute, processors and contractors.
Analysis of data from the 1993 Recycling Level Survey and the Fall Waste Composition Study indicated that construction waste represented 23 percent of the solid waste stream.
Approximately 47 percent of this waste was recycled in 1993 with large increases in wood and drywall recovery.
Increasing recognition of recycling options and expansion of processing capacity continues to hold further promise for a greater level of recycling for construction waste in the future.
Business Waste Prevention Programs
The Metro business waste prevention technical assistance program had three primary objectives for the year:
* Target large waste generators for assistance and develop printed materials that would allow industry peers to duplicate waste prevention programs within their own operations.
* Develop cooperative working relationships with industry trade and professional associations and include these groups in waste reduction program planning to encourage cooperative projects, industry ownership and sustainability through industry support.
* Support local waste consultation programs by referring requests for assistance by businesses to local government business recycling coordinators, by distributing Metro developed industry specific materials to local governments for use in their waste audit programs and providing technical assistance to businesses when local governments can not provide this service.
Commercial Waste Prevention Brochure The Paperless Office
The Paperless Office brochure was developed as a companion piece to a Metro One Percent for Recycling grant that encouraged businesses to incorporate waste prevention strategies into their operations.
Two Metro area corporations, Mentor Graphics and the Legacy Health Chain, were featured with examples of their waste prevention efforts and the savings from these practices.
Waste Prevention practices introduced at Mentor Graphics resulted in an annual savings of $116,800 and the Legacy Hospital achieved an annual savings of $279,000.
The brochure provides resources for business waste prevention assistance and is available for distribution through Metro Recycling Information and local government waste consultation programs.
Industry-Specific Waste Reduction Programs: Law Finns
Metro and the Oregon State Bar (OSB) formed a partnership in FY93- 94 to promote and implement a recycling and waste reduction education program for OSB membership.
Metro researched State Bar programs to determine waste reduction and recycling commitment levels.
Program information was obtained from the following State Bars: Florida, Texas, Colorado, Utah, Washington and California.
To date, support materials have been developed to approach the major Metro area supplier for standard legal forms to solicit their participation in a pilot project for use of recycled content in several standard legal forms.
"Metro and the Oregon State Bar formed a partnership to promote a recycling and waste reduction education program."
The first waste consultation is scheduled for August 1994 with Portland's largest law firm, Stoel Rives, Boley Jones and Grey.
The firm has 258 lawyers.
Metro Cooperative Commercial Recycling Programs
Galleria Tenant Recycling Project
A Galleria business tenant's request for recycling assistance provided Metro with the opportunity to solicit Galleria management and hauler support for a comprehensive tenant recycling program.
Seventy five percent of the Galleria tenants participated in a waste consultation and recycling orientation.
Recycling program improvements include:
* Commingled Office Pack recycling program with expanded recycling opportunities replaced a white paper recycling program that did not accommodate the typical paper generated by tenants
* Reduced storage space requirements since all paper is collected in one box
* An orientation flyer developed for tenant use was distributed by Galleria management to new tenants
* Recycling report cards, developed by the hauler, to let specific tenants know about contaminants found in recyclables
* Revised collection system: Each tenant received recycling bags stenciled with their suite number.
This action allowed the janitorial service to collect bags and return to the appropriate tenants while also allowing the hauler to identify contaminants specific to tenants.
US Bancorp Tower Tenant Recycling Project
A US Bancorp restaurant tenant request for Metro assistance for green glass recycling resulted in the organization of a cooperative group including Metro, US Bancorp tenants/management and their waste hauler) that organized and implemented a comprehensive recycling program.
Recycling programs were implemented for the following materials: Green, brown and dear glass, plastic and tin.
The US Bancorp Tower recycling program from January 1994 to June 1994 recycled five tons of materials that had previously gone to the landfill.
Oregon Convention Center - Event Recycling
A series of meetings were held with the Oregon Convention Center Event Director, contracted production company staff and select exhibitors to determine the level of commitment each group had to show recycling/exhibitor waste prevention planning.
Individual responsibilities were outlined for each project.
The first two shows targeted for event recycling/waste reduction assistance, scheduled for September/October 1994 are the National Recycling Congress Conference and the annual Home Builders and Remodelers Show.
Hospital Waste Minimization Assistance
At the request of the Veterans Administration and St. Vincent hospitals, Metro provided comprehensive waste consultations that examined hospital operations for recycling and waste prevention options.
The focus was reducing waste before it occurs by working with suppliers to reduce packaging and increase product recyclability locally.
Consultations will continue, as results are not immediate and require ongoing cooperative work with hospitals and suppliers.
Greening Your Bottom Line Workshop--Hotel Resource Efficient Project
Metro provided funding and technical assistance for an October 1993 waste reduction workshop for the hospitality industry called Greening Your Bottom Line.
The event featured guest speaker Ted Saunders, recycling manager for the Boston Park Plaza Hotel and also president of Ecological Solutions, a consulting firm that integrates environmental solutions into business operations.
Mr. Saunders' talk was result-oriented, and provided examples of how the Boston Park Plaza Hotel saved money through waste prevention programs.
The Greening Your Bottom Line workshop was the kick-off event for Metro's Hotel Resource Efficient project.
Five Portland hotels were selected to participate in the project: Red Lion--Lloyd Center, Vintage Plaza, Benson, Hilton, Holiday Inn at Coliseum.
TheGreenwood Inn, which is a in franchised collection area of Washington County joined the project in August.
Hotels participating in the demonstration project are learning practical, effective ways to reduce the amount of waste they produce, improve recycling, help dose the loop by purchasing recycled content products, and use water and energy more efficiently.
The project is funded through Metro, Pacific Power, Edison Electric and Portland General Electric.
Other sponsors (endorsement 
Buy Recycled Tradeshows
Metro continued to promote buying recycled products by providing information to businesses and the public sector.
In October 1993, Metro held a Buy Recycled Trade Show at its regional headquarters.
Thirty-five vendors displayed their products and over 200 people from local businesses and the public attended the show.
A wide range of products were promoted including recycled paper and office products, drain pipe for septic fields made from recycled polystyrene plastic, and tiles from recycled window glass.
In addition to the tradeshow, Metro staffed a booth at Portland's Home Improvement and Remodeling Show.
This annual event attracts thousands of visitors and was an excellent opportunity to educate the public about building and remodeling materials made with recycled content, such as carpet, tiles, insulation and plastic lumber.
Metro also staffed a recycled product display at the "Business After Hours" event sponsored by the Portland Chamber of Commerce.
The display was very popular with local businesses.
Targeted Marketing of Recycled Products
Each year Metro improves its ability to target specific segments of the community to find a better match between recycled products and potential customers.
In FY93-94, special projects for the hotel and hospitality industry and at grocery stores included a buy recycled element.
An inventory of products commonly purchased by these industries was compiled, and available recycled product substitutes were identified.
The vendors who supply these industries were also contacted and encouraged to carry more recycled products.
During FY 94-95 Metro will expand its targeted marketing to lawyers, warehousing and distribution operations, and household products.
Phonebook Recycling
The Waste Reduction Division coordinated the annual phonebook recycling campaign once again in FY93-94.
This cooperative program with US West Direct, GTE Northwest, the Girl Scouts of America, Fred Meyer Stores and local governments are waste haulers achieves one of the highest recovery rates in the nation.
In FY93-94, 40 percent of the phonebooks distributed were collected for recycling compared to 38 percent in the prior year.
This equaled 1,936 tons of phonebooks.
"In FY93-94, 40 percent of the phonebooks distributed were collected for recycling."
Public drop-off sites were located at Fred Meyer stores and at some recycling depots.
In addition, local businesses were encouraged to collect and recycle their phonebooks.
The phonebooks are recycled into insulation, fruit packaging, ceiling tiles and filler for corrugated cardboard.
Market Analysis and Information Management
Glass
The markets section worked with a marketing research contractor to complete a local market viability assessment describing four alternative markets for recycled green glass.
These markets included sand blasting, building materials, subsurface fill, and landscaping gravel.
The assessment identified perceptions of the material, how it might best be applied, and the factors affecting its marketability such as distribution and pricing.
The most significant finding of the assessment was that the local sandblasting industry is the most "market ready" of the target markets.
More specifically, one blasting grit supplier expressed a strong interest in processing and marketing recycled glass for blasting applications.
Metro introduced the President of this company to key staff at Owens-Brockway to begin discussing the feasibility of a buy-sell relationship.
This discussion is currently in progress.
Oil
Metro participated in several collaborative efforts to increase recovery of used oil from do-it-yourself (DIY) mechanics.
The first of these was an ad hoc committee of the Association of Oregon Recyclers.
This committee obtained a grant from Metro to test the effectiveness of several education and promotion treatments aimed at increasing used oil recycling.
This study was completed on time and under budget.
The AOR Committee also authored and successfully lobbied for a bill (SB 1014) which established statewide recovery goals for do-it- yourself used oil, and created a broad-based, statewide committee to recommend necessary measures to meet these recovery goals.
A Metro appointee serves on this committee.
It also includes representatives from petroleum marketing companies, retail stores that sell new motor oil, commercial used oil recycling companies, curbside used oil collectors, environmental organizations, used oil depot operators, recycling trade organizations, independent retail service stations, automotive repair shops, AAA and the Multi-family Housing Council.
Between March and July, 1994, this committee assessed the existing used oil recycling infrastructure and effort.
The Committee is in the process of finalizing its findings and recommendations, which will be reported to the 1995 Legislature.
The committee's recommendations will help guide Metro and DEQ's used oil recycling program development.
Recycling Business Development Program
The Market Development section provided information, guidance, advocacy and referral to approximately 60 recycling businesses and entrepreneurs.
Market Development staff also compiled and published the Recycling Business Resource Directory which contains descriptions and contact information for more than 160 resources available to recycling businesses in all stages of development.
These include resources in the areas of financing, business management, marketing, and recycling.
Recycling Level Survey for 1993
The Waste Reduction Division conducts a Recycling Level Survey for the tri-county region each year.
In FY93-94, approximately 98 buy- back centers, intermediate processors and end users of recycled materials were surveyed to determine the amount of material they received.
The recycling rate for 1993 was 38 percent of waste generated.
The recovery rate which also includes materials burned for energy was 42 percent.
Based on the survey results, overall recycling has leveled off during the past two years.
However, per capita waste generation and disposal rates are decreasing slightly.
In 1993 the per capita generation rate was 7.11 pounds per person per day, down from 7.39 pounds per person per day in 1992.
The per capita disposal rate was 4.62 in 1993 compared to 4.66 in the prior year.
The largest increases in recovery were for yard debris, wood and drywall.
These indicate the success of the region's curbside recycling program for yard debris, and expanded construction site recycling.
Overall, the results of the 1993 Recycling Level Survey indicate a trend of a consistent level of recycling, increased materials recovery and a reduction in generation of waste.
TABLE: Recycling Levels (1986-1993) [SEE SOURCE DOCUMENT]
GRAPHIC: Tons Recovered [SEE SOURCE DOCUMENT]
Recycling Level Survey for 1993
The Waste Reduction Division conducts a Recycling Level Survey for the tri-county region each year.
In FY93-94, approximately 98 buy- back centers, intermediate processors and end users of recycled materials were surveyed to determine the amount of material they received.
The recycling rate for 1993 was 38 percent of waste generated.
The recovery rate which also includes materials burned for energy was 42 percent.
Based on the survey results, overall recycling has leveled off during the past two years.
However, per capita waste generation and disposal rates are decreasing slightly.
In 1993 the per capita generation rate was 7.11 pounds per person per day, down from 7.39 pounds per person per day in 1992.
The per capita disposal rate was 4.62 in 1993 compared to 4.66 in the prior year.
The largest increases in recovery were for yard debris, wood and drywall.
These indicate the success of the region's curbside recycling program for yard debris, and expanded construction site recycling.
Overall, the results of the 1993 Recycling Level Survey indicate a trend of a consistent level of recycling, increased materials recovery and a reduction in generation of waste.
Market Profiles
The division prepared Market Profiles for 13 recycled materials collected in the Metro region.
The profiles analyze market conditions, such as supply and demand, collection and processing costs, and market prices.
They also include an informed outlook on future markets for each material.
The profiles are used by businesses wanting to utilize recycled materials, and by analysts to evaluate recycling programs and to map future waste reduction strategies.
Market Profiles are available for the following materials: newsprint, old corrugated cardboard, high grade paper, mixed scrap paper, magazines, glass, plastics, tires, oil, yard debris, wood, paint and gypsum.
Recycled Products Guides
This year, after feedback from users of Metro's recycled products guides, the guides were redesigned to make them more readable and easier to use.
The new design utilizes a smaller format and lists specific products more clearly.
A diligent effort was made to include local sources for each of the products.
Specific ordering information is included where ever a local distributor is not available.
Pertinent information from the Earthwise Purchasing booklet was condensed and incorporated into each guide.
One new guide was added for commercial and industrial operations.
The full set of four guides now includes: Paper and Office Products; Construction Materials; Commercial and Industrial Products; and a Shopper's Guide to Buying Recycled.
The Shopper's Guide replaces the former Consumer Guide with a combination of educational narrative about shopping recycled with listings of more than 150 recycled-content products available to retail consumers
The number of companies and recycled products listed has grown tremendously in the past year.
Since last year, the number of companies listed in the recycled products database grew by 75 percent from 180 companies to 315.
The number of products rose from 239 in 1992-93 to 530 currently, an increase of 122 percent.
The office guide includes listings of 162 products, the industrial guide lists 211 products, and the construction guide lists more than 250 products.
Revised editions of all four guides will be published at the end of September 1994.
Recycled Products Database
While updating the recycled products database for the 1994 guides, the opportunity arose to make the database more accessible.
The data itself was cleaned up and rearranged and a user-friendly application was written to make the database accessible to more users.
In addition to the database being available on disk to users of the Recycled Product Guides, members of the public will be able to come to Metro to peruse the database to locate specific products and vendors, or to select a group of products based on product type, material recycled or location of the vendor.
Home Composting Workshops
Metro manages five home composting demonstration centers throughout the region.
Thirteen different composting systems are exhibited at each center accompanied by information on the composting process and the characteristics of the various systems.
Workshops for the public are held on Saturdays during the spring and fall.
The compost projects coordinator conducted 44 workshops for approximately 935 people at the demonstration centers between July 1993 and June 1994.
Twenty-six additional presentations were offered in the community by Metro compost corps volunteers.
The compost corps volunteers assist Metro with public outreach.
About 23 volunteers devoted 289 hours in community outreach and educated approximately 5,000 people through presentations and booths at fairs and garden stores.
Interest in home composting and attendance at workshops increased during the year.
A comparison of attendance figures indicates a 13 percent increase from FY92-93.
There was an average of 22 participants at each workshop compared to 17 in 1992.
Self-guided visitors at Metro's compost sites increased by 96% over FY92-93.
Commercial Composting
In addition to the home composting education program, Metro continued to work with local processors to test their products and develop expanded markets for commercial compost.
Standards were developed for locally-produced compost as well as a sampling procedure for testing.
A committee of experts was created to help Metro determine characteristics to standardize as well as acceptable levels for physical and chemical properties of compost depending on its use.
Erosion Control Project
The goal of this project was to demonstrate a practical use for yard debris compost produced in the Metro region that could lead toward stabilizing and expanding markets for the material.
Increased collection and recovery programs for yard debris have resulted in more material available for composting than ever before.
Of the yard debris available in the wastestream, 45 percent was collected and composted in 1992, and 68 percent was collected and composted in 1993 (1993 Recycling and Recovery Level Survey).
The objective of this project was to use locally produced yard debris compost and monitor the results in situations typically needing erosion control.
This study was directed specifically at soil erosion problems in urban areas caused by highway construction and home building.
The three sites selected represented road construction, home building and mobile home development.
Projects were initiated beginning in October 1993 and continued through April 1994.
Compost was donated by local processors and spread in place as uniform three inch cover on slopes by on-site contractors.
Visual monitoring began within one month of compost application and continued on a monthly basis.
Oversight for the project was provided by a review committee including staff from Metro, Oregon Department of Environmental Quality, Oregon Department of Transportation, Cities of Portland, Gresham and Lake Oswego, W
At the conclusion of the project, Unified Sewerage Agency agreed to include yard debris compost as an approved method for erosion prevention and control within the Washington County area.
The Oregon Department of Transportation's site coordinator recommended continued use of yard debris compost for erosion control.
Waste Reduction Education
Public Affairs
The Public Affairs Department provides promotion support for waste reduction programs.
Program support for FY93-94 fell into three categories: direct program support, recycling information, and toxics reduction outreach.
Direct program support was provided in the form of coordination of advertising, media relations, community events, displays, videos and printed materials for several waste reduction programs including home composting, multifamily recycling, Earthwise builders, recycling business assistance, buy recycled, Earthwise businesses and phone book recycling.
Recycling information support was provided when Metro Recycling Information co-sponsored the 1993 Home Improvement and Remodeling Show with the Oregonian, collaborating on production of a Recycle- at-a-Glance poster that was distributed at the show and advertised widely.
Metro staffed a "Reduce, Reuse, Recycle" booth at the show, reaching more than 1,700 people.
More than 6,000 copies of the Recycle-at-a-Glance poster were distributed during and after the show.
In cooperation with the Solid Waste Operations Division, Public Affairs administered the Alternatives to Pesticides education program for home gardeners.
The program reached nearly 6,000 people through community events, workshops and presentations during FY93- 94.
In May and June 1994, Public Affairs coordinated an alternatives to pesticides advertising campaign that included a radio spot and an Earth Agenda television spot that ran for four weeks.
As a result of the campaign, more than 3,000 Common Sense Gardening books were distributed in May and Tune.
School Programs
It was a very busy year for the waste reduction education school programs group.
More than 15,000 students were reached over the course of the year with programs aimed at recycling and toxics reduction.
With the production help of Metro's corps of volunteers, the puppet show on toxics reduction proved to be a huge success among the elementary school children.
Worm bin presentations were especially popular.
Requests for middle and high school recycling presentations dropped off, leading to the conclusion that past recycling education programs have been successful in reaching many students who have retained their knowledge and understanding of why and how to recycle.
Middle and high school program presentations of "Toxics in the Home" were well received.
Metro Recycling Information
Metro Recycling Information, formerly known as the Recycling Information Center, is a major customer service and public relations program for Metro and serves as the clearinghouse for recycling, waste reduction and solid waste disposal information for the Metro region.
During FY93-94, the staff of 4.5 F-l k answered over 86,000 calls and distributed more than 120,000 informational brochures and fact sheets.
The program maintains up-to-date information on more than 450 recycling depots, drop-off sites, collection services, curbside recycling programs, reuse referrals and markets for recyclables.
In addition to Monday through Saturday telephone service, staff also answers questions for walk-in customers and operates a lending library of recycling industry books and journals.
Metro In-House Waste Reduction Program
Metro made a significant commitment to waste reduction and recycling in FY 93-94 by implementing a comprehensive in-house recycling/waste reduction program.
Our new Office Pack recycling for high grade papers expands the number of different types of paper that can be recycled, while our new Scrap Paper recycling program captures the lower paper grades that had previously been considered waste.
Both programs should substantially reduce Metro's overall waste generation.
Metro's hauler, as part of the new waste contract, will provide garbage weights and recycling levels to track the new program's success in waste diversion.
We will also be able to share data with businesses interested in implementing their own recycling programs.
* In 1993-94, the Division wrote a comprehensive recycled product procurement ordinance that was incorporated into the Metro Code.
The ordinance requires that a 10 percent price preference be given to recycled products versus non-recycled, if they meet performance standards.
It also requires that Metro bids and proposals include provisions for recycled products and encourages staff to specify recycled materials when they are available.
* Promotional materials: Recycle While You Work brochure, Office Pack and Scrap Paper recycling bin labels and signage were distributed at employee department recycling orientations.
New recycling containers were purchased using funds obtained from a Waste Reduction Task Force Bake Sale.
* A waste reduction orientation and Recycle While You Work brochure is now an integral part of each new Metro employee's orientation.
* Metro Office Pack recycling program has allowed us the opportunity to close the recycling loop by purchasing paper that Metro employees have recycled.
* Metro conducted 2 recycled product tests using Metro, Zoo and MERC staff.
Eco Writer pencils was one of the products included in the recycled products Survey.
MERC and Metro staff were targeted to evaluate the product performance.
Evaluation forms were developed to standardize this information and product evaluations will be made available to facility purchasing agents and any interested parties to expand recycled product knowledge.
* Some examples of other waste reduction programs: Use of re-refined oil in all Metro fleet cars; permanent waste reduction column in Metro's newsletter that showcases current waste reduction accomplishments; recycled products trade show that targeted Metro, local governments, and businesses.
(Event will be held next year because of the large attendance).
Summary
Working with an even further reduced budget, the Waste Reduction Division set out to accomplish more in FY93-94 than in previous years.
Through the efforts of an enthusiastic and dedicated staff as well as effective collaboration with local governments, haulers and processors, the Division made significant in-roads in the area of business recycling, source reduction and recycling of construction and demolition debris, and research for recycled products.
Metro Waste Reduction Milestones
Metro Regional Recycling Levels
1989 RSWMP adopted Waste Reduction begins administering 1% for Recycling Grants
1990 Region achieves recycling rate of 28% Metro's first Buy Recycled Index Metro Recycling Information Center receives 42,822 calls
1991 Region achieves recycling rate of 32% Curbside Containers-- Clackamas County Metro's "Paper Train Your Staff" campaign begins Metro Central Station opens Deja Shoe 1% Recycling grant awarded Riedel MSW composting facility begins operation
1992 Region achieves recycling rate of 38% Regional Yard Debris Plan adopted East Multnomah cities initiated their "Curby" residential recycling program Oregon Recycling Act adopted Metro Buy Recycled paper campaign begins The region recycles 1,538 tons of phone books Curbside containers distributed to residents of Washington County Curbside yard debris collection begins in East Multnomah County Metro Recycling Information Center receives 80,351 calls
1993 Region achieves recycling rate of 39% Riedel MSW composting facility ceases operations Metro recycles vacant Sears store to create its new headquarters building Alternatives to pesticide program stimulates more than 3,000 calls Portland increases frequency of curbside yard debris recycling to bi-weekly 1% for Recycling grant program ends after awarding 37 grants totaling $1,365,102
1994 Receding rate levels off at 38% Per capita waste generation and disposal decline Waste Reduction Division hold two public roundtables 178% of the Region's multi-family complexes have on-site recycling Green Plate Restaurant Recycling Program begins Local Governments move to weekly curbside collection of yard debris 47% of construction waste is recycled Metro Recycling Information Center receives 86,254 calls __________________________________________________________________
Return to the top of this document.
[up.gif] Return to General References
[up.gif] Return to Dept. of Defense Index
[up.gif] Return to Envirosense Home Page
Last Updated: April 23, 1997
