Horn icon.
This link bypasses navigation taking you directly to the contents of this page.
Inquiry Question
Historical Context
Maps
Readings
Images
Activities
Table of Contents
Building America's Industrial Revolution: The Boott Cotton Mills of Lowell, Massachusetts--Supplementary Resources
By looking at Building America's Industrial Revolution: The Boott Cotton Mills of Lowell, Massachusetts, including what influenced the development of the Boott millyard, students can more easily understand the workings of the industrial system at Lowell.
Those interested in learning more will find that the Internet offers a variety of materials.
Lowell National Historical Park Lowell National Historical Park is a unit of the National Park System.
The park's web page details the history of the park and visitation information.
The site also offers a photographic tour of Lowell in the page titled "Images of Lowell."
Places Where Women Made History The National Register of Historic Places, a division of the National Park Service, offers a travel itinerary on Places Where Women Made History.
The site features Lowell National Historical Park as an example of how the Industrial Revolution produced a new way of life for American women.
Center for Lowell History The University of Massachusetts Lowell, Center for Lowell History offers a wealth of information about Lowell, Massachusetts.
Included on the site is special collection called "The Blue Plate Special: An eclectic View of the Lowell Historical Society's Collection" and a comprehensive "links" page that directs you to archives, timelines, research topics, and much more.
Slater Mill Slater Mill Historic Site provides an overview of the site as well as the story of Samuel Slater.
A Virtual Museum: History of Technology and Everyday Life The University of Wisconsin-Parkside History Department created a virtual museum that features the Industrial United States.
Included in this feature is a section on early industrialization in Lowell, Massachusetts.
The section provides maps of Lowell, and information about Lowell mills and factories as well as the workers.
The Industrial Revolution ThinkQuest Junior sponsors a page on the Industrial Revolution that provides important facts about the revolution, offers fun things to do related to the facts learned, and recommends other sources of information related to the revolution.
Modern History Sourcebook The Modern History Sourcebook is one of a series of internet history primary sourcebooks created by the History Department of Fordham University in New York.
Included on their web page is account of Harriet Robinson as a "Lowell mill girl."
Lowell Mill Girls and the Rhetoric of Women's Labor Unrest Lowell Mill Girls and the Rhetoric of Women's Labor Unrest is an essay examining impact of the Industrial Revolution on working women.
The essay was written by Catherine Lavender at the Department of History, The College of Staten Island of The City University of New York.
Child Labor in America The Library of Congress provides a unique resource page titled Child Labor in America.
Included on the site are links to information on child labor and labor reform, photographic histories, as well as several links specifically detailing the experience of Lowell mill girls.
For Further Reading For further reading about the development of the textile mills in Lowell and America's Industrial Revolution consider the following useful works: David Macauley, Mill (Boston, Houghton Mifflin Co., 1983) and William H. Pierson, American Buildings and Their Architects: Technology and the Picturesque, the Corporate and the Early gothic Styles (New York: Doubleday and Company, 1978).
Sources for related topics include Thomas Dublin, Farm to Factory: Women's Letters 1830-1860 (New York: Columbia University Press, 1981; revised edition, 1993) which includes primary sources related to Lowell's early women mill workers and Katherine Patterson, Lyddie (New York: Lodestar Books, 1991) which is a historic novel based on factual accounts of Lowell's "mill girls."
Back to the Beginning
Comments or Questions Privacy 
