International Information Programs East Asia-Pacific Security Issues U.S. Policy Toward North Korea
What U.S. Administration Officials Are Saying* May 2003 Excerpts from statements made by U.S. Administration officials about North Korea
May 31, 2003 Deputy Secretary of Defense Paul Wolfowitz Interview with Yusuke Takahashi, NHK Television
Takahashi: And fifth question is North Korea....
Im sorry to say that nobody expect that Mr. Kim Jong Il suddenly become a reformer like Deng Xiao Ping in communist China.
Why dont we seek a regime change in that country like we did in Iraq and if not, why cant US give the North Koreans the security guarantee they ask? That non-aggression pact or some such kind of guarantee.
Wolfowitz: Well, Im not quite sure what anyone thinks that by itself is going to accomplish.
Its not -- if we were talking about it in the context of the kind of major change that I talked about, there are many things that could be on the table, but if take a view that North Koreas never going to change, that Kim Jong Il will continue to rule the country and continue to pursue the insane policies hes pursuing, then its hard to see any successful outcome other than that country increasingly heading towards collapse.
But I think what is essential is for everyone in North Korea to get a message that comes not just from the United States, but from all the regional powers, that they face a fundamental choice.
Now its true, maybe there are only a few people in North Korea who have any ability to make that choice, but I think the clearer it can be presented to them including to Kim Jong Il, the better chance there is of a peaceful outcome and I think we all want to see a peaceful outcome because war in Korea would be quite a terrible thing.
Takahashi: But if they were to escalate the situation again, would you specify that what is the additional step that we can make to stop them from exporting nuclear reactive materials?
Wolfowitz: Well, theres a great deal we can do in that regard.
In fact this wasnt the purpose of our operation in Iraq, but weve just taken one customer away from them.
There are a lot of other things that can be done to prevent the export of those materials and it will be important, because as I said in my comments, I think the greatest single danger posed by what theyre doing is in fact the potential export.
But, look, the further North Korea goes up this escalatory road, the further its going to have to climb back down at some point.
Theyre not improving their security by what they do and theyre wasting their limited national resources and what they need to understand very clearly, and that message has to come not just from the United States, but from Japan and South Korea and Russia and most of all from China, is that the help that they are getting now is going to dry up if they keep going down this road of provocative behavior.
May 31, 2003 Deputy Secretary of Defense Paul Wolfowitz Remarks at a conference on Asia-Pacific security issues Arranged by the International Institute of Strategic Studies Singapore
..In Korea, where our alliance has endured and prospered for over 50 years, we have launched a bilateral posture review effort -- a phased process we call the Future of the Alliance study.
That initiative was agreed to at our December 2002 Security Consultative Meeting.
And we began work in earnest when the Roh Moo-hyun government took office in late February.
At their recent summit meeting in Washington, our two Presidents pledged to work closely together to modernize the U.S.-Korean alliance, taking advantage of technology to transform both nations' forces and enhance their capabilities to meet emerging threats.
Our agreed goal is to jointly assess our respective transformation plans and determine how best to strengthen the deterrence value of our alliance.
Tomorrow I will be going to Seoul for important discussions with South Korean officials.
My basic message will be that change is positive, that we are determined to enhance the quality of our alliance with the Republic of Korea and, in so doing, to strengthen deterrence on the Korean peninsula and stability in North East Asia more generally.
Fifty years ago this July the guns went silent on the Korean peninsula.
For the ensuing half century the strong alliance of the U.S. and the Republic of Korea has preserved the peace on the basis of effective deterrence backed up by a strong common defense capability.
This formula has worked and allowed South Korea to prosper, both economically and politically, rising from the ashes of a devastating war to become the 11th largest economy in the world and a thriving democracy.
As we discuss in Korea how best to transform our respective forces to ensure the continuing effectiveness of our alliance, we are guided by two principal considerations.
First, deterrence remains a key objective of our common defense posture.
The changes we make should take advantage of new technology to counter North Korean asymmetric capabilities and to strengthen deterrence.
Second, the changes we make should help to sustain a strong alliance over the long run by reducing unnecessary burdens on both sides and ensuring that the alliance will remain relevant into the future.
May 31, 2003 Deputy Secretary of Defense Paul Wolfowitz Question and answer session following remarks at the IISS Asia Security Conference in Singapore Also participating were Senators Jack Reed and Sen. Charles Hagel
Q: I would just like to focus on North Korea.
You rightfully said that North Korean has got to go through a fundamental change in the way in which it governs itself.
Do you think North Korea is capable of making that change itself? I am very skeptical about that and think some strong external force might be necessary to achieve regime change and then let things settle down with a major role being played by the South Koreans.
Wolfowitz: I m tempted to ask you exactly what you have in mind.
(Laughter.)
I think given all the factors involved, including not only the slightly different perspectives of all the major countries in the region that Senior Minster Lee spoke about last night, but also the enormous danger that any contemplation of military force is fraught within the peninsula.
I think a slower and more patient approach than I am hearing you suggest may be what's necessary.
I agree that challenge is enormous, and you ask are they capable of making that kind of change.
I think the task is to persuade them, to persuade their leadership really, that the only way to avoid regime change brought about by internal collapse is to in fact have the kind of policy change -- fundamental policy change -- that Deng Xiao Ping led in China.
It's not a really mystery.
It can be done.
It has been done.
It certainly requires a regime that is willing to make enormous departures from the past, to admit that the huge investment that's made in military resources for example is unnecessary.
But I think it is possible both to present this regime with the fact that it's the only real alternative it has, and also I think working cooperatively to convince it that if it does take that path, it can do so with not only some safety but with some enormous help and benefit accruing.
Q: I would like Paul and Jack Reed also who dealt with North Korea issue in his comments to reconcile two times scale on the North Korean problem.
We have been talking about the long-term project getting this rather odd place to reform and I think Paul Wolfowitz is just right on that score.
However, the nuclear problem is unfolding on a much more rapid scale, and so we have a question what to do about an imminent threat to our security that is unfolding now, and a prospect of reform or even collapse that is not imminent but years in the future.
And so I think all this discussion of what ultimately happens with North Korea still begs the question what do we do now about nuclear weapons in North Korea.
I wonder if both of those gentlemen would address the near term problem rather than the long-term problem.
Wolfowitz: There clearly is the problem that you refer to.
I think the fact is the further the North Koreans go down the road they re marching, the further they re going to have to march back eventually.
That is a fact that they need to face, and I think it is a fact that we need to face that I referred to in my remarks that the greatest danger posed in that regard is the danger of export.
Fortunately they have just lost one potential customer in Baghdad and I think there are things we can do to limit the market elsewhere, and not perfectly, but the more cooperation we have the more we can do that successfully.
I think that's important.
But recognizing the time scale problem you referred to, I am not really sure I see a solution.
It's not a case of don't just stand there, do something .
The question is what are you going to do.
Military action isn't going to solve that short-term problem and large-scale bribery I don't think is going to solve that short-term problem.
So I am open to ideas, but it seems to me that it is a case that requires a certain amount of long-term Asian patience.
But I also believe that the more quickly we can really achieve that consensus among the major northeast Asian powers on what is the way out and the only way out for North Korea, the more quickly we may be able to get them to confront reality.
Reed: Well I think because time is of the essence for this particular problem and I agree with Paul that the real problem as I see it is the diversion of this fissile material to terrorists or other states, is that we do have to try to engage as quickly as possible with some type of negotiation.
That first requires negotiating among the regional powers -- China, South Korea, Russia, Japan -- to come with a concerted effort to try to deal with the issue and again as I try to suggest in my remarks, that the essence of any negotiation is understanding you have to give to gain.
That's a threshold we have to cross first.
If we're unwilling to cross that then we ll be paralyzed because we won t do anything.
And I would suggest that the prospects of the satisfactory resolution are difficult to calculate, but without this process I think we won't have either the legitimacy or the confidence to go forward with perhaps more robust coercive measures which might, I regret to say, but might someday be necessary....
Q: Sorry to come back to North Korea, but it seems that Russia, Japan, China, the U.S. and South Korea essentially agree on one thing only, and that is to prevent the invention of a repugnant and unpredictable regime which has outlawed weapons programs including chemical and biological as well as nuclear.
Now maybe this is prudent, and maybe given the dangers that North Korea poses there's no choice.
But isn't the message of this that essentially non-proliferation is a dead letter, but is the result of Iraq's ability to defy the U.N. for twelve years.
And isn't that the last impression that the United States would wish to give to other countries such as for example Iran?
Wolfowitz: I am afraid that I don't understand the premise of the question.
It seems to be that non-proliferation is not a dead letter at all and in fact the implication of preventing the implosion of North Korea is that they are on a course that is going to lead to that implosion unless they change and that change requires both giving up their own nuclear program in the second instance, but in the first instance not exporting it.
No, I think the North Korean nuclear problem is front and center on our agenda and if they want to save themselves from the dead end they are going down, I think they have to address our concerns.
I think that's fairly clear.
Q: What I meant is that essentially North Korea is being taken more seriously because it has become a nuclear power by its own admission, whether or not that's true, and that the lesson that people will have is that in the case of Iraq it became imperative to confront Iraq militarily because it had banned weapons systems and posed a danger to the region.
In the case of North Korea, which has nuclear weapons as well as other banned weapons of mass destruction, apparently it is imperative not to confront, to persuade and to essentially maintain a regime that is just as appalling as the Iraqi regime in place, for the sake of the stability of the region.
To other countries of the world this is a very mixed message to be sending out.
Wolfowitz: The concern about implosion is not primarily at all a matter of the weapons that North Korea has, but a fear particularly by South Korea and also to some extent China of what the larger implications are for them of having 20 million people on their borders in a state of potential collapse and anarchy.
It's is also a question of whether, if one wants to persuade the regime to change, whether you have to find -- and I think you do -- some kind of outcome that is acceptable to them.
But that outcome has to be acceptable to us, and it has to include meeting our non-proliferation goals.
Look, the primarily difference -- to put it a little too simply -- between North Korea and Iraq is that we had virtually no economic options with Iraq because the country floats on a sea of oil.
In the case of North Korea, the country is teetering on the edge of economic collapse and that I believe is a major point of leverage whereas the military picture with North Korea is very different from that with Iraq.
The problems in both cases have some similarities but the solutions have got to be tailored to the circumstances which are very different....
Q: I would like to pose a question to you which gets back to the Korea issue and goes into a little bit more detail.
I was interested, and I must say, rather heartened, by the positive tone of your comments about the possibility for a negotiated outcome there and I certainly agree with you how important that is that it be a multilateral process.
It does seem to me though that it is still pretty tough and the heart of that task is going to be verification.
The North Koreans have raised the bar pretty high but would count is adequate verification of de-nuclearization as part of such a deal, and I guess one thing that worries me about the prospects for a successful outcome is whether or not the U.S. or for that matter, the rest of us who have a key interest in the elimination of the nuclear threat on the Korean peninsular.
Whether we could possibly reach a verification regime that would satisfy our concerns.
It seems it would need to be qualitatively more intrusive than any verification regime that's been reached before and although I'm sure you don't want to start the negotiations with the North Koreans in the privacy of this room, I'd be very interested if you'd give us some hint as to what kind of solution to the verification problem do you think might be acceptable to the U.S.
Wolfowitz: I think for the reasons you alluded to plus the fact that I'm not here to start negotiations in any form, public or private, I don't think that's appropriate.
But I think the basic point, I think in some ways we may be more successful ultimately if the bar is set high both in terms of what we expect of them and in terms of what we as a group are prepared to deliver.
But it needs to be understood also, and this is I think why the multilateral approach is so essential that the countries of the region that are helping to keep North Korea afloat need to send a message to North Korea that they re not going to continue doing that if North Korea continues down the road its on.
Most of that help does not come from the U.S.; it comes from other countries and that's why a multilateral approach I think is essential.
May 31, 2003 Deputy Secretary of Defense Paul Wolfowitz Media roundtable discussion Singapore
..It's the North Korean problem that is a tough one, but I think it's a problem as I said this morning that needs to be addressed on a multilateral basis, needs to be addressed with firmness, and needs to be addressed with patience.
It would be nice to resolve it quickly but I don't see a way to do that.
May 30, 2003 Secretary Colin L. Powell Aboard Air Force One En Route Krakow, Poland
QUESTION: North Korea.
SECRETARY POWELL: There's no change in our policy on North Korea.
Multilateral discussions.
The President is very pleased that he has been able to pull together all of our partners in the region who are concerned about nuclear activities in North Korea so that we are all on the same policy sheet of music.
We have to have a de-nuclearized North Korea.
And we will work together toward that end.
And we hope North Korea will understand it is in their interest to move in this direction through multilateral discussions.
May 29, 2003 State Department Spokesman Richard Boucher Daily Press Briefing
QUESTION: Do you have anything to say about these North Korean allegations that South Korean warships crossed the sea border? Do you know anything about it?
MR. BOUCHER: No.
There have been reports the other way around, that North Korean fishing boats are coming across to the South.
QUESTION: I think, well, maybe they are making mutual counteraccusations.
MR. BOUCHER: I know for several days there have been reports in South Korea that North Korean boats were coming south across the maritime line.
QUESTION: Well, there's definitely one today about North Korea saying that South Korean warships have crossed the line.
MR. BOUCHER: I see.
QUESTION: Are you taking a position on who's right and who's wrong in this?
MR. BOUCHER: I won't jump into it yet at this point.
Thanks.
May 28, 2003 State Department Spokesman Richard Boucher Daily Press Briefing
QUESTION: Congressman Weldon is about to leave for North Korea.
Could you tell us what you know about that?
MR. BOUCHER: Yeah.
Representative Weldon and other members of Congress are traveling to North Korea, based on an invitation that was extended by the North Korean Government.
We understand Representative Weldon will also visit Seoul on the return trip from Pyongyang.
They travel as members of Congress.
Our Assistant Secretary for East Asia and Pacific Affairs Jim Kelly briefed the members of the Congressional delegation before their departure.
We'll, of course, look forward to hearing from them on their return, but I would say they are not carrying a message from the administration.
May 27, 2003 State Department Spokesman Richard Boucher Daily Press Briefing
QUESTION: Last week when the Russian Defense Minister was here, at the conclusion of his talks a senior Russian official -- he couldn't -- was asked not to speak in name -- spoke of the light water reactor as being extremely comparable to the light water reactor in North Korea that the U.S. was willing to help supply, that it was no more -- well, not putting words into his mouth.
He said it's the same situation, implying that it's a civilian use reactor.
Does the U.S. dispute that what they're doing with the reactor itself isn't really contributing to their nuclear program, weapons program?
MR. BOUCHER: The position that we have always held is that Iran was engaged in a much broader program, that they were using the nuclear reactor as cover for acquisitions, for expertise, for exchanges, for a much broader program.
And now it's becoming increasingly clear that broader program that we had always talked about, in fact, exists.
It's a full nuclear fuel cycle program.
There is a no reason for a country like Iran, which flares off more gas in a year than it would ever get from these nuclear programs, no reason for a country like Iran to have those programs.
It just doesn't make sense for anything other than nuclear weapons, and therefore we think it is not appropriate for -- not in anybody's interest to be helping Iran with its nuclear programs.
QUESTION: Thank you.
North Korea.
They issued a statement by Foreign Ministry State Spokesman -- I think it's the Sunday -- they say that they agreed to hold multilateral talks, maybe including South Korea and Japan, only after bilateral talks with the United States.
Could we ask your response to this statement, first?
MR. BOUCHER: I think the Secretary spoke to it this morning and stressed the need for multilateral talks, indeed expanded multilateral talks, that would involve other governments, as we have proposed.
North Korea's nuclear weapons program is a global concern.
It's a threat to the peace and stability of Northeast Asia and to the global nonproliferation regime.
We have made it clear that we are prepared to talk to North Korea about its nuclear weapons program in a multilateral format.
Given North Korea's history of noncompliance with bilateral agreements, only in such a multilateral process, where all key concerned parties are engaged, can a lasting solution be found to the problem posed by North Korea's pursuit of nuclear weapons.
QUESTION: This type of statement is a good symptom of changing attitude, or, you know, business as usual, just another tactics of old games they play?
MR. BOUCHER: I'm not able to analyze North Korean statements for you.
I don't know.
QUESTION: Richard, generally speaking, is there any movement on arranging another round of multilateral talks of the kind that took place in Beijing?
MR. BOUCHER: At this point, I don't have any decisions for you.
As we've said, we wanted to take our time, analyze what was said in Beijing, analyze what's going on on the ground, also talk to the Japanese and South Korean leaders, which the President was able to do last week.
So, at this point, I don't have anything new for you.
May 23, 2003 President of the United States George Bush Joint Press Availability with Japan's Prime Minister Junichiro Koizumi Crawford, Texas
BUSH: ...
On the threat from North Korea's nuclear program, the Prime Minister and I see the problem exactly the same way.
We will not tolerate nuclear weapons in North Korea.
We will not give into blackmail.
We will not settle for anything less than the complete, verifiable, and irreversible elimination of North Korea's nuclear weapons program.
We discussed the fact that China has started to play an important role in our efforts to address this challenge.
At talks held in Beijing last month, China called on North Korea to renounce nuclear weapons and live up to its agreements.
The Prime Minister and I agreed that we must broaden these talks to include Japan and South Korea, and at sometime later, perhaps others.
We are confident that our diplomatic approach will bring a peaceful solution.
Yet we agreed that further escalation of the situation by North Korea will require tougher measures from the intelligence community.
Finally, I assured the Prime Minister that the United States will stand squarely with Japan until all Japanese citizens kidnapped by North Korea are fully accounted for.
I strongly condemn the kidnapping of Japanese citizens by the North Koreans....
Q: Mr. President, you said today that an escalation of North Korea of its nuclear activities will require tougher measures.
But right now they possess nuclear weapons you say you won't tolerate.
So at what point would you need to increase pressure if they simply do nothing?
PRESIDENT BUSH: Well, the first step was to convince China to participate in the process of saying to North Korea that acceptance by the international community and potential help will come when they change their behavior and their attitude toward nuclear weapons.
This message has been delivered, and the North Koreans are thinking about it.
Should they choose to move forward, which we hope they do, then we will have the Japanese and South Koreans join the dialogue so that there's now five of us sitting around the table, all discussing how to see that the Korean Peninsula is nuclear-weapons-free.
And the importance of this meeting today should say to the world that Japan and the United States stand shoulder-to-shoulder on the issue of North Korea's nuclear weaponry.
I believe that we can solve this peacefully.
I believe that diplomacy can work.
And as importantly, Japan and the United States will not be blackmailed by North Korean threats, and that's important for the North Korean leadership to know.
May 22, 2003 Secretary of State Colin Powell Press Conference at the French American Press Club Hotel Clarion St. James et Albany Paris, France
QUESTION: Rivoli, ABC News.
The situation in North Korea.
Is it time for the Russians and the Chinese to play more of an integral role to make the situation without (inaudible) nuclear power more of a multilateral negotiation tactic or is it still, or are you still employing bilateral negotiation tactic? Where do you stand on that?
SECRETARY POWELL: There will be, there will be (inaudible) there can only be a multilateral solution.
North Koreas possession of nuclear weapons, which they say they have, is unacceptable to South Korea, to Japan, to China, to Russia, to the United States, to the world....
And so it is unacceptable.
The only way it can be dealt with is with all the nations who have an equity in this involved.
It is not just the U.S.-North Korea bilateral issue, however much North Korea says it is, or how many times they say it.
It has to be dealt with multilaterally.
The Chinese understand that.
Thats why they were willing to not only host the three-party meeting we had in Beijing, but to participate fully in that.
I think that the other nations who have an interest in this, South Korea and Japan, want to be part of that multilateral grouping if there are future meetings and in my conversations with my Russian colleagues last week in Moscow, it is clear that Russia is also committed to a de-nuclearized North Korean Peninsula, and is willing to play a political role in helping to bring that about.
North Korea has to understand that its going to be multilateral, and that their repeated threats, their repeated claims, their suggestions of that which they might do or might not do is not going force us into a bilateral discussion with them.
It is not going force us into giving a concession that just lead to further demands for further concessions.
We want to help North Korea.
The President has made this clear from the beginning.
It is a country with a starving population, and plutonium cannot be eaten.
It is time for them to realize that they have to give up these programs and some of the other things they are doing in order for their neighbors to assist them through this terrible period that they are going through.
QUESTION: (inaudible) claims that they indeed have reprocessed (inaudible).
SECRETARY POWELL: No.
May 21, 2003 State Department Spokesman Richard Boucher Daily Press Briefing
QUESTION: Well, one of the things they talked about in the editorial (Washington Times, May 21, "The Fog at Foggy Bottom") was the situation where North Korea announced on March 31st to State Department officials that it was reprocessing plutonium for the first time.
I know we have been through that a few weeks ago.
But the question is raised, I guess not directly by the editorial, but was there any punishment for anybody involved who knew of the information, but which was not subsequently passed on elsewhere within the administration?
MR. BOUCHER: I find it hard to answer a question that's based on the premise that we should believe what the North Koreans say.
We have explained exactly what the North Koreans said at different times, how it was contradictory, discussed what we have done -- we and the White House and others did -- with the intelligence agencies.
To assume that we have to punish people because the North Koreans tell another lie or tell something that may or may not be true is kind of extensive step.
May 20, 2003 William Bach Director of the Office of African, Asian and European Affairs for International Narcotics and Law Enforcement Affairs U.S. Department of State Testimony: Drugs, Counterfeiting and Arms Trade: The North Korean Connection" Hearing before the Senate Committee on Governmental Affairs Subcommittee on Financial Management, the Budget, and International Security
See full text.
May 20, 2003 Andre D. Hollis Deputy Assistant Secretary of Defense for Counternarcotics Testimony: The North Korean Narcotics Threat Hearing before the Senate Committee on Governmental Affairs Subcommittee on Financial Management, the Budget, and International Security
See full text.
May 19, 2003 White House Spokesman Ari Fleischer White House Press Briefing
Q The President met with the President of South Korea last week.
He is meeting with Prime Minister Koizumi this week.
Is the President pushing for a new round of talks with North Korea in the near future?
MR. FLEISCHER: Well, we're still talking about the exact next steps to take.
We have never said that there won't be additional talks.
In fact, I think that that is one of the things we are taking a look at, is the possibility of additional talks, what the appropriate time would be, and again, they would be multilateral forum if they were to take place.
Q Is he, is part of the discussion on Friday going to focus on that?
MR. FLEISCHER: I would anticipate, yes.
That, of course, is going to be an issue that comes up Friday....
Q Ari, President Bush and South Korea Roh agree to achieve a peaceful solution of North Korean nuclear crisis.
What would be the real role of -- the United States expect from South Korea?
MR. FLEISCHER: Well, the impact of resolving this crisis would be the removal of a threat that endangers millions of lives around the peninsula and in the neighborhood, including Japan and China and Russia, everywhere where North Korea, with its possession of nuclear weapons and its desire to acquire more nuclear weapons and its ability to have missiles presents a threat to the neighborhood.
Also, one of the greatest results that could come will be an improvement in the lives of tens of millions of people who live north of the Demilitarized Zone on the Korean Peninsula.
There are tens of millions of North Koreans who are impoverished, who are famished, who live in -- there are large numbers who live in prison camps that were created by a ruthless dictatorial North Korean government.
And so, as a result of a North Korean government that honors its obligations to the world, perhaps it can end its isolation in the world and do what free governments should always do, which is serve the needs of their people.
And the North Korean government has not done that.
May 19, 2003 State Department Spokesman Richard Boucher Daily Press Briefing
QUESTION: Regarding North Korea, we get a report on last Friday about the -- a high ranking member of the North Korean Labor Party, who is (inaudible) is seeking political asylum to the United States.
Could you -- can you say anything on that or --
MR. BOUCHER: No, I couldn't.
I don't know of this report, but I wouldn't be able to say anything anyway about an asylum request.
QUESTION: (Inaudible) is illegal to help the people who are seeking asylum including such a high-ranking member of the North Korean Labor Party?
MR. BOUCHER: We have asylum laws that follow international standards, and they don't discriminate on the basis of high rank or low rank.
May 15, 2003 Secretary of Defense Donald H. Rumsfeld and Air Force Gen. Richard B. Myers, chairman, Joint Chiefs of Staff Department of Defense News Briefing
Q: Mr. Secretary, on North Korea, can I ask a follow-up? President Roh also suggested at the White House that this might not be the best time to start reducing U.S. troop levels over there, as he suggested last year when he signed a declaration on coming into office.
You've also suggested maybe it's time to relook at the 37,000 U.S. troop level over there.
In light of the threat North Korea poses with its nuclear capability, what's your view on whether U.S. force levels should remain at that level, at the current level for the foreseeable future?
Rumsfeld: I think it's a mistake to look at it that way, the way you've characterized it, the way your question characterizes it.
As I say, I was in the meeting with both presidents and then I left when they went outside and made a statement and may have said something.
I just am not knowledgeable of what they said and I'm not going to comment on what they said.
Our position has been that the existence of nuclear weapons in North Korea is, at the minimum, probable.
They have been assessed to have a small number.
It has also been assessed that in the event they reprocess, they could have a handful more in a relatively short period of time; not weapons, but the materials for weapons.
That fact, to me, does not make a notable difference in the -- it's a bad thing.
It's unfortunate that that's the case.
We wish it weren't the case if, in fact, it is the case.
And the president and Secretary Powell have worked very hard and continue to work very hard, with Japan and South Korea and with the People's Republic of China, to try to follow a diplomatic path to find a way that the peninsula, the Korean peninsula be nuclear-weapon free.
I personally -- and Dick, you might want to comment on this -- in trying to think about it, I don't think that that issue necessarily affects the kinds of things we've been discussing with South Korea about how our forces are organized, how they're arranged there.
And it seems to me that so many things have changed in the world since those forces were put there.
They're now spread out over dozens and dozens of locations in the country, which is not efficient.
It's not helpful from a force protection standpoint.
It tends to be somewhat intrusive in terms of the people who live there.
And General LaPorte was asked, when he took that post, by me, just as I was asked by the president when he was elected, to look at our arrangements around the world and see if we can't modernize them, see if we can't arrange them so that they fit the 21st century, instead of the end of a conflict 50 years ago, in that case, or in Europe.
So, we're looking all over the globe.
And General LaPorte has had good discussions with the Republic of Korea's civilian and military leadership.
We certainly consider them a very close ally.
We certainly would do whatever makes sense in very close consultation with them.
But if you think of the changes in warfare -- just most recently, Iraq and Afghanistan -- it's rather clear that there are enhancements that can be made to that force, and capabilities that can be arranged that would considerably strengthen the deterrent, even though it might change how forces were arranged and what kinds of forces were there.
So --
Q: (Off mike.) -- forces?
Rumsfeld: It -- the ultimate test is how capable, how lethal, how effective is what you have? And it does not necessarily, as we learned in Iraq, go to the total number of forces.
I'm not going to get into what we might or might not do with the Korean government, other than to say whatever we do, we do in very close consultation with them.
Q: General Myers, are there lessons from the Iraq war that kind of -- are starting to shape the way you're viewing U.S. force structure and --
Myers: I'm sure there will be.
And it's probably too early to tell.
But let me -- there are three points of what the secretary said I think are really important.
One is any changes on the peninsula are being worked very closely between the two militaries, between the two governments.
So, there's no surprises here.
Two, no change will make the capability on the peninsula in South Korea less than it is today; it will only improve it -- only improve it.
And as the secretary said, that does not necessarily mean more people.
It's just capabilities we're talking about, so we're talking about technology, as well, and how we might be organized.
And the third thing I'd say is that this is not going to happen next week.
Anything that happens happens over time, so we're taking a long view, not a short view.
And therefore, you can't connect it with what's going on in the north or south.
I mean, it's -- the security of the peninsula and of our ally in South Korea is paramount, and it obviously won't be compromised....
Q: Mr. Secretary, back in 1994, the U.S. drew up options for an airstrike to take out the Yongbyon nuclear reactor.
Rumsfeld: I recall.
Q: Have you, as a matter of prudent military planning, updated those plans to give the president the full range of options as he decides how to deal with North Korea?
Rumsfeld: We do not discuss war plans or contingency plans or options or excursions.
May 14, 2003 Joint Statement Between the United States of America and the Republic of Korea The White House
See full text.
May 14, 2003 President George Bush and South Korea's President Roh Moo-Hyun Press availability May 14
See full transcript.
May 14, 2003 White House Spokesman Ari Fleischer White House Press Briefing
35 P.M. EDT MR. FLEISCHER: ....this evening, the President will welcome the new President of South Korea to the White House for their first face-to-face visit.
During the meetings and then the dinner that's following, I anticipate that they will talk about strengthening the United States-Korean alliance, an alliance that is already strong.
I believe they will talk about -- I'm certain they will talk about North Korea's attempt to blackmail the region through its development of a nuclear weapons program.
And they will also talk about bilateral economic ties that unite the United States and South Korea....
Q One quick thing looking ahead to tonight's meeting.
The South Koreans have made it pretty clear that they would prefer the United States would explicitly take military action off the table with regard to North Korea because they think it poses a threat to them.
Presumably, President Roh will bring that up with President Bush tonight.
Is that something that he is going to say is a nonstarter?
MR. FLEISCHER: Well, we'll give you a report specifically after the meeting.
But it is the longstanding policy of the United States not to take options off the table.
And that continues to be the case here.
Q Ari, also on North Korea.
Have you yet made a determination of whether North Korea is, in fact, reprocessing at Yongbyon or one of the other facilities?
MR. FLEISCHER: No, it's just as I said last week; we continue to evaluate information and no hard conclusions one way or another.
Q And do you have any reaction to the reports out of China of a new batch of North Korean defectors in recent weeks and months, including high-ranking military officers?
MR. FLEISCHER: I think it comes as no surprise to the President that people want to flee the tyranny of North Korea and the hunger, the starvation, and the prison camps of North Korea.
North Korea is one of the most despotic, miserable places left on the Earth.
And it is so because of the government of North Korea and the system of tyranny they've imposed on their own people.
All you need to do is compare South Korea to North Korea, which, after the Korean War they basically started out at about the same level, and look at the huge democratic, economic, cultural successes of the South and compare it to the North.
And you're talking about family members.
You're talking about people who are the same.
What's only different is the form of government.
And from the President's point of view, it's a stunning reminder that freedom and liberty promote human good.
And in North Korea, freedom and liberty have been crushed.
And that's why you see a difference between the South Korean people and the North Korean people in terms of the food, their health, their education, their medicine, and all their ways of life.
Q In terms of the defectors, is there -- first of all, so are you confirming that, in fact, there have been these defections?
MR. FLEISCHER: Well, clearly, there have been defections in the past.
We've all watched them on TV as people ran to freedom in the various embassies in Beijing.
In terms of the specific reports, I've seen the reports.
I don't have anything to confirm about them, but it would not be surprising.
Q What can we expect from the two leaders when they come into the Rose Garden?
MR. FLEISCHER: I think you're going to see a statement much along the lines that I've said, about the strong ties that exist between the United States and South Korea; the determination to make certain that there is a denuclearized Peninsula; and the strength of our economic ties.
Q On the question of whether or not we should be taking things off the table or exempting North Korea from a preemptive policy, is this something that the South Koreans have actually asked the United States to do? Or is this just a debate in South Korea? How would you characterize the nature of this discussion?
MR. FLEISCHER: Well, I'd say let the meeting take place.
This will be the first time that President Roh has gotten a chance to meet face-to-face with President Bush.
They spoke on the phone shortly after he was elected -- I think the election was in December of 2002, if I remember, it was late last year, and they spoke shortly thereafter.
And we'll see if they raise that or not; I don't know.
Q On the question of troops, that's something that's been kicked around for years about either the numbers or the location of troops.
What is U.S. thinking now about any changes in the placement or numbers?
MR. FLEISCHER: Well, the Department of Defense is conducting a review worldwide of our force structure.
And the review is conducted with a goal of making certain that our forces are configured the best, the most optimal way to provide for the defense of whatever region they are in.
And that is underway in South Korea.
I anticipate that will be something that is discussed.
There will be a joint statement from President Bush and President Roh following the meeting, and so you may find more specifics on the joint statement.
I refer you to that, and it will be coming out after the meetings.
Q But can you say one way or the other whether the U.S. is inclined to reduce its troops in South Korea in any way, or move them in any strategically significant fashion?
MR. FLEISCHER: I think the fair thing to do is let the meeting take place and then you'll be able to take a look at the joint statement and get answers to your questions.
Q Staying on this meeting tonight, will the President forcefully lobby or try to get South Korea to get more on board in terms of sanctions or taking other steps to pressure North Korea?
MR. FLEISCHER: Well, I think you should let the meeting take place.
And the President feels very strongly that for the good of peace on the Peninsula, it's important that North Korea not be allowed to continue its pursuit of nuclear weapons.
After all, they entered into agreement saying they would not pursue nuclear weapons, and they violated their agreement.
And the President wants to talk to President Roh about his approach to it, and that will be part of the topic tonight.
Q Well, in terms of -- we've discussed kind of bits and pieces of what they might discuss, topics they might discuss during these various meetings.
But looking at this meeting in a broader picture, what does the President hope to accomplish in this meeting?
MR. FLEISCHER: I think the President hopes to accomplish in the meeting the continued cooperation between the United States and South Korea on the nuclear issue that North Korea has presented, and continue to make progress on our economic relations.
Q But does he feel like he begin to establish a personal rapport here --
MR. FLEISCHER: Sure.
Sure.
Sure....
(T)he President looks forward to meeting for the first time in person with the new President of South Korea as part of solidifying and strengthening the United States's ties to South Korea.
South Korea is a partner of the United States, an ally in the region.
And South Korea faces threats from the North and we want to work together on how to deal with these threats....
Q On Korea, the South Korean President said yesterday that he did not have any rash expectations that the North Korean nuclear problem can be resolved right away.
Does President Bush share that feeling?
MR. FLEISCHER: Well, clearly, by the actions that North Korea has taken, no one can expect it to be resolved right away.
This is part of a diplomatic process, and diplomacy takes time.
That's why the President was heartened by China's involvement, and Japan's thoughts about this situation, and South Korea's thoughts.
This is the nature of diplomacy; it does take time.
May 13, 2003 Vice President Richard Cheney and Secretary of Defense Donald Rumsfeld Remarks at the Hudson Institute's Presentation of the James Doolittle Award
Q: I'm a German emergency doctor, Norbert Vollertsen, who lived in North Korea for one and a half year.
The people in North Korea are starving and dying.
They are suffering under a dictatorship maybe even worse than Iraq.
Is there any opportunity for the U.S. government to give assistance to those people?
Rumsfeld: The U.S. government has been giving assistance to those people.
And you're quite right: The circumstance of the people in North Korea is a tragedy.
The food is in short supply, the many people in North Korea have not received the kinds of nourishment that they need.
And indeed, the North Korean military, if I'm not mistaken, recently lowered the height at which they would accept people in the military, because so many individuals have not grown because of lack of food early in their period.
But the United States has been one of the large donors of food in North Korea.
I know that the People's Republic of China is giving something like a half a billion dollars a year to North Korea.
I know that hard currency goes from Japan into North Korea.
The problem isn't that they're not getting enough money from the outside world.
If you look at that peninsula, and you look at it at night from a satellite, the southern portion of the peninsula is just filled with lights and energy and activity, economic activity.
And from the Demilitarized Zone north, there's practically not a light to be seen at night; some in Pyongyang, but it's a black, bleak picture.
Why is that? They're roughly the same size.
The South has a GDP -- I'm going to guess -- is probably 25, 35 times what it is in the North.
Why? It's because of the system, it's because of the viciousness of that dictatorship.
And it is a heartbreaking thing to think of the circumstance of the people in that country, but the solution for it, it seems to me, is to recognize that market systems are the ones that are producing the most for their people, and dictatorships and despotism don't.
May 13, 2003 State Department Deputy Spokesman Philip T. Reeker Daily Press Briefing
QUESTION: ...
I have a question about Korea and North Korea.
As you know, South Korean President Roh Moo-hyun arrived in Washington this morning for a summit talking with President Bush tomorrow.
And to cope with the North Korean nuclear crisis, the United States, it seems to have two different approaches.
One is the apply military pressure and the other is diplomatic one.
Which is more effective measure at this particular moment?
MR. REEKER: I will let you do your own analysis or talk to the many talking heads around town.
What I would note, as you did, is that South Korean President Roh arrived in New York -- I think we discussed this yesterday -- for the start of a five-day visit.
He has come to Washington this morning.
Later in the week he will travel to San Francisco before returning on Friday.
Indeed, he will meet with the President tomorrow at the White House and he is meeting with several members of the Cabinet, including with the Deputy Secretary Mr. Armitage, in Secretary Powell's absence; also with congressional leadership.
The South Korean Embassy can give you more details of his schedule.
And, of course, accompanying him is the Foreign Minister, Foreign Minister Yun, and he is meeting with Deputy Secretary Armitage this afternoon at 4:30 here at the State Department.
They are going to discuss key issues of mutual interest, and, of course, that does include the nuclear issue with North Korea, as well as our very extensive bilateral and security issues and economic issues that we normally discuss.
QUESTION: Did reports that North Korea fired a laser at U.S. troops come up in the recent U.S. talks with North Korea and China?
MR. REEKER: I don't know.
QUESTION: Does the State Department have any confirmation on these reports?
MR. REEKER: I don't know.
Those would be military issues.
QUESTION: Yesterday, you were asked about the North Koreans -- reports that the North Koreans were pulling out or had declared null and void the '92 nonproliferation agreements.
MR. REEKER: We did, then, find the report that I think some of you were referencing, so we have seen this report from North Korea's official news agency, the KCNA.
As you are aware, the 1992 North-South Joint Declaration specifies in detail measures for denuclearization of the Korean Peninsula.
And what we have read in this report is a regrettable step, we believe, in the wrong direction.
It follows North Korea's violation of its other international nuclear obligations.
And again, I would just say that we urge North Korea, in keeping with the desire of its neighbors, of the international community as a whole, to verifiably and irreversibly terminate its nuclear weapons program.
This is clearly another attempt by North Koreans to pin responsibility for their own actions on others, and their efforts to deny responsibility for their actions and decisions are, frankly, convincing to no one.
May 12, 2003 State Department Deputy Spokesman Philip Reeker Daily Press Briefing
QUESTION: Do you have any reaction to North Korea's latest pronouncement in which it says it is -- I don't know if it says it nullified, or it just has been nullified, this agreement with South Korea from 1992, just as President Roh visits --
MR. REEKER: As you indicated just in your question, often these things are a little difficult in terms of complicated language and translation.
All I had seen was one wire service report reporting on a report from the North Korean official news agency, so I will have to look further into it and see if we have a more specific look at that and any sort of reaction we would have.
But I don't have anything further at this point....
QUESTION: Do you have anything on North Korean ship carrying around tons of drugs in nearby Australia?
MR. REEKER: -- the ship that was stopped by Australian, seized by Australian officials.
I don't really have anything particularly new on it.
That certainly is, you know, something that we will watch closely, in terms of evidence that we have seen, as part of our look at international drug trafficking, which, as you know, has a high priority on our global agenda.
It does fall into the category of the allegations that we have seen before, that either the North Koreans state or criminal North Korean drug traders are involved in drug trafficking with criminal elements in Japan and on Taiwan, who then sell drugs to final consumers.
A lot of that we have written about in our annual global narcotics report.
So I'd just refer you to that.
I don't think I have anything particularly new.
This was a very impressive seizure off Australia's coast, of a North Korean ship, the Pong Su, which was carrying heroin, and does provide new evidence of trafficking from North Korea and clearly suggests involvement of North Korean state entities in criminal activities.
So we will continue to work with others and follow them.
May 8, 2003 State Department Spokesman Richard Boucher Daily Press Briefing
QUESTION: ...We get a report from South Korea this morning about the satellite photograph, which is showing here smoking coming up from the Yongbyon reactor, you know, facility.
Could you say anything on that?
MR. BOUCHER: As you know, I won't be able to talk about any information that we may or may not have in specific terms.
I would say that, obviously, we followed developments in North Korea very closely with regards to the nuclear issue, and particularly with regard to the nuclear reprocessing.
As you know, the North Koreans have made troubling statements recently about reprocessing, both in public and in the discussions in Beijing, when they said they were reprocessing.
But we look at all the available information, not just the statements.
We are consulting with friends and allies, like South Korea and Japan.
And, as we have said before, the North Korean reprocessing of spent fuel to recover plutonium would be a matter of deep concern to the entire international community.
And they have heard that view from us.
They have heard it from many others as well.
QUESTION: There is a report in that regard that the U.S. has now concluded that they have reprocessed at least some of those fuel rods.
Can you confirm that?
MR. BOUCHER: No.
May 7, 2003 State Department Spokesman Richard Boucher Daily Press Briefing
QUESTION: On North Korea, do you have anything to say on North Korean reprocessing their spent fuel? There is report that they may have some movement in the past 48 hours.
MR. BOUCHER: I don't really have anything new to say.
We have made clear our view that reprocessing would be a serious matter, a matter of deep concern to the entire international community.
Not only the United States has made that clear, I think other countries have, as well.
Certainly, North Korea has been making troubling statements about reprocessing in recent weeks.
but I don't have any new information that I can share with you at this point.
QUESTION: Richard, do you have anything to say about the Post story this morning suggesting that the U.S. wants to go ahead with talks, but, at the same, time step up pressure on such issues as --
MR. BOUCHER: I think it's -- I'm not going to speculate at this point.
We are continuing to review the discussions that we had in Beijing and the actions and statements that North Korea has made and taken subsequent to those discussions.
So that -- those policy deliberations are ongoing in the administration.
We're analyzing this.
We're consulting within the administration.
We're consulting with other governments, friends and allies on the next steps.
And as you know, we have some high-level visits coming up from Japan and South Korea, and we look forward to those discussions, as well, in order to further these consultations.
So I think it's premature.
I won't speculate at this point where those things will come out.
The deliberations are continuing.
May 5, 2003 Secretary of State Colin L. Powell Remarks With NATO Secretary General Lord Robertson After Their Meeting
QUESTION: Mr. Secretary, there's a report this morning that the United States is prepared to acquiesce in North Korea's possession of reprocessing again and some spent nuclear fuel.
Do you have any comment on that?
SECRETARY POWELL: I saw a press report that said that.
We do not want to see North Korea have a nuclear capability.
We believe it is also the opinion of all of North Korea's neighbors.
North Korea entered into an agreement with South Korea in 1992 that they would not do that, an Agreed Framework agreement with us in 1994, and has made other commitments that they would not move in this direction.
But they have moved in this direction.
And we will continue to work with our friends in the region -- Japan, South Korea, China, Russia, Australia and others -- to have a solid front in making it clear to North Korea that it would be in their best interest to remove and eliminate all programs and facilities that they have that would lead to the development of nuclear weapons.
At the same time, it is up to the North Koreans to make an informed judgment as to what they wish to do, and we will work with our friends and allies to make sure that whatever they might already have or might develop in the future is not something that would be exported to the rest of the world.
It's a dangerous situation.
But this is the time for us to work with our friends and allies and try to impress upon North Korea that better opportunities await them, support awaits them from nations in the region, if they would simply begin acting in a more responsible way than they have in the past with respect to nuclear weapons programs, as well as proliferation activities and other activities of the regime such as the drug trafficking that they do, if you'll take note of the ship that the Australians stopped not too long ago.
These kinds of behavior will not help the people of North Korea come out of the serious economic difficulties that they find themselves in.
And so we'll continue to pursue the President's policy of diplomacy on a multilateral basis, working with our friends in the region, as well as with the United Nations.
May 5, 2003 White House Deputy Press Secretary Scott McClellan Press Gaggle with Scott McClellan Aboard Air Force One En Route Little Rock, Arkansas
Q Has the President tacitly conceded that North Korea is a nuclear power and it's not going to -- does he still want them to dismantle their nukes, or just not sell them?
MR. MCCLELLAN: I saw those reports, and I think that our position remains the same, that the United States, as well as the international community, is concerned about North Korea possessing nuclear weapons and potentially transferring nuclear materials to others.
We're continuing to consult with friends and allies, after our recent discussions with North Korea, about the next steps to take.
Remember that we are approaching this in a multilateral forum, and that the international community has made it clear to North Korea that its relations with the outside world hinge on its verifiable and irreversible elimination of its nuclear weapons program.
Q No change in policy?
MR. MCCLELLAN: -- North Korea will continue to isolate itself as long as it pursues a nuclear weapons program.
But we remain concerned about both the possession of and transfer of nuclear weapons, or nuclear weapons materials.
May 5, 2003 State Department Spokesman Richard Boucher Daily Press Briefing
QUESTION: On North Korea, we get a report this morning the administration is kind of shifting, changing their policy, emphasizing more locate of the weapons mass destruction.
Can you say anything on that?
MR. BOUCHER: Just to say that first of all, the Secretary addressed that, I think, to some extent, outside when he was there.
He said it's important to remove and eliminate North Korea's nuclear weapons program, that we have not implicitly or explicitly adopted a policy that accepts North Korea's pursuit and possessions of nuclear weapons.
Our goal remains the complete, verifiable and irreversible elimination of North Korea's nuclear weapons program.
Denuclearization of the peninsula is a goal that is widely shared by other members of the international community.
We all think that nuclear weapons on the peninsula are destabilizing, and frankly, are not in any way helpful to North Korea's planned future.
We are all making that point to them.
QUESTION: So there is no policy change, I mean, more emphasis on the forceful option rather than dialogue or diplomatic solution?
MR. BOUCHER: I would say that we haven't decided what to do in terms of next steps yet.
We're analyzing the talks that were held in Beijing, the multilateral discussions that were there.
We're consulting very closely with South Korea and Japan as we go forward, but no decision on what happens next.
May 4, 2003 Secretary Colin L. Powell Interview on NBC's Meet the Press With Tim Russert
"MR. RUSSERT: North Korea.
This is what the Patterns of Global Terrorism has to say about North Korea: " continued to sell ballistic missile technology to countries designated by the United States as state sponsors of terrorism, including Syria and Libya.
We now believe that North Korea has one or two nuclear bombs, could be producing five or six more by mid-summer.
Will we allow that?
SECRETARY POWELL: We, I think, have had some success in recent months in convincing all of North Korea's neighbors that the problem presented to the region and to the world by North Korea is not just a problem between North Korea and the United States, but with all of the nations in the region.
And as a result, we got China to take a more active role in sponsoring a multilateral meeting that included China, the United States and North Korea.
South Korea and Japan were not in the meeting, but their interests were certainly represented in that meeting by the United States.
And everybody has now made it clear to North Korea that they will not find any assistance coming to them from the region in terms of economic development, in terms of helping them with their serious economic problems and problems of poverty, unless they abandon their nuclear weapons programs.
They say they have a couple of nuclear weapons.
They've admitted that.
They are always ambiguous in their statements, masters of ambiguity.
They say they have completely reprocessed all of the cells that would the rods that would give rise to a sufficient amount of plutonium to develop five or six weapons.
We can't confirm that with our intelligence, but that's what they say.
And what they have gotten in response to these statements is nothing from us except condemnation.
All of their neighbors have now said to them this is not going to get you anywhere, we will not be blackmailed, we will not be intimidated; you do not want to go in this direction because all it will do is further isolate you.
And it takes time for the North Koreans to hear these kinds of messages.
They are masters of saying all we have to do is keep threatening people, hold our breath, throw tantrums, and they'll come our way.
Not going to happen this time.
We are not going to be frightened into doing something.
We're not going to be intimidated into doing something or blackmailed into doing something that we do not believe will solve this problem once and for all.
The Agreed Framework of 1994 dealt with one aspect of their nuclear weapons capability, but while it dealt with that, temporarily it left the capacity in place for that program to come back.
And at the same time we thought we had dealt with that, they started working on another program to develop nuclear weapons.
We're not going to fall for that game again.
MR. RUSSERT: If we wake up six, seven months from now and they have more nuclear weapons, then what happens?
SECRETARY POWELL: They have a bigger problem than they have now.
Their nuclear weapons are not going to purchase them any political standing that will cause us to be frightened or to think that somehow we now have to march to their tune, march to their drummer.
MR. RUSSERT: We would never let them sell or transfer those weapons.
SECRETARY POWELL: Absolutely not.
May 4, 2003 Secretary of Defense Donald H. Rumsfeld Secretary Rumsfeld Media Stakeout after CNN Late Edition
Q: I was hoping you could tell us a little bit about North Korea.
There have been reports that they have an arsenal of nuclear weapons that could hit American interest some say over 100.
Im wondering if a military strike on North Korea is going to end up being an option?
Rumsfeld: It is a dictatorship and a closed system, and therefore we have to face the reality that its hard to know whats actually going on in there, because theres so few people who move in and out freely and we dont have a free press there.
Theres not the opportunity to know with what ground truth is.
So all I can say is that the intelligence community of the world have tended to believe that North Korea may have a few, small number, single digit 1-2-3 nuclear weapons.
May have.
And that it they reprocess they could probably have 4, 5 or 6 more in a relatively short, nuclear material sufficient for 3, 4 additional weapons.
I have not seen the report that you are referring to, but if someone is saying that they have hundreds, I have never seen anything that would suggest that.
May 4, 2003 Secretary of Defense Donald H. Rumsfeld Secretary Rumsfeld Interview with Tony Snow, Fox News Sunday
HUME: What about North Korea?
RUMSFELD: We -- I don't know what will happen there.
The president obviously is on the track of -- and Secretary Powell, of moving it towards the United Nations.
China has been helpful recently.
We'll have to see what path they decide to take.
HUME: The conventional wisdom about North Korea is that there's really no good military option there, that the costs that North Korea could impose even in losing the war on South Korea are so high, so devastating particularly to Seoul, that it would be unacceptable and you could never go military.
Do you believe that?
RUMSFELD: I don't think it's helpful for me to say what I believe from a military standpoint on that subject.
HUME: Well then you're not -- you -- (inaudible) -- are not ruling that out, are you?
RUMSFELD: The United States government, in successive administrations of both political parties, over my adult lifetime, which is pretty long, has never tended -- never really leapt up and ruled things out.
It's not a helpful thing to do.
SNOW: It has been reported that Bill Clinton had a military option ready to go on North Korea in 1994.
RUMSFELD: It's true.
I was called in along with other former secretaries of defense and briefed by Secretary of Defense Bill Perry about the possibility that they might need to use military force.
SNOW: North Korea now is saying -- the latest bit of bluster of Pyongyang is that they've got a hundred nuclear weapons or a hundred weapons that are ready to strike American targets.
Now, one presumes that if they are making threats, whether they're credible or not --
RUMSFELD: (Inaudible) -- report said they have a hundred nuclear weapons.
They certainly have lots of weapons that could strike U.S. forces near the demilitarized zone, but they most certainly do not have hundreds of nuclear weapons.
SNOW: Nevertheless, if they are making threats of that sort, one would presume that there at least is on the shelf some sort of military response should they act first.
RUMSFELD: On the shelf of the United States?
SNOW: Yes.
RUMSFELD: Oh, that's the business of the Pentagon.
We make plans.
We prepare ourselves.
That's why -- that's what the Constitution charges the president -- to provide for the national defense, and that's been true for decades.
SNOW: So, of course, there is at least some contingency plan with regard to North Korea?
RUMSFELD: I'm not going to get into what our contingency plans are, but certainly the responsibility of the president, and certainly the secretary of defense and the department, is to see that we are prepared to best serve the American people.
__________________________________________________________________
*Back to the current month for What U.S. Administration Officials Are Saying __________________________________________________________________ __________________________________________________________________
This site is produced and maintained by the U.S. Department of State's Bureau of International Information Programs (usinfo.state.gov).
Links to other Internet sites should not be construed as an endorsement of the views contained therein.
Back To Top blue rule IIP Home | Index to This Site | Webmaster | Search This Site | Archives | U.S. Department of State
Sorry, you need a JavaScript capable browser to get the best from this page
