National Park Service Johnstown Flood National Memorial This historic photo shows the row of large, two-story houses lining the lake shore before the flood.
SPECIAL EVENTS Am I Not a Sister? Date 02/10/2003 Contact Terry Roth , 814-886-6156 To honor the contributions of African-Americans and women to our nation's history, the National Park Service invites the public to attend a program that highlights the heroic work of black women during a tumultuous time in our nation's history.
Commonwealth Speaker John Burt, Esq. will present "Am I not a Sister? The Women of the Anti-Slavery Movement".
In this illustrated talk, he tells the stories of some of the most important pre-Civil War Pennsylvania abolitionists.
African American women such as Mary Myers, Henrietta Duterte, and Susan Vashon, and white women such as Lucretia Mott, Jane Swisshelm, and Madeline LeMoyne campaigned against slavery by agitating others in the media, in churches, and in politics.
They also helped fugitive slaves as they escaped from the South.
John Burt is an attorney and Adjunct Professor of Sociology at Carlow College in Pittsburgh.
He served as both a consultant and a featured speaker in "Pennsylvania's Pathways to Freedom," a television documentary on the Underground Railroad in Pennsylvania.
He has given guided tours on the subject for ten years, and lectures extensively on the history of American reform movements like the abolitionist movement.
Mr. Burt has been a popular member of the Pennsylvania Humanities Council's Commonwealth Speakers program since 1998.
This presentation is part of the celebration of Black History Month in February and Women's History Month in March.
It is a program of the Pennsylvania Humanities Council, supported in part by a grant from the Pennsylvania Historical and Museum Commission.
The program begins at 2:00 on Saturday February 22, 2003 at the Johnstown Flood National Memorial visitors center.
This presentation is free-of-charge and open to the public.
The National Park Serve cares for special places set aside by the American people so that all may experience our heritage.
Johnstown Flood National Memorial commemorates the Johnstown Flood of May 31, 1889.
The park contains nearly 165 acres and preserves the remains of the South Fork Dam and portions of the former Lake Conemaugh lakebed.
The Visitor Center is located at 733 Lake Road, in St. Michael, Pennsylvania.
Visit www.nps.gov/jofl for more information on the park.
Return to list » Home Accessibility Activities Contact Us [pp_nav_spacer.gif] Educational Programs Facts History 
ParkNet U.S. Department of the Interior FOIA Privacy Disclaimer FirstGov
