International Information Programs East Asia-Pacific Security Issues U.S. Policy Toward North Korea
What U.S. Administration Officials Are Saying* September 2003 Excerpts from statements made by U.S. Administration officials about North Korea
September 29, 2003 State Department Spokesman Richard Boucher Daily Press Briefing
QUESTION: There's a report regarding the new bill is being discussed on the Capitol, U.S. Capitol, regarding the -- to provide $200 million to support of the refugees, North Korea refugees, and to promote democracy in North Korea.
And do you have any, like, comments on --
MR. BOUCHER: I don't know if we've taken a position on that legislation yet.
I'll try to check....
QUESTION: I just want follow up on this issue on the -- this weekend Korean Foreign Minister Yoon and also Russian President Putin, they emphasize the necessity of more details on the security assurance.
Can I interest your position right now?
MR. BOUCHER: I don't think I have any more details for you at this point on what we might be prepared to do as regards to any concerns North Korea could have about security.
We've addressed that in public.
The President has addressed that in public in the past.
Nothing new at this moment.
September 26, 2003 Secretary of State Colin L. Powell Interview on "The Late Show With David Letterman" Ed Sullivan Theatre New York City
MR. LETTERMAN: What about...people running governments who we know have weapons of mass destruction? North Korea, for example.
What do we there? Why is that circumstance a bit different? Is it because we don't have evidence of mass murder there?
SECRETARY POWELL: Well, that's one reason.
Another reason is that we believe there are still diplomatic ways to resolve the problem in North Korea, and the problem in Iran.
In the case of Saddam Hussein, we tried a diplomatic approach for twelve years; it didn't work.
In the case of North Korea, we've got them in negotiations with us and four other nations, their neighbors, to try to find a peaceful way forward.
And in Iran, we have got the international community involved, the International Atomic Energy Agency, the UN.
People often accuse us of being unilateral.
Why doesn't the United States just go out and do whatever it wants to? But in the case of North Korea and in the case of Iran, we are working with the international community, but the President never gives up any of the options he has to protect the American people in any way that may be appropriate.
But we prefer to work to the international community.
That's why the President came here last year and challenged the UN to do something about Saddam Hussein violating the instructions of the UN.
And when the UN saw fit not to, the President, with a coalition of other nations joining in, he enforced the UN demands.
September 23, 2003 Secretary of Defense Donald H. Rumsfeld Remarks at the U.S.-Korean Business Council Luncheon Washington, D.C.
See full transcript.
September 22, 2003 Secretary of State Colin L. Powell Interview on The Charlie Rose Show New York City
MR.
ROSE: The IAEA (International Atomic Energy Agency).
SECRETARY POWELL: The IAEA, and through the IAEA, through the Security Council.
Just as, in a multilateral way, we are dealing with the problem of North Korea, nuclear weapons in North Korea.
MR.
ROSE: Where does that stand?
SECRETARY POWELL: It stands that we had a very useful six-party meeting.
We insisted that this should not be a problem just between North Korea and the United States.
That's what the North Koreans wanted.
"Okay, gee, you caught us again, what will you give us this time if we behave?" Wrong.
This is a problem between you and us and you and your neighbors.
And so it took us six months with everybody criticizing and all sorts of great advice coming in, but we succeeded in getting China, Japan, Russia, South Korea to join with us, and then with North Korea in a six-party meeting in Beijing last month.
I expect there will be more meetings.
MR.
ROSE: But it didn't end well, did it?
SECRETARY POWELL: It ended with an agreement, one, all parties agree, including the North Koreans, that we want a denuclearized Korean Peninsula.
Parties agreed that there will be an opportunity for future discussions.
And I expect there will be future discussions.
The North Koreans have said that, well, we're going to go off and demonstrate that we have a nuclear weapon, and we're going to demonstrate and show you we have the means to deliver it.
Well, you know, they say many things, and sometimes we have to take what they say seriously, because they will actually demonstrate something, and other times it's a little bit of rhetoric, a little bit of blustering.
We take it seriously.
They say they have nuclear weapons, they say they've reprocessed all 8,000 of those rods -- I can't establish that they have done so -- but they say they have.
And what they have done is raise the level of concern, not just with the United States, but, guess what, with their immediate neighbors, their immediate neighbors who have a lot to offer North Korea.
And one particular immediate neighbor, China, who now is playing a very important and direct role in convening these six-party meetings, and is a principal provider of assistance to North Korea.
MR.
ROSE: But it's an interesting situation.
Not only do they have the closest relationship with all of those other nations, with North Korea, but they also have, I understand, moved some troops up on the border, to send -- you didn't make much of this.
SECRETARY POWELL: No, it's -- it seems to be merely a --
MR.
ROSE: -- a training --
SECRETARY POWELL: No, no.
They've been reviewing the kinds of --
MR.
ROSE: It wasn't to send a message?
SECRETARY POWELL: No.
First of all, there are not 150,000 Chinese troops that have moved to the border.
I have no information to support that.
But it's clear they were doing some activity at the border to strength their border controls.
But it was not some huge movement of troops as first reported in the press.
September 17, 2003 White House Spokesman Scott McClellan The James S. Brady Briefing Room
Q Thank you.
I didn't get to ask all my questions yesterday on the Korean energy situation.
When will the KEDO executive board convene? You say it will convene soon.
And where will it convene?
MR. McCLELLAN: You could direct those questions to KEDO.
But as I said, that money was provided for the administration of KEDO.
That's where that money is going.
What we -- in terms of North Korea, where we need to keep our focus is on the multilateral approach that is making some progress to get North Korea to end, irreversibly and verifiably, its pursuit -- or its nuclear weapons program.
We are making some important progress through the multilateral approach.
We are continuing to pursue that.
And at this point, that funding was strictly provided to support the administration of KEDO.
September 16, 2003 State Department Deputy Spokesman Adam Ereli Daily Press Briefing
QUESTION: Any update on the trilateral talks, the TCOG, informal TCOG, whatever?
MR. ERELI: I do have an update for you on that.
We expect that informal trilateral consultations with Japan and the Republic of Korea regarding North Korea will take place September 29 and 30 in Tokyo.
Assistant Secretary for East Asian and Pacific Affairs James Kelly will meet with his Japanese and South Korean counterparts, Director-General Mitoji Yabunaka and Deputy Foreign Minister Lee Soo-Hyuck.
September 16, 2003 White House Spokesman Scott McClellan Press Briefing The James S. Brady Briefing Room
Q Scott, on North Korea, can you explain the statement your office released last night about giving U.S. aid for energy? Will some of the U.S. money go to the North Korea? And are there secret negotiations --
MR. McCLELLAN: No, no, no, that's not money for energy.
That's money for the administration of KEDO.
So that's what that is.
Q But none of it goes to North Korea then?
MR. McCLELLAN: No, it's for the administration of KEDO.
We made that clear in the statement.
Q KEDO is just South Korea?
MR. McCLELLAN: I'm sorry?
Q KEDO is just South Korea negotiations?
MR. McCLELLAN: No, no, no.
It was set up when the agreed framework was reached.
And we continue to believe it's important to provide the administrative funding for it.
But no money is going to North Korea for any nuclear activities.
September 15, 2003 State Department Deputy Spokesman Adam Ereli Daily Press Briefing
QUESTION: There is a KCNA report accusing the United States and Japan of holding up food aid to North Korea.
Is there any truth to that? Is the United States doing anything to prevent others from giving humanitarian food aid to North Korea?
MR. ERELI: On the issue of food aid to North Korea, we provide -- the United States provides food aid on an entirely humanitarian basis.
It is not linked to political issues.
This year, we are providing 40,000 metric tons of food -- food aid to the North Korean people through the World Food Program.
Most of this aid has already been delivered.
The United States is considering whether to provide an additional 60,000 metric tons of food aid.
And in making this decision, we are considering three factors: Demonstrated need in North Korea; competing needs elsewhere; and the extent to which we can assure that food aid reaches those for whom it is intended.
On that last point, we remain concerned that North Korea has not allowed the World Food Program access to all vulnerable North Koreans, and that it has restricted the World Food Program's ability to monitor the distribution of food aid, and these are serious issues.
We have discussed these concerns directly with the North Koreans, as well as with the World Food Program and other donors; unfortunately, North Korea continues to restrict access and monitoring.
QUESTION: On your first two criterion, I'm a little puzzled by number one.
Are you suggesting that there is a question that North Korea might not need food assistance? I mean, I thought it was pretty well understood by everyone that there was a severe shortage.
MR. ERELI: Yeah, without -- I don't want to link -- these criteria are long established.
QUESTION: Yeah, but it seemed to me that number one has already been established.
MR. ERELI: Yeah, it's still a criteria.
It's a well established criteria, but it's still a criteria.
When you are considering whether to provide aid, one criteria is the need for that aid.
We are not debating the need for the aid....
What we're debating is, or what we're having issue with is --
QUESTION: Three.
MR. ERELI: Yeah, exactly.
QUESTION: Okay.
So number two really -- number two also, you are not suggesting that there is another country with greater needs, where this additional $60 million might go?
MR. ERELI: I put it this way.
Having assessed the situation, we believe it is appropriate that -- or -- that we believe that 60,000 is an appropriate amount of aid given -- 60,000 metric tons is an appropriate amount of aid considering the need and -- both in North Korea as well as competing needs elsewhere.
QUESTION: Okay.
So it's really just number three, then?
QUESTION: And to go to number three, when you announced the 40,000 back in February, you said -- you had said the first two, and then you said, "donors ability to access all vulnerable groups and monitor distribution."
Monitoring is still a major concern for you?
MR. ERELI: Yes....
QUESTION: Is there any progress towards a new round or even a TCOG or "non-TCOG-TCOG" meeting that you guys have frequently --
MR. ERELI: TCOG-non-TCOG (laughter) COG-T?
QUESTION: Yeah.
MR. ERELI: No, I don't have anything for you on it.
QUESTION: Same subject.
Also on the problems with North Korea, the Red Chinese have placed 150,000 troops on the northern Korean border.
Has that been worked out at the meetings recently in Beijing or is this just on their initiative?
MR. ERELI: We are aware of reports that China has shifted responsibility for border protection along its borders with North Korea and Burma to the People's Liberation Army.
This shift is -- would be consistent with China's practices elsewhere along its borders.
So that explains the shift.
September 11, 2003 State Department Spokesman Richard Boucher Daily Press Briefing
QUESTION: ... on North Korea.
There are reports that the Administration was, perhaps, seeking a freeze on the North's nuclear programs, as sort of a first step toward eventual complete dismantling of their programs.
Do you have anything on that?
MR. BOUCHER: I think I'd just have to refer you for what we have said I think fairly frequently; and that is, that as we engage in this attempt on our side to find a peaceful and diplomatic solution to the problems created by North Korea's nuclear programs, it's important for North Korea to bear in mind vis-�-vis us, but vis-�-vis all the others who are participating and concerned about this situation, that there not be any further provocative steps or difficulties.
It's important for North Korea to think about moving in the right direction and not take steps in the wrong direction.
And I think we have made that repeatedly clear here, and that's our view, and that's, I think, the view of many others as well....
QUESTION: What about these reports that there is a new ICBM that North Korea's got that can reach targets even further than you thought they could before?
MR. BOUCHER: We have made clear, and I think I talked about it the other day, that North Korea has been working on its missile programs.
This has been a concern of ours.
It's been a very strong concern of people who live in the neighborhood, such as the Japanese and the South Koreans.
And, as we have said before, we watch this very closely, but I wouldn't be able to share with you whatever information we might have.
QUESTION: Why not?
MR. BOUCHER: Because whatever intelligence information we have, we want to keep acquiring, so we know what's going on.
QUESTION: The reports in Beijing have been on the nuclear programs, and not much has been said about the missile programs.
Are the missile programs a part of the Beijing discussion?
MR. BOUCHER: As you know, in the President's announcements in the early part of the Administration, there were a number of areas in North Korean policy that were significant concerns for us and continue to be.
North Korea's missile developments and exports have been longstanding concerns that we have, I think, addressed again and again.
The immediate problems created by North Korea's nuclear weapons programs and their violation of all their previous commitments are the ones that are most up front and need to be dealt with in Beijing first.
And the Secretary and President and others have made clear that, first, North Korea needs to completely, verifiably and irreversibly dismantle its nuclear weapons programs.
But we have also said that the other issues need to be dealt with and we are prepared to deal with them through the kind of approach we were willing to take, the bold approach.
And we would have addressed those other issues through that approach if North Korea had not started violating its nuclear commitments some years ago.
QUESTION: Well, these other issues include missiles, right?
MR. BOUCHER: Other issues include missiles.
They're still there, and they still need to be dealt with.
But we've made clear, first, we need to deal with nuclear weapons programs.
September 10, 2003 Secretary of State Colin Powell Remarks with Canadian Foreign Minister Bill Graham After Meeting Washington, DC
QUESTION: Do you know whether the North Koreans have stopped reprocessing at Yongbyon? There's a report that they have stopped now.
SECRETARY POWELL: I've seen a variety of reports with respect to what's going on at Yongbyon.
But a lot of material that I have is classified, so I'd rather not comment on it.
The North Koreans have claimed they reprocessed all.
We have never been able to establish that as a fact, and I'll just leave it, leave it there.
September 10, 2003 White House Spokesman Scott McClellan The James S. Brady Briefing Room
Q Scott, a few on Korea, please.
How dangerous is the North Korean situation now? They keep ratcheting up their threats and their rhetoric.
And is the U.S. concerned about anti-American attitudes in South Korea? Would the President consider reducing American forces in South Korea?
MR. McCLELLAN: Well, on North Korea, I think we've made some significant progress in terms of the multilateral approach.
Now we have five nations that are united in saying to the North Koreans, we don't want a nuclearized peninsula, you need to end in an irreversible and verifiable way your nuclear weapons program.
So that's some important progress.
And we had some discussions, and we're making progress on that front.
What was the second part of your question?
Q On anti-American attitudes in South Korea and possibly reducing U.S. troops in South Korea.
MR. McCLELLAN: And we have good relations with South Korea, in terms of the troops.
Those are issues that you need to address to the Pentagon.
They're the ones who make -- the Pentagon are the ones that make the decisions in terms of our troops.
September 10, 2003 State Department Spokesman Richard Boucher Daily Press Briefing
MR. BOUCHER: I'm happy to see you all here, and I have one thing that I do want to talk about, and that's trafficking in persons.
The White House has put out a short statement to indicate the President has notified Congress that 10 countries that were on the tier three, the Trafficking in Persons list from earlier this year, have made significant progress and therefore are being moved up to tier two, and thereby have avoided possible sanctions under the Trafficking Victims Protection Act....
The 10 countries are: Belize, Bosnia-Herzegovina, Dominican Republic, Georgia, Greece, Haiti, Kazakhstan, Suriname, Turkey and Uzbekistan.
All these countries have made important progress.
Some have passed legislation.
Victims' support programs have been started.
They've arrested and prosecuting traffickers.
There have been public service announcements and awareness campaigns.
In every one of these countries, public officials spoke out on this important human rights issue.
This is the first year that the President was required by the Trafficking Victims Protection Act to make determinations regarding countries placed on tier three in the report, and sanctions were required.
Unfortunately, there are still five countries that did not make improvements and are still in the tier three, under the tier three standard.
Those countries are Burma, Cuba, Liberia, North Korea and Sudan.
The President, acting on the recommendations of the Secretary, determined that sanctions will be imposed on Burma, Cuba and North Korea.
While Liberia and Sudan are also subject to sanctions, the President determined that certain multilateral assistance for these two countries would promote the purposes of the act or is otherwise in our national interest, and so he has made the appropriate determinations that some certain bilateral -- multilateral assistance can continue.
In the case of Sudan, that's assistance -- excuse me.
In the case of Sudan, this means assistance that would support a peace accord.
In both cases, I would point out that humanitarian assistance is not affected....
QUESTION: Richard, does the U.S. Government have an assessment of whether the North Korean nuclear facilities at Yongbyon are still active?
MR. BOUCHER: No, I don't have one that I can share with you.
September 9, 2003 State Department Spokesman Richard Boucher Daily Press Briefing
QUESTION: (Inaudible) very, very modest, you know, peaceful demonstration by North Korea yesterday on the 55th year anniversary of the founding country (inaudible).
It is a good thing for North Korea?
MR. BOUCHER: I'm not going to try and interpret North Korean behavior.
We saw the same parade you did.
QUESTION: Can you comment, if not on behavior then on their statements that Army Chief of Staff -- I don't know his exact title -- said that the DPRK will continue to increase its nuclear deterrent force as a means for just self-defense in order to defend the sovereignty of the country as the United States has not yet shown its will to drop its hostile policy.
Any comment on that?
MR. BOUCHER: No, I have tried to refrain from commenting on every statement made by North Korea, as we're trying to interpret them every day.
As we know, it's contradictory sometimes with other things that they've said recently.
I think the key element in there is whether or not they're going to sit down and solve this diplomatically and peacefully as we believe can be done through the talks that the Chinese have helped organize.
And in so doing, will they verifiably and irreversibly end these nuclear programs that have caused so much turmoil in the region, and that have disrupted so much North Korea's effort to become part of the international community.
September 8, 2003 State Department Spokesman Richard Boucher Daily Press Briefing
QUESTION: Jack Pritchard, the former State Department official, spoke this morning and he said the six-nation process that began can only carry the situation so far, and he says what is required is a sustained commitment by the United States to deal with North Korea; we have got to have a full-time negotiator who can do coordination with North Korea; and that it must keep the other four members of the six-nation process informed.
What I just read you is, more or less, direct quotes.
Do you have any thoughts on his proposal?
MR. BOUCHER: I think if you look at the way that we've structured these discussions, we've made available opportunities for whatever configuration of discussions might be helpful.
But we've also -- and Jack Pritchard had a lot to do with this, this process of keeping the others informed who are interested in this.
So we've been able to organize a forum in which the community of most interested parties -- geographically, at least -- were able to deal with this in one forum.
We've always kept the others completely and fully informed of whatever is said in direct meetings or direct discussions, and so we think that this forum maximizes the communication but also maximizes any opportunities, should that be appropriate, for meetings of two parties, three parties, four parties, or whatever.
QUESTION: Just to follow on that, Ambassador Pritchard essentially called for sustained, serious, direct bilateral talks outside the six-party mechanism, and he suggested that the six-party mechanism, if it met only every couple of months, was sort of like a drive-by, where you roll the window down and stick your head out and talk to the North Koreans, you roll it back up.
MR. BOUCHER: I'd hate to think of six cars driving by and rolling windows down at the same time, but --
QUESTION: This was basically his point, that it's going to be very hard to get this done "a six," as it were.
MR. BOUCHER: Well, I think we have always felt that the important thing is that this is matter for any number of nations.
The affront of North Korea has been an affront to the international community, including the neighbors they had agreements with.
But also, the potential solutions, the potential benefits down the road to North Korea, potential relationships, are also centered on these nations, and that's why we need to deal with it in this kind of forum.
As I said, it provides ample opportunity for other kinds of discussions.
Even sustained discussions in this forum, we believe are possible.
But having just had the first set of discussions in this forum, I think we would say it's not time to junk it and try something else.
We've achieved some success in moving the ball forward, at least to another round of discussions, to an understanding that we need a nuclear-free peninsula.
QUESTION: So you have no interest for now, then, in bilateral talks outside the context of the six-party --
MR. BOUCHER: I would say we've just gotten started with this forum and it's time to pursue it because we do think it has, at least, showed a bit of promise in terms of what it might produce.
QUESTION: Richard, do you want to say anything now, since the topic is raised, about a former negotiator of North Korea, at a moment in very -- a sensitive moment in the negotiations openly criticizing policy that he, two weeks ago, was part of? Does that in some way weaken, you know -- I mean, why -- the North Koreans could jump on this and demand two-party or say, "Hey, Pritchard just said that."
MR. BOUCHER: There are plenty of people expressing their opinion every day.
QUESTION: Right, but they hadn't just --
MR. BOUCHER: And now he has become just one of them.
QUESTION: Right.
MR. BOUCHER: What can I say? It's a free country.
QUESTION: Richard, on this.
Do you have any reaction to the latest bombast of the North Koreans ahead of their National Day party? What I'm referring to specifically is this, these statements that they don't see the need, again -- again, conflicting statements that they don't see the need for any more talks.
MR. BOUCHER: This -- not the one before where they said they didn't see the need for talks --
QUESTION: This one, today.
MR. BOUCHER: This one, today.
And between the last one and this one, we've had a statement that they intended to go back to further discussions in the six-party forum.
Right?
QUESTION: Yeah.
MR. BOUCHER: So, well --
QUESTION: You can just say no if you want.
MR. BOUCHER: No.
QUESTION: You insulted them enough there.
MR. BOUCHER: No.
We think, you know, we have taken this process seriously.
We, the Chinese, and others have said that there was a consensus that these talks could be useful and that parties intended to continue them.
We would expect North Korea to stick to that.
QUESTION: Well, in that vein, then, a senior Russian official has just arrived in Pyongyang, and I'm wondering if you have used this person or anyone else in the time between the talks in Beijing and tomorrow's celebrations to suggest to the North Koreans that, you know, provocative moves are not going to be helpful on the occasion of their National Day.
MR. BOUCHER: We have certainly made it clear in our discussions in Beijing and our public statements that North Korea should avoid any provocative or escalatory actions that would increase tension in Northeast Asia and would also increase North Korea's isolation.
We believe all our partners in the international community, including the other participants in the six-party talks, are making the same point, as well.
QUESTION: Do you have any reaction to reports out of North Korea that they now are threatening a missile that can reach further distances than ever before, including all of South Korea?
MR. BOUCHER: Well, we've seen them developing long-range missiles for many years.
We've always made clear our concern about such missiles.
We've made clear that such developments don't enhance the security of North Korea, but, in fact, only add to North Korea's estrangement from the international community, particularly its immediate neighbors.
QUESTION: There's no independent confirmation from the U.S. on what they believe is --
MR. BOUCHER: I wouldn't be able to get into details on what we know, because that comes from our intelligence....
QUESTION: Yes, still North Korea.
Yesterday, the Secretary said on the TV ABC interview, and he said, "Two weeks, we going to make a judgment."
Can you say anything on that? Can you elaborate what he meant? He said, "We will have to make a judgment with our allies over the next two weeks."
That means you're going to have a kind of a TCOG meeting in two weeks for major decision or future, you know, dialogue process?
MR. BOUCHER: ...
I didn't remember him saying that so I didn't have the chance to check up and see.
Let me see if there's some particular event planned in the next few weeks that -- where we would be making decisions with our allies about how to proceed or how to approach the next round.
September 8, 2003 Office of the Spokesman Question Taken at Daily Briefing of Sept. 8, 2003 Korea Secretary's Remarks
Question: What did the Secretary mean when he said that we will have to make a judgement with our allies over the next 2 weeks as to what kind of security assurance would be satisfactory for all of us to provide to the North Koreans? Is there a particular meeting that is going to occur in the next 2 weeks?
Answer: As the Secretary indicated, we will be consulting with South Korea and Japan on North Korea policy, including coordination for the next round of Six Party Talks and how to deal with North Korea's stated security concerns in that context.
As part of those consultations, we hope to meet trilaterally in the new few weeks, but there is no date to announce for such a meeting at this point.
September 7, 2003 Secretary of State Colin L. Powell Interview on NBC's Meet the Press with Tim Russert
MR. RUSSERT: Let me turn to North Korea.
One of your staff members, an Under Secretary of State, John Bolton, gave a speech, and this is how it was reported, that Kim Jong-il and his grip on the nation, the speech entitled, "Dictatorship at the Crossroads," described life in North Korea as a "hellish nightmare" and called Kim a "tyrannical rogue."
Is that helpful?
SECRETARY POWELL: It's accurate.
And John's speech was cleared within the Department, so there was nothing that was inconsistent with policy.
John happened to give it in Seoul at a time when were undergoing some delicate discussions with our friends and it got a great deal of attention, and it got a great deal of attention especially from the North Koreans.
But notwithstanding all of the attention it got, the North Koreans and all of our other neighbors in that part of the world came together in Beijing a few days after the speech to begin a six-party discussion about this problem
MR. RUSSERT: Also this from The New York Times, however.
In an interview last year with The New York Times, John Bolton was asked about conflicting signals from the administration on North Korea.
He strode over to a bookshelf, pulled off a volume and slapped it on the table.
It was called The End of North Korea by an American Enterprise Institute colleague.
"That," he said, "is our policy."
Is that our policy?
SECRETARY POWELL: Our policy is the denuclearization of the Korean Peninsula.
It's also the policy of all of those participating in the six-party talks.
But if you think that I am any more of a fan of the North Korean regime than John Bolton is, that's wrong.
We know this regime.
We know the kind of regime it is.
We know about the prison camps that it keeps.
We know about its trafficking in drugs, its trafficking in counterfeit currency.
This is not a regime to be admired in any way
.
But our policy right now is not to invade it or to overthrow it, but right now our policy is the denuclearization of the peninsula.
And then there are many other issues we have that we want to engage our friends on with respect to North Korea: these criminal activities that it participates in, as well as a large army it maintains at the expense of taking care of its people, and its proliferation of missiles and other technologies that could be used to develop weapons of mass destruction.
So there's quite an agenda we have with the North Korean regime, and I think the success that we have had in recent months is making it not just an agenda between us and the North Koreans, but between us, the Russians, the Chinese, the South Koreans, the Japanese and the North Koreans.
Six parties, not just two.
September 7, 2003 Secretary of State Colin L. Powell Interview on ABC's This Week with George Stephanopoulos
MR. STEPHANOPOULOS: Let me now turn to the North Korea.
Former President Jimmy Carter two days ago called the standoff on the Korean Peninsula "the greatest threat to global peace".
Do you agree with that?
SECRETARY POWELL: No, I don't think it's the greatest threat to global peace.
I think it is a -- I think terrorism is the greatest threat to global peace.
North Korea is a particular problem.
And we're hard at work on that problem.
When we first discovered the problem last fall, and the problem in a nutshell was that North Korea, having been capped with one of its nuclear weapons programs -- everybody said that's terrific, the Agreed Framework stopped that North Korean nuclear program -- they were working on another one.
We found it and called them to it, called attention to it, and said what about this?
They said we're doing it, we're a nuclear weapon-holding country, we told previous administrations ten years ago, they didn't believe us, we're telling you now.
Well, we have to accept them at their word.
What we did, rather than just running into a negotiation, and once again, having them try to get something out of us for promises that weren't kept last time to be repeated now, we said this is a problem for the international community, and especially for North Korea's neighbors.
Everybody said it will never work, they will never come into a meeting with anyone except the United States.
Well, we have succeeded in bringing all of the neighbors to the table: China, Japan, South Korea, Russia, North Korea, and the United States.
And we had, I think, a very good meeting a week and a half ago with all of these six parties, with all six parties saying "We want to see a denuclearized Korean Peninsula", to include the North Koreans saying that.
Now what we have to do is to find a way forward, in order to make sure that this time, if the North Korea's are serious, and what they are asking for are security assurances.
The President has said repeatedly, "We're not going to invade you, there's no hostile intent, we retain all of our options, but we can find a peaceful solution to this problem".
MR. STEPHANOPOULOS: As part of that way forward, are you prepared to provide aid and other incentives in a step-by-step process in return for a step-by-step builddown of the Korean nuclear program?
SECRETARY POWELL: We haven't gotten that far.
Right now, the first challenge before us is to get North Korea to say clearly that they are prepared to give up entirely their nuclear weapons program in a verifiable manner.
And we know that they want from us, the only thing they've asked for from us, the United States, is a -- some sort of security assurance.
That's the first step.
Other items with respect to economic assistance, which they've asked other countries for, or other things that might be done as we move down this road, that's not on the table right now.
Step one is an end to their program in a verifiable way, their commitment to an end in that program.
It won't be ended in one meeting or with one statement.
It's going to take time.
And we will have to make a judgment with our allies over the next two weeks, before the next meeting, as to what kind of security assurance would be satisfactory for all of us to provide to the North Koreans so that they would feel comfortable in taking this step.
September 5, 2003 Secretary of State Colin L. Powell Remarks at The Elliott School of International Affairs George Washington University Washington, DC
American and Chinese interests in Korea may not overlap completely, but they do so considerably.
Neither side wishes to see nuclear weapons developed and deployed by the North Koreans on the Peninsula.
Neither side enjoys the specter of the chronicled debacle that is the North Korean economy.
Neither side has any interest in a worsening refugee crisis on China's border.
Neither side relishes a North Korean regime that runs drugs and weapons, and that counterfeits currencies, or that engages in the periodic extortion of its neighbors though brinksmanship military conduct.
Neither side, to be sure, has any interest in another Korean war.
We have worked to transform our common interests with China into solid and productive cooperation over the challenges posed by North Korea.
We are doing so, as well, in conjunction with Japan, Russia, and South Korea.
Our agenda is ambitious, but it is succeeding.
The fact that we now have a six-party framework for talks over North Korea's nuclear program stands as testimony.
Once again, we worked with partners.
We found nations with like interests to ours with respect to Korea to come together and form this six-party grouping with includes the North Koreans.
A very multilateral approach to diplomacy.
And we very much appreciate the leadership role that the Chinese have played in trying to find a solution to this problem.
We still have a long way to go before we achieve success in dealing with North Korea's dangerous nuclear weapons program.
We have no intention of invading or attacking North Korea, and we have told our partners and the North Koreans that.
We have stated our intentions, openly and honestly: we want peace, not war; we want security, not fear, to envelop Korea and its neighbors.
But we will not yield to threats and blackmail.
We will not take any options off the table.
Now is the time for North Korea to alter its behavior, to end its nuclear program in a verifiable manner.
I believe strongly that a diplomatic solution can be achieved, and when it has been achieved, we will have demonstrated that American diplomacy is designed to satisfy not only American national interests, but the interests of international security as well.
We will show that the equities of other powers can be best advanced along with American ones, not in opposition to them.
September 5, 2003 Secretary of State Colin L. Powell Remarks with Mexican Foreign Minister Luis Ernesto Derbez After Their Meeting Washington, DC
QUESTION: Secretary, on North Korea, it is now being suggested that North Korea would not have to completely dismantle its program before it saw what the U.S. is willing to come back with to offer them in closer cooperation.
Could you name some of those things that the U.S. would initially be willing to talk about to reconsider if North Korea verifiably begins to dismantle its program?
SECRETARY POWELL: Well, I would be pleased if North Korea would say that to begin with, that they are prepared to undertake a process to verifiably dismantle their nuclear weapons program.
The only thing that North Korea has said to us that they would like to see from the United States is a security assurance that we are not planning to attack them, or invade them.
We have said that.
And they wish to see this assurance provided in some form that they would have confidence in.
And that's the stage of discussion and negotiation we are at now.
And that's what we're going to be pursuing in the weeks ahead as we get ready for the next meeting.
With respect to other things that might flow from that, and how one goes about verifying the destruction of their nuclear weapons capability, all these issues are for discussion in the future.
The only thing that the North Koreans have said to us that they wish from us at the moment is some assurance that we have no plans to attack them or invade them or have hostile intent toward them.
And so that's what we're focusing on: them making it clear to the world that they not only say they do not wish to see nuclear weapons on the peninsula, but they're actually prepared to act on that by removing their capability.
And we are looking at ways in which we can give them the kind of assurance that they say they need.
And we will continue to consult very closely with our four partners in this.
I think the six-party meeting that was held week before last was a very, very important one.
All of North Korea's neighbors came together, with the United States, to make the case that we are for peace, not war; we are for solving problems, not threatening neighbors.
And I find that to be a positive step forward and I'm looking forward to further discussions with the other five parties.
September 5, 2003 State Department Spokesman Richard Boucher Daily Press Briefing
QUESTION: ...
Do you have any comments on the U.S. side about North Korea telling South Korea and China about North Korea's participation in the next round of meetings?
MR. BOUCHER: I know we've seen a number of different reports since the talks in Beijing, where the North Koreans have said different, and sometimes contradictory, things.
It will be up to the Chinese to put together the next rounds of talks.
And, certainly, we look to them to do that.
We would -- we have already said we believe there was a consensus.
The Chinese have said and we have said, and we believe there was a consensus to hold more talks, and would reiterate how important it is that all the parties attending adopt the stance that we and others have adopted; that this is a problem that needs to be solved peacefully, diplomatically, the Beijing talks are the opportunity to do that, and it needs to result in a nuclear-free peninsula.
QUESTION: Also on North Korea, a senior official explained to us yesterday that this new approach would mean that North Korea wouldn't have to completely dismantle its programs before the United States talks about what it's willing to do in return.
Could you talk about that a little bit more, talk about maybe some of the things that might be among the first that the U.S. would be willing to come back with?
MR. BOUCHER: First of all, I kind of differ with the characterization of a new approach; that I think if you look at what a senior official said before the talks occurred, that they said very similar things.
If you look at what we and Secretary Powell and the President of the United States have actually said in the past, you will find that we have said things that were very consistent with what I will say today.
In January, the President described it, and his -- the way he described it was, we expect them to disarm, we expect them not to develop nuclear weapons, and if they choose to do so, then I will reconsidered whether or not we'll start the bold initiative that I talked to Secretary Powell about.
That's always been our position.
So we have made absolutely clear North Korea needs to change its behavior.
We are not going to grant inducements to North Korea to change its behavior.
North Korea needs to live up to the obligations it's already -- that it had agreed to and it's already violated.
At the same time, we have also made clear that these -- nothing will happen until North Korea changes its behavior and begins to take concrete steps to dismantle its nuclear weapons program.
But as the President said, we are willing to talk about the possibilities if North Korea changes its behavior.
QUESTION: Will the U.S., for example, be willing to help them do that? Would that be one of the things that could be new -- could be new cooperation, if North Korea says it is willing to start dismantling its nuclear program?
MR. BOUCHER: As I said, if North Korea is changing its behavior, then we're willing to talk about what's possible.
There is a process of verification.
There are processes of, you know, verifiable, irreversible end to a nuclear program that do involve discussions.
And as I think senior officials have said, that there is an element of sequencing to all this.
We have made clear we're prepared to talk about what's possible.
We have made clear that we have certain policies, which we express freely.
But, at the same time, we don't intend to offer inducements or rewards for North Korea's developing nuclear weapons, contrary to all its previous understandings.
QUESTION: Richard, when the senior official talked about the sequencing of complementary steps, he was then talking about the bold approach?
MR. BOUCHER: The bold approach itself involved sequencing, but we wouldn't -- we have always said -- no, within the bold approach, there is sequences.
But the -- I think we have always made clear, and I think the senior official said this yesterday, that the bold approach doesn't kick in till we have an end to the nuclear programs.
QUESTION: No, but what he said yesterday was that once they started, you could start talking about --
MR. BOUCHER: -- the possibilities.
QUESTION: Right.
MR. BOUCHER: Yes, and that's what I said today.
QUESTION: You could -- you would start doing the sequencing, but not at the end, at the -- right after the beginning.
I mean I'm confused because it seems to me that what he was suggesting yesterday was not actually the bold approach, which is what I think you just suggested it was.
It seems like he was talking about something quite specific and --
MR. BOUCHER: Actually, it depends on what the questions are, you know.
Can you do this? Can you do that? Can you do this then? Can you get involved in the verification process somehow?
It's hard to speculate on specific possibilities.
But, as a general principle, repeat what we've said before.
We're not going to offer inducements.
We're not going to pay for the horse twice, I think, is the way we put it.
And nothing can happen until North Korea changes its behavior and begins to take concrete steps and dismantle its nuclear weapons program.
At the same time, we are prepared to talk about what the possibilities are if North Korea should do that.
QUESTION: And are you suggesting that the possibilities are more aspects of "the bold approach," or the possibilities are more help in verification, dismantling, et cetera?
MR. BOUCHER: I'm suggesting neither the one nor the other.
QUESTION: Correct me if I'm wrong, but I think "the bold approach," or "bold initiative" as defined months ago, is a broad package of aid, trade and diplomatic relations.
Is that still on the horizon?
MR. BOUCHER: As the President said in January, as I think we've said repeatedly here, as the Secretary has said, that if they choose to do so, meaning expect -- if North Korea chooses not to develop nuclear weapons -- then "I, the President will reconsider whether or not we'll start the 'bold initiative.'"
So, yes, it's still a possibility.
And we're willing to talk about that possibility.
But nothing, nothing can happen until North Korea changes its behavior and begins to take concrete steps to dismantle its programs....
QUESTION: ...
I don't think anything's been said about food aid for North Korea in months.
Do you have anything on that subject?
MR. BOUCHER: There's not really anything new in months.
I think earlier this year we announced that there was an initial contribution for the year and that there was another possible contribution.
Certain things have been worked out.
We have not moved on the second tranche yet, but the first tranche is, I think, either has been delivered, or is being delivered.
That was all underway.
QUESTION: Are you still awaiting -- you still awaiting North Korean movement on access for monitors, is that right?
MR. BOUCHER: It was on the question of making sure it was used well.
And I don't know exactly what we're waiting for, but we have not gotten to the point where we can release that second tranche yet.
QUESTION: On North Korea, based on the issue of sequence, which was emphasized by yesterday's senior official on the -- during the Beijing talk this time, say -- North Korea proposed a four-step approach.
How can you characterize, you know, this approach in terms of a sequence issue?
MR. BOUCHER: I don't think I want to try to characterize the North Korean approach.
North Korea laid out in April a series of steps.
No, I'm not in a position to describe or comment on a North Korean proposal at this point.
September 5, 2003 White House Spokesman Scott McClellan Press Gaggle in the James S. Brady Press Briefing Room
Q Yes, we have one other, which you didn't respond to, which involves Helen's question.
Was the senior State Department official yesterday signaling any change whatsoever ... in U.S. policy toward North Korea? ..
Is there new flexibility? Is there any adjustment in policy, whatsoever? Is there any difference between the situation a week-and-a-half ago and now?
MR. McCLELLAN: I think it's important to focus on what was accomplished in the recent talks that took place, the multilateral talks.
The five nations, in a multilateral forum -- when I'm referring to the five nations, I'm referring to China, Russia, South Korea, Japan and the United States -- the five nations made it very clear to North Korea what it needs to do to become part of the international community and realize the benefits of the international community.
The five nations made it very clear that North Korea must verifiably and irreversibly end its nuclear weapons program.
So there is a strong message going to North Korea.
North Korea is learning that the international community is not going to reward bad behavior.
They must change their behavior and begin to take concrete steps to dismantle its nuclear weapons program....
Q My question -- has there been any adjustment in policy, was the official signaling any new flexibility?
MR. McCLELLAN: No, the official was talking about -- let me go back to what the President said, back in January, 2003, in a pool spray in the Oval with the President of Poland.
The President said -- and he said:
"I've instructed our Secretary of State to approach North Korea about a bold initiative, an initiative which would talk about energy and food, because we care deeply about the suffering of the North Korean people.
And then the North Koreans made a decision.
I view this as an opportunity to bind together nations in the neighborhood and around the world to make it clear to the North Koreans that we expect this issue to be resolved peacefully and we expect them to disarm.
We expect them not to develop nuclear weapons, and if they so choose to do so -- their choice -- then I will reconsider whether or not we will start the bold initiative that I talked to Secretary Powell about.
People say, well, are you willing to talk to North Korea? Of course we are.
But what this nation won't do is be blackmailed.
And what this nation will do is use this as an opportunity to bring the Chinese and the Russians and South Koreans and the Japanese to the table to solve this problem peacefully."
So we are moving forward on a multilateral approach, exactly what we've spelled out to address this.
And nothing can happen until North Korea changes its behavior and begins to take concrete steps to dismantle its nuclear weapons program.
North Korea must end, verifiably and irreversibly, its nuclear weapons program.
Q Are we going to discuss security issues --
MR. McCLELLAN: Well, you're asking a question that, again, that North Korea must change its behavior.
That's the message.
That's why I referred back to the recent talks.
North Korea must change its behavior and take concrete steps to end its nuclear weapons program.
Q And what was the answer?
MR. McCLELLAN: That's what the message that was sent by the five nations to North Korea.
And so that's where things are.
Q His concrete steps will be answered by U.S. concrete steps, is what you're telling us.
MR. McCLELLAN: Well, I think the five nations have made it very clear that we are always willing to talk about what is possible if North Korea changes its behavior.
We are ready -- so I think that's what --
Q That statement --
MR. McCLELLAN: That's we've talked about all along.
Q But that statement you just read --
MR. McCLELLAN: But now we have five nations sending that very clear message to the North Koreans.
Q China has also sent a message to the U.S., that it had better soften its stand.
MR. McCLELLAN: You might want to ask China about some of those comments.
Q No, you don't have to ask China.
MR. McCLELLAN: China is part -- China, South Korea, Japan, Russia, the United States, have all made it very clear, the importance of a non-nuclear peninsula, and made it very clear --
Q And they've made it clear to the U.S., he has to soften --
MR. McCLELLAN: -- that North Korea needs to end its nuclear weapons program in a verifiable and irreversible way.
September 3, 2003 Secretary of State Colin Powell Remarks with Republic of Korea's Minister of Foreign Affairs and Trade Yoon Young-Kwan After Their Meeting in Washington, DC
See full transcript.
September 3, 2003 State Department Spokesman Richard Boucher Daily Press Briefing
QUESTION: ...North Korea? Have you had any chance to talk with the Chinese also with the comment by Deputy Foreign Minister Wang Yi?
MR. BOUCHER: We have had a chance to talk to them about it.
I don't have any more information.
I think any further clarification would have to come from the Chinese side.
QUESTION: Also, can you say anything on the -- yesterday's North Korean parliamentary decision which has endorsed the reinforcement of the nuclear deterrence? Can you say anything on that?
MR. BOUCHER: I think I'd just say what we've said before, what many governments have said and what the parties who attended the six-party talks said, that the Korean Peninsula must be free of nuclear weapons.
The goal of the international community, including the neighbors who were at the talks, is to seek a peaceful and diplomatic solution to the problem, one that results in a complete, verifiable and irreversible end to the North Korean nuclear programs.
That's a fact that needs to be accepted by the North Koreans and we need to talk about it.
QUESTION: You don't have any comments about the credibility of the North Korean legislature as a representative body --
MR. BOUCHER: I don't think it's a body that's been known to be either representative or to act independently in any time in the past....
QUESTION: Is there any difference -- any policy difference between the United States and South Korea in dealing nuclear? Any issues?
MR. BOUCHER: No.
None.
None at all.
We'll talk this afternoon, and I'm sure everything will be hunky-dory.
September 2, 2003 White House Spokesman Scott McClellan White House Press Briefing
Q ...
On North Korea, did the President and Secretary of State discuss it today? And is the President now prepared to take tougher actions, perhaps a quarantine or financial boycott of North Korea?
MR. McCLELLAN: Well, one, the meeting with the Secretary of State hasn't taken place.
But that's one of the regular meetings he has and it's not something that we typically get into readouts on.
But our policy on North Korea remains the same.
We are pursuing a peaceful, diplomatic solution through a multilateral forum.
North Korea knows what they need to do.
They need to end their pursuit of nuclear weapons, end its nuclear weapons program in a verifiable and irreversible way.
And the talks last week, some progress was made.
All countries made it very clear to North Korea that they support this policy.
Q But is there any review, is there any sense of urgency, any consideration of changing course here?
MR. McCLELLAN: No, we're continuing to work this through the multilateral approach.
September 2, 2003 State Department Spokesman Richard Boucher Daily Press Briefing
QUESTION: A couple things on North Korea.
First, I understand that the Secretary is going to be meeting here tomorrow with the South Korean Foreign Minister to have a kind of follow-up to the six-party talks in Beijing.
And, secondly, the Chinese seem to have come out and said that you guys are the problem here.
What do you have to say to that?
MR. BOUCHER: Well, let me say several things.
On the question of the Chinese, we've seen some press reports quoting, I think it's Vice Foreign Minister Wang Yi.
I have yet to see the real transcript of what he said, and I want to be very careful about saying exactly what it was he said, whether he was representing a Chinese view or representing views that others, North Koreans, might have expressed.
So I don't know what he said and I can't comment specifically on him.
I think that it was clear from the talks in Beijing that all, perhaps with the exceptions of the North Koreans, at the discussions in Beijing agreed that the main problem is North Korea's nuclear weapons program, and that all the parties getting together agreed that we need to address that in a multilateral fashion and ensure an end to the nuclear weapons program.
So we, the Chinese, along with Russia, Japan and South Korea, continue to work together very closely on a peaceful resolution to the North Korean nuclear problem.
And as you know, we believe this must lead to an end, to a complete, verifiable and irreversible end to North Korea's nuclear weapons program.
QUESTION: South Korea?
MR. BOUCHER: As far as the meetings with the South Korean Foreign Minister, if I can just do that quickly, Foreign Minister Yoon Young-Kwan arrives in Washington today.
He'll meet with the Secretary and other officials here on Wednesday through Friday.
And then he returns to Seoul on Saturday.
The Foreign Minister will discuss next steps regarding North Korea, as well as a range of bilateral issues.
QUESTION: Can I just be -- back to the Chinese?
Forgetting, leaving out the fact of what the Vice Foreign Minister said or might have said, how do you respond to -- how would you respond to someone who said -- who said that the U.S. position was the problem? In other words, when you say you obviously don't agree with it.
MR. BOUCHER: I would respond the way I did, that it seems that all the parties in Beijing agree that North Korea's nuclear weapons program is the problem, the main problem.
QUESTION: As far as I know, you haven't responded to the various North Korean statements since the meeting ended on Friday, the first of which said that they didn't see any point in continuing with these discussions, followed by a quasi-backtrack subsequent to that.
Any comment on all of this?
MR. BOUCHER: Well, it is nice to let time pass because they turn out -- there is several statements.
If you comment on each one, you find yourself with a bit of whiplash.
I think the point is that, as the Chinese hosts, I think, conveyed after the discussions in Beijing, that the parties at the discussions agreed that there was value in continuing discussions in the multilateral setting, and that the next step was for the Chinese to consult with the parties on dates for another round of talks.
We would expect that process to be underway.
So there was, I think, a consensus at the meeting that the multilateral process was valuable and should continue, and we would expect all of the parties at the meetings to maintain that consensus....
QUESTION: Can you tell us a little bit more about the latest talking in Beijing, and what Secretary's assessment on that talk in Beijing? Was it surprised -- he surprised that the DPRK again, for their part, say that they could demonstrate their nuclear position, and what --
MR. BOUCHER: Well, how much of readout did you guys do on Friday?
MR. ERELI: Guidance.
MR. BOUCHER: Okay.
MR. ERELI: There was no briefing.
MR. BOUCHER: I think, first of all, neither the Secretary, nor anyone else around here is surprised by belligerent and somewhat contradictory statements made by North Korea.
At the same time, the assessment of the talks in Beijing was that there was a useful consensus on the importance of the multilateral process, that the talks demonstrated why it's important to have everybody there.
Everybody heard what was said; no secrets, everybody heard the same thing and saw the same thing and it's all on the table.
The strong consensus that North Korea needs to end its nuclear program was also valuable.
And so I think we felt that the overall discussion was useful, if not if not immediately productive.
It wasn't expected to be, and that there would be further talks, as everybody agreed at that meeting.
QUESTION: Wasn't it failure that they couldn't agree that a next round of talk at any other --
MR. BOUCHER: Well, they seem to have agreed to have another round of talks.
The fact that they weren't set up immediately at a precise date is not unusual in diplomatic discussions.
QUESTION: Yeah, back to North Korea.
Could you update us, please, on the status of the latest Proliferation Security Initiative meeting in Paris? And also, would the U.S. consider postponing those exercises in the interests of pursuing diplomacy with North Korea? The Coral Sea Exercises is what I'm specifically asking about.
MR. BOUCHER: I can't remember the date for the Coral Sea Exercises.
QUESTION: I think it was just said.
I don't know if there's a specific date, but it was announced it would be after the Beijing talks, sometime in September.
MR. BOUCHER: I think it said September, yeah.
QUESTION: So I guess I'm wondering is there any thought to postponing it?
MR. BOUCHER: I think I'll leave the participants of the Proliferation Security Initiative meeting in Paris to update you on any developments that there might be there, and let me see what I can do in terms of confirming the fact of the meeting and the logistics....
QUESTION: You said that you were -- there was a strong consensus at the meeting that North Korea needs to end its nuclear program, but was there a consensus that the U.S. proposal is the right way to go about it? In other words, the first thing that would have to happen is dismantling of North Korea's weapons facilities, and only then would concessions be talked about?
MR. BOUCHER: I don't think I can give an endorsement to a particular proposal, even ours, as meritorious as I'm sure it was.
The point is that these are initial discussions.
They're the beginning of a process.
They are not a moment where we expected particular agreement on a particular proposal.
But I think we felt that the discussions in Beijing demonstrated the value of this multilateral process and some agreement among the participants to continue.
_________________________________________________________________
*Back to the current month for What U.S. Administration Officials Are Saying _________________________________________________________________ _________________________________________________________________ _________________________________________________________________
This site is produced and maintained by the U.S. Department of State's Bureau of International Information Programs (usinfo.state.gov).
Links to other Internet sites should not be construed as an endorsement of the views contained therein.
Back To Top blue rule IIP Home | Index to This Site | Webmaster | Search This Site | Archives | U.S. Department of State
Sorry, you need a JavaScript capable browser to get the best from this page
