National Park Service Johnstown Flood National Memorial This historic photo shows the row of large, two-story houses lining the lake shore before the flood.
SPECIAL EVENTS Flood Site Tours - Summer 2003 Date 05/22/2003 Contact Gregory Zaborowski , (814) 886-6140 Leave Your Car and Follow the Route of Canals, Railroads, and the Path of the Johnstown Flood This Summer
Area residents and visitors will have the opportunity to go on two different guided tours this summer.
The National Park Service is offering a tour of the Allegheny Portage Railroad and the 1889 Johnstown Flood.
Both tours will start on Sunday, June 15 and continue through Saturday, August 23.
Both tours start at 12 noon and end around 4:30p.m.
Transportation and tour guide are provided free of charge, however, there are admission fees at two of the sites for each tour.
The tour starting at Allegheny Portage Railroad National Historic Site will explore an exceptional story combining engineering, steam engines, and canal boats of the early and mid 1800's.
The tour will begin at the visitor center and includes stops at the newly opened Hollidaysburg Canal Basin Park, the famous Horseshoe Curve National Historic Landmark and the Gallitzin Tunnels.
The cost of admission to Allegheny Portage Railroad is $3.00 for adults.
Children age 16 and under are free.
The Horseshoe Curve admission is $3.00 for adults and $1.50 for children age 6-17.
This program is offered Wednesday through Sunday.
The tour of the Johnstown Flood begins at the visitor center of the Johnstown Flood National Memorial.
Participants will visit the remains of the South Fork Dam, which burst on May 31, 1889 despite valiant last minute efforts to fortify it.
The failed dam unleashed a raging torrent that destroyed the city of Johnstown and killed over two thousand people.
Participants will visit the Clubhouse of the South Fork Fishing and Hunting Club as well as travel through many of the local boroughs that the waters destroyed along the twenty-mile path of the Flood.
At the Johnstown Flood Museum, visitors will hear stories of the survivors of the Flood and visit Grandview Cemetery where many of the victims were laid to rest.
Participants will also get an exceptional view of the path of the Flood from the top of the Johnstown Incline.
The price of admission to Johnstown Flood National Memorial is $3.00 for adults and children 16 and under are free at the National Park site.
The Johnstown Flood Museum fees are $4.00 per adult, $3.00 for each child age 6-17 and $3.50 for seniors age 62+.
This tour is offered Thursday through Monday.
Since each tour starts at 12:00 it is a good idea to eat lunch before the tour begins.
However, snacks and refreshments are available at a couple of stops on each tour.These tours are a partnership between the National Park Service, The National Park Foundation and the Student Conservation Association, and are made possible through the generous support of the Ford Motor Company.
For information, reservations, and directions for these tours please call the following numbers; for the Allegheny Portage Railroad Tour call (814) 886-6150 or visit the web site at www. nps.gov/alpo and for the Johnstown Flood Tour call (814) 495-4643 or visit the web site at www.nps.gov/jofl.
Return to list » Home Accessibility Activities Contact Us [pp_nav_spacer.gif] Educational Programs Facts History 
ParkNet U.S. Department of the Interior FOIA Privacy Disclaimer FirstGov
