KY Crafted Logo Kentucky Crafted: A Cultural Showcase of Kentucky's Finest Kentucky's Finest Musicians to Perform at Kentucky Crafted: The Market 2002 CONTACT: Beau Haddock Toll Free (888) 592-7238 (KY CRAFT) Ext. 4817
[Eddie.jpg]
2001 National Heritage Fellowship recipient, Eddie Pennington
Frankfort, Ky.-- While it is no secret that Kentucky is full of musical talent, the number of great performers appearing on the Cultural Stage at Kentucky Crafted: The Market 2002 is certainly something to sing about.
This year's special 20th anniversary market will feature not only the state's best traditional and contemporary crafts, foods, 2-dimensional art, books and children's activities, but also a wonderful variety of Folk, Bluegrass, Jazz, Thumbpicking guitar, and Gospel musicians.
On both Saturday, March 2 and Sunday, March 3, performing artists from the Kentucky Arts Council's Performing Arts on Tour Directory 2002-03 and the Kentucky Folklife Program's Tour of Kentucky Folk Music will dazzle audiences with their amazing vocal and instrumental stylings.
Starting off the weekend at 10am on Saturday, March 2 will be Pale, Stout and Amber.
This trio showcases the knowledge and talents of David Atcher, Art Mize, and Robert Tincher, who draw on Ireland and Scotland's rich traditional music heritage.
Having spent years exploring the Celtic roots of the music they grew up playing here in Kentucky, Pale, Stout and Amber mixes story and song with history and personal experience.
This performance is sure to take listeners of all ages on a journey that is not only entertaining, but also educational, teaching about the folk music of the British Isles and its relationship to Kentucky's own Appalachian and Bluegrass music traditions.
Following such powerful performance might seem a challenge, but Cheryl Skinner is more than capable.
At noon on Saturday, audiences will have the chance to hear Skinner combine her flute, vocal, keyboard, and composition talents to produce a unique, innovative and inspired sound.
Cheryl brings her own brand of smooth jazz vocals and elegant piano stylings to the table.
With her full menu of talents, Cheryl has something to satisfy anyone's appetite.
Eddie Pennington brings yet another style to the Kentucky Cultural Stage at 1pm on Saturday with his thumbpicking favorites.
A 2001 National Heritage Fellowship recipient, Pennington is considered by his peers to be the greatest living thumb style guitarist, with performances marked by his humorous southern mannerisms.
Born in Western Kentucky, the home of the thumbpicking style, Pennington has played for the Olympic ceremonies in Atlanta, was a feature performer of the Wolf Trap/Folk Masters radio series, and remains one of the top musicians of this truly "Kentucky-based" style of guitar.
If Celtic, jazz, and thumbpicking aren't enough, visitors will have the chance to hear the gospel quartet music of the Northern Kentucky Brotherhood at 3pm on Saturday afternoon.
Representative of traditional gospel quartet music once found in African American churches, the Northern Kentucky Brotherhood is one of the few groups in Kentucky who perform purely in the a capella style, and they do it beautifully.
Next on stage at 4pm Saturday will be the Juggernaut Jug Band.
Formed some thirty years ago by a group of friends fascinated by jug band music, the band is dedicated to preserving the music and spirit of the original Louisville jug bands from the early 1900s.
The music is a blend of jazz and blues performed on strings and other standard instruments, with one interesting twist - the sound of a jug.
With every performance, the audience is invited to have as much fun as the band.
It isn't all fun and games though.
The band's exuberant music is the result of skillfully conceived arrangements and unique vocal harmonies.
Saturday's final performance will be at 5pm by Homer Ledford and the Cabin Creek Band, a five-piece traditional bluegrass and old time music band.
All of the band members grew up surrounded by the music they have been playing together for over sixteen years.
The band's instruments include the autoharp, musical saw, dulcimer, "fiddlefone," two fiddles (twin fiddles), banjo, guitar, bass, and a mandolin, making them well-equipped to bring new life to the old time bluegrass music they perform.
After an overnight break from the invigorating and enthralling Saturday performances, Market visitors are invited to return on Sunday for five more original and inspiring performances.
The Orville Hammond Trio starts off the day at noon with performances that reflect a variety styles, from straight-ahead jazz to the Caribbean styles of Orville's native homeland.
With bass, drum-set and piano, The Trio has been featured on the Black Entertainment Television Network, Kentucky Educational Television and in major performance venues across Kentucky and the southeast.
At 1pm on Sunday, visitors will hear a big switch from the Trio with No Tools Loaned, a hot new bluegrass band from Frankfort, Kentucky, that includes banjo, mandolin, guitar, dobro, bass fiddle, and amazing vocal harmonies.
No Tools Loaned's unique style is sure to produce a performance that will long be remembered.
Although the band is newly formed, its members are all seasoned veterans.
This band describes their music as "third-generation bluegrass," which is evident in the great instrumentals and tight vocal harmonies.
The Kettleheads take the stage at 2pm on Sunday afternoon, blending and changing musical styles with virtuosity, moving from Acoustic Jazzgrass to Progressive Bluegrass.
The Kettleheads formed when lifelong musician Tom Minton converted an abandoned T-shirt factory in a remote section of eastern Pulaski County into a rehearsal space.
Friends came wandering over the hills and hollows of Kettlehead Road to listen and join in.
Now, the Kettleheads host the Kettlehead Music Festival annually, and have become icons in these hills.
Voted four-time "Festival Favorites" at the Master Musicians Festival, the Kettleheads search for just the right songs that are pure Kentucky, full of rocky, sweet emotion, and then switch gears with blistering speed, always leaving their audiences ready for more.
At 3pm on Sunday, Jay Flippin and Gordon Towell will perform intimate jazz duets on the piano and saxophones, respectively, selecting compositions from a repertoire of jazz standards and originals.
These performers are not only experienced jazz practitioners, but also teachers who can enlighten the audience about the art form and distinct nature of its performance.
Their strong melodies and harmonies provide a distinct and completely engaging performance.
The final group to perform at Kentucky Crafted: The Market 2002 will be Hog Operation at 4pm on Sunday.
Steeped in Kentucky's rich music tradition, their high-energy performances include American roots music such as blues, celtic, bluegrass, country, and rock.
Traditional instrumentation from the guitar, banjo, bass, fiddle, and mandolin accompany silky smooth harmony vocals.
With a wonderful blend of so many musical styles, Hog Operation provides an enticing blend for the Cultural Stage's 2002 finale.
The public is invited to attend Kentucky Crafted: The Market, 2002, Saturday, March 2, 9 a.m.-6 p.m., and noon to 5 p.m. on Sunday, March 3, at the Kentucky Fair and Exposition Center, South Wing A, Louisville.
General admission for adults is $6.00 and $3.00 for children 6-12; children under six are admitted free.
Trade Days, (not open to the general public) are Thursday, February 28, 4 p.m. - 8 p.m., and Friday March 1, from 9 a.m.- 6 p.m.
A limited number of wheelchairs will be available upon request.
Shuttle service is provided from the fairground parking areas to the front of South Wing A.
An additional entrance is at the rear of South Wing A.
The Market is produced by the Kentucky Craft Marketing Program, a state agency in the Kentucky Arts Council, Education, Arts 
For more information, call 888 KY CRAFT (592-7238), ext. 4801.
###
Since 1981, the Craft Marketing Program's mission is to develop the state's craft industry, support and empower Kentucky artisans and craftspeople, create an economically viable environment for craft entrepreneurs, preserve the state's craft traditions, stimulate and support product development, and generate public awareness, public support and public/private partnerships.
The Program provides assistance to Kentucky residents, individuals, or groups wanting to develop as craft professionals through economic opportunities and training, to other outside entities (e.g., craft retailers, craft and art organizations, community and government agencies), and the general public.
