Magnet Schools Assistance Purpose Funding Status Eligibility Laws, Regs, 
The project is directly linked to the Arkansas Accountability Plan and each magnet school will participate in the systemic reforms included in the plan, with emphasis on reform practices related to curriculum and performance assessment.
Further, the materials, programs, and approaches included in the project are designed to meet the needs of a diverse student population, such as that in Hot Springs.
The magnet themes were selected by parents and students, and were supported by community representatives, businesses, and partners in education.
All of the themes have an academic focus and, in support of lifelong learning, all themes address career awareness and skills.
Schools participating in the project are:
School Grades Special Curriculum/Theme Park Elementary K-5 International Studies 
San Jose Unified School District San Jose, California
The goal of the San Jose Unified School District magnet program is to provide outstanding educational programs in integrated learning environments.
The district has been under Federal Court Order to desegregate its schools since September, 1986.
In 1994, 1996, and again in 1999 the court issued modified remedial orders which reconfirmed the district's use of a system of magnet schools to promote the voluntary movement of students for desegregation purposes.
Through this project, the San Jose Unified School District is designing unique, innovative curricula for four magnet schools to reduce isolation of minority group students and increase the academic achievement of all students.
The schools targeted to participate in this project were the most racially segregated and poorest academically performing secondary schools in the district.
More than 4,000 students are expected to benefit directly as a result of a comprehensive approach that includes: * The design and implementation of new and innovative instructional methods and practices, including state-of-the-art instructional technology, that promote high interest and provide challenging educational programs in each project school; * The implementation of academic enrichment and support services for all students in the project schools, to assist under-achieving students as well as high achievers to be successful in challenging educational programs; * Collaboration with parents, students, institutions of higher education, businesses and community groups in designing and revising magnet programs to ensure the success of all students enrolled in those programs; and * The implementation of summer workshops, after-school in-service training, and released time activities to train teachers to use innovative instructional methods and practices with a diverse student body, and to develop programs and curricula appropriate to the magnet theme of each school.
Schools participating in the project are:
School Grades Special Curriculum/Theme Burnett Academy 6-8 International Baccalaureate Middle Years and Technology Hoover Middle School 6-8 Academics/Visual, Performing and Technical Arts Steinbeck Middle School 6-8 Arts, Sciences, and Telecommunications San Jose High Academy 9-12 International Baccalaureate
New Haven Public Schools New Haven, Connecticut
New Haven, the seventh poorest community in the United States, is typical of many older urban areas.
Once a thriving manufacturing center, the central city has lost jobs and middle class residents to surrounding suburbs.
The urban public schools are predominantly black, Hispanic and poor.
The surrounding suburban schools are mostly white and middle class.
Despite these economic and demographic trends that have laid waste to many American cities, New Haven has been able to discourage white flight from its schools to a greater extent than many other communities in similar circumstances, through the establishment of the New Haven Public Schools' magnet schools.
After years of decline, enrollments are beginning to grow and academic success at most magnet schools in New Haven has dramatically increased.
Through this project, New Haven will develop attractive inter-district magnet schools to draw a diverse group of suburban students and encourage New Haven students to stay in New Haven.
The project combines several innovative and highly effective approaches to systemic school reform.
As a result, the magnet schools participating in this project will be based on a comprehensive systemic school reform approach that blends the Comer School Development Program model, school restructuring that focuses on equity and academic excellence, the thematic approach of traditional magnet schools, and an evaluation model developed with the Education Alliance of Brown University--using teacher, administrator, student and parent surveys and site visits--that will keep magnet school development and implementation on track.
Schools participating in the project are:
School Grades Special Curriculum/Theme Davis Elementary K-5 21st Century School Mauro Elementary K-5 Mathematics and Science Microsociety Elementary K-4 Microsociety Sheridan Middle 5-8 Communications and Technology Metropolitan Business H.S. 9-12 Business and Investment
School Board of Pinellas County St. Petersburg, Florida
The district is committed to meeting the guidelines of its court-approved desegregation plan and has, in the past, successfully used magnet programs to assist in that process.
The district is also committed to developing high quality programs capable of supporting the highest student achievement for all students by developing Pinellas County Student Expectations, which further define standards set by the State of Florida.
The Pinellas County magnet schools included in this project have been designed with the full participation of school staff, curriculum experts, parents, students, and the community.
A magnet planning process was established that required planners to review relevant research, seek assistance from university personnel as well as from professional experts in the private sector, and to visit existing exemplary programs.
The selection of themes for the magnet programs included in this project was based on input from parents, the professional community, national magnet experts, students, site visits and curriculum specialists.
Schools participating in the project are:
School Grades Special Curriculum/Theme Campbell Park Elementary K-5 Marine Science Gulfport Elementary K-5 Montessori Maximo Elementary K-5 MicroSociety
Lansing School District Lansing, Michigan
The Lansing School District magnet program has been designed to address the goals of reducing and preventing racial isolation, promoting systemic reform that is aligned with the State of Michigan's content and student performance standards, and providing a challenging academic program to all students.
The proposal features innovative educational methods and practices to meet students' needs and interests.
The project also reflects a wide range of themes to ensure that all students have equitable access to quality education, preparing them to thrive in a culturally diverse, technologically oriented, and highly competitive global community.
To ensure broad-based, community-wide participation in the planning process for the magnet project, a Magnet Exploration Team was formed.
Stakeholders represented on the Magnet Exploration Team included parent organizations, school district groups and employee unions, community groups such as the NAACP and the Greater Lansing Urban League, and institutions of higher education, including Michigan State University.
Schools participating in the project are:
School Grades Special Curriculum/Theme Grand River Elementary K-5 International Studies, Language 
Greenburgh Central School District No. 7 Hartsdale, New York
Through the implementation of this project, an interdistrict magnet school--the Westchester Magnet Academy--serving students from three dramatically different school districts in terms of their student populations, will be created and implemented.
Westchester Magnet Academy will enable students of diverse talents and backgrounds to work cooperatively in a hands-on, integrated approach to learning.
Students from the Greenburgh Central School District No. 7, Harrison Central School District, and Irvington Union Free School District will be participating in a cooperative Expeditionary Learning Outward Bound (ELOB) program on the Purchase College, SUNY campus.
ELOB is a comprehensive school design that aims to transform curriculum, instruction, assessment, school culture, and school organization.
It is based on two central ideas: students learn better by doing than by listening; and developing character, high expectations, and a sense of community is as important as developing academic skills and knowledge.
At the Westchester Magnet Academy, the program differences will not be in content, but in the methods used to facilitate student achievement.
The program requires the reorganization of time, student grouping and resources to support its high quality learning expeditions.
Teachers will design learning expeditions, which are long term, multidisciplinary projects that combine academic, service, and physical elements.
Academy students will be required to meet all New York State Regents requirements in order to graduate.
Wake County Public School System Raleigh, North Carolina
The Wake County Public School System magnet project, Project Gateways, is designed to prepare students to meet the demands of the 21st century information age and the changing social dynamic of a diverse society.
Magnet programs in this project will bolster the power of project schools to attract and maintain diverse school populations and increase the achievement levels of all students.
Selection of the schools to participate in this project followed a thorough review of the district's successful magnet program, which has grown from two schools in 1977 to 42 schools in 2000.
Over the years, many school and community voices have participated in the design and implementation of the district's magnet program.
Project Gateways builds upon the solid support of the school district and community for voluntary desegregation and the magnet school program.
Central to this and all district initiatives is the belief that all students can learn, regardless of race, socioeconomic status, or other factors.
Coupled with this belief is the district's approach to managing for significantly high student performance that integrates a triad of educational reform practices: (1) Effective Schools philosophy and research; (2) Total Quality Management theory and practice; and (3) Baldridge Education Criteria for Performance Excellence:
Schools participating in the project are:
School Grades Special Curriculum/Theme Moore Square Middle 6-8 Museums Magnet Brooks Elementary K-5 Museums Magnet Millbrook Elementary K-5 Primary Years International Baccalaureate Joyner Elementary K-5 Language Exploration Powell Elementary K-5 Visual and Performing Arts
Hamilton County Department of Education Chattanooga, Tennessee
Hamilton County's magnet schools represent more than simply high quality alternatives to neighborhood schools, as important as those are to parents of school age children who responded to surveys conducted as part of the planning that preceded the development of this proposal.
Magnet schools represent, especially for residents of Chattanooga, the removal of a barrier that many felt prevented their children from receiving a high quality education.
Hamilton County's magnet schools, as models of equity and excellence, will ensure that all students will have access to high level courses that will allow them to meet performance and content standards which will ultimately prepare them for good career opportunities.
To accomplish this: * All magnet school curricula will be aligned with high state content and assessment standards that are the basis for instructing all magnet students; * Students will have adequate time and assistance to learn content; * Teachers will have mastery of course content and techniques to teach it meaningfully and will know and use strategies for reaching diverse student populations and students with different learning styles; * Students will have adequate access to all school resources from high quality textbooks, to computers, to media centers and libraries, to science laboratories; and * Teachers will have expectations that all students can learn to high standards and therefore all students will be given the opportunities to master all of the content needed to meet high state standards.
Schools participating in the project are:
School Grades Special Curriculum/Theme Barger Academy K-5 Fine Arts Chattanooga Middle School 6-8 Museum School/Paideia East Lake Academy 6-8 Fine Arts Lakeside Academy K-5 Math/Science/Technology Normal Park K-5 Museum School/Paideia Tyner Middle Academy 6-8 Math/Science/Technology Brown Academy K-5 Classical Studies Battle Academy K-5 Multiple Intelligences
Wichita Falls Independent School District Wichita Falls, Texas
The Wichita Falls Independent School District (ISD) serves a city of approximately 100,000 people with a diverse economic base that is composed of manufacturing, Sheppard Air Force Base, the oil industry, ranching and agriculture, a medical center, and retailing and wholesaling.
The Wichita Falls ISD magnet schools included in this project address the national education goals and state standards as the district restructures the curriculum, instruction, and school structure for the new magnet schools.
The project applies the following seven principles for creating outstanding schools: * Giving families more choices among schools; * Raising expectations by establishing high standards for what all children should know and be able to do; * Increasing parental involvement; * Improving instruction; * Breaking the mold by reinvesting in teaching and learning; * Putting more time and effort into learning; and * Increasing technology.
Further, the organization of classes at the new magnet schools will not be dependent upon a specific course structure.
Students will be scheduled into interdisciplinary blocks.
Applications of technology will be included in all programs.
The interdisciplinary curricula will be designed to satisfy the requirements of the state curriculum and to promote the acquisition of skills and knowledge necessary for students to succeed in the 21st century.
Those skills include the assessing and synthesizing of information, technologies, ethics, careers, and mentorships.
Schools participating in the projects are:
School Grades Special Curriculum/Theme Alamo Elementary 1-6 Math and Medical Research Burgess Elementary K-6 Classical Studies Fannin Elementary K-6 Writers' Academy Huey Elementary 4-6 Montessori and Science Lamar Primary Center K-3 Environmental Science
