The Subcommittee on Coast Guard and Maritime Transportation Hearing Coast Guard and Federal Maritime Commission FY 2000 Budgets February 11 1998 __________________________________________________________________ TABLE OF CONTENTS(Click on Section) PURPOSE OF HEARING U.S. COAST GUARD BACKGROUND
OPERATING EXPENSES
WITNESSES
HEARING TRANSCRIPT __________________________________________________________________
PURPOSE OF HEARING
The purpose of this hearing is to consider the Administration's fiscal year 2000 budget requests for the U. S. Coast Guard and the Federal Maritime Commission (FMC).
The Subcommittee will also receive testimony from the General Accounting Office (GAO) about the U.S. Coast Guard's budget.
Specifically, the GAO witness will address the progress of the Coast Guard's deepwater acquisitions project, the use of additional Coast Guard drug interdiction funding from the 1999 supplemental appropriations legislation, and inform the Subcommittee about GAO's efforts to identify areas where the Coast Guard can be more efficient.
U.S. COAST GUARD BACKGROUND
THE FISCAL YEAR 2000 COAST GUARD BUDGET REQUEST
The Administration requests $4.13 billion for fiscal year 2000 to fund Coast Guard activities and programs which are subject to appropriation.
This request is $117 million less than the amount appropriated for the Coast Guard in fiscal year 1999, but it is $168 million more than the President's fiscal year 1999 request.
The President also proposes creating new navigation user charges, with estimated proceeds of $41 million to be credited to the Coast Guard's Acquisition, Construction 
OPERATING EXPENSES
General
The budget request for the Operating Expenses (OE) account in fiscal year 2000 is $2.941 billion, an increase of $125 million (4.4 percent) over the fiscal year 1999 appropriated level, to fund continued operation and maintenance of a wide range of multi-mission vessels, aircraft, shore units, and aids-to-navigation.
[Image36.gif]
The following table illustrates how the fiscal year 2000 Coast Guard OE account is allocated among missions compared to the fiscal year 1998 allocation and fiscal year 1999 estimates:
(Actual) (Planned) (Planned)
% of OE % of OE % of OE
In FY 98 In FY 99 In FY 00
Drug Interdiction 16.6% 17.2% 17.7%
Search and Rescue 12.7% 11.6% 11.6%
Aids to Navigation/Ice Operations 19.3% 19.8% 19.2%
Defense Readiness 2.5% 2.1% 2.1%
Marine Environmental Protection 11.0% 11.5% 11.5%
Other Law Enforcement 2.6% 2.5% 2.4%
Marine Transportation Safety 14.2% 13.6% 13.7%
Fisheries Law Enforcement 16.8% 16.3% 16.3%
Migrant Interdiction 4.3% 5.4% 5.5%
The Coast Guard's Operating Expense account request includes an additional $99.4 million for enhanced Coast Guard personnel entitlements.
These additional personnel costs include the fiscal year 2000 pay raise of 4.4 percent, Coast Guard inclusion in new Department of Defense entitlements, escalating health care costs, and the annualization of past pay raises.
The President has requested $38 million to operate new Coast Guard facilities during fiscal year 2000 which includes $15 million to operate seven newly-constructed coastal buoy tenders and $539,000 for additional personnel to operate the newly established Vessel Traffic Service in New Orleans.
The budget also includes $600,000 to conduct major maintenance to ensure continued operation of the Coast Guard ice breaker MACKINAW until its retirement.
The President's request also calls for operating expense reductions of $50 million.
These reductions include $16 million for the decommissioning of eight aging buoy tenders slated for replacement in fiscal year 2000 and millions of dollars in savings from capital investment in new technology and management efficiencies.
The Coast Guard also plans to close two small Coast Guard air facilities which are located in Air Facility Long Island, New York, and Air Facility Muskegon, Michigan.
The drop in the price of fuel is also expected to save the Coast Guard approximately $10 million in fiscal year 2000.
Drug Interdiction
The fiscal year 2000 budget request includes an increase of $46 million in the Coast Guard's operating expense budget to allow the Coast Guard to operate the Coast Guard drug interdiction assets which were acquired with funds provided in the fiscal year 1999 supplemental appropriations act.
This includes funds to operate six additional coastal patrol boats in the Caribbean and other illicit drug maritime transit zone areas.
The additional fiscal year 2000 drug funding would also allow the Coast Guard to operate three maritime patrol aircraft and eight deployable pursuit boats in the drug transit zones.
Title VIII of the Omnibus Consolidated Appropriations Act, P.L. 105-277, contains the Western Hemisphere Drug Elimination Act.
This legislation authorizes billions of dollars in funding during fiscal years 1999, 2000, and 2001 for the U.S. Customs Service, the U.S. Coast Guard, the Department of Defense, the Department of State, the U.S. Agency for International Development, the Department of Agriculture, and the Drug Enforcement Administration to enhance their current drug interdiction programs as well as establish new interdiction and source country programs.
Under this new law, the U.S. Coast Guard is authorized to receive $151 million for each of the next three fiscal years to expand drug interdiction activities around Puerto Rico, the United States Virgin Islands, and its other maritime transit zone areas of operation.
The Coast Guard is authorized to spend $630 million to purchase equipment to enhance its drug interdiction operations.
The Coast Guard is also authorized to spend $15 million to establish, operate, and maintain maritime training vessels to visit participating Latin American and Caribbean nations to provide law enforcement training and to perform maintenance on participating national assets.
The Omnibus Consolidated Appropriations Act appropriated an additional $44 million in fiscal year 1999 for Coast Guard counter-drug operating activities.
This law also provides the Coast Guard with an additional $217 million to purchase equipment to combat drug smuggling.
Defense Resources
The Administration proposes to fund $334 million of Coast Guard Operating Expenses from budgetary function "054" which would allocate funds from the defense budget to support the Coast Guard's military readiness.
Navigation Support
As indicated in the table on page two, the largest percentage of the Coast Guard's operating budget (19.2 percent) is used for navigation support.
The bulk of this spending maintains a system of over fifty-thousand floating and fixed aids to navigation along our coasts and inland waterways.
These aids, including buoys, lighthouses and shore structures, are used to facilitate commerce, to increase the safety of mariners, and to protect the environment.
ACQUISITION, CONSTRUCTION AND IMPROVEMENTS (AC
General
The Administration requests an appropriation of $350.3 million, a $275 million (44 percent) decrease relative to the amount appropriated in fiscal year 1999, to build and improve the Coast Guard's vessel, aircraft and boat fleets, shore facilities, and information management resources.
The Administration assumes that the Coast Guard's Acquisition, Construction and Improvements account would include another $41 million in an unspecified navigation user fee.
If authorized by Congress, these new navigation user fees would reduce the appropriation to the AC
If no user fee is authorized, the full $350 million for the AC
Section 207 of the Coast Guard Authorization Act of 1998 prohibits the Secretary of Transportation from establishing any fee of this type before September 30, 2001.
[Image37.gif]
The fiscal year 2000 request includes $153 million for two seagoing buoy tenders, twenty additional motor life boats and other vessel projects; $22 million for upgraded sensors and avionics on Coast Guard helicopters and fixed wing aircraft; $54 million for enhancement to Coast Guard information systems, National Distress System, and commercial satellite communication system; and $69 million for renovations and improvements to Coast Guard facilities.
Funding of $34 million is also included in the Coast Guard's AC
Navigation User Charges
The President proposes user charges for navigation aids to generate $41 million in Coast Guard Acquisitions funding.
Details of this controversial proposal have not been released.
A broad coalition of ship operators, maritime labor representatives, and shippers is strongly opposed to a navigation user charge.
Authority exists for the head of a Federal agency to establish charges for services or things of value provided by the agency under the User Charge Statute, section 9701 of title 31, United States Code.
That authority allows charges to be established administratively in narrow, specific circumstances, and only when involving specific charges for specific services to specific individuals or companies.
Many believe that an attempt to administratively collect fees from vessel operators for general aids to navigation in U.S. ports and waterways would exceed the authority of agency heads to establish charges under the User Charge Statute.
Supreme Court decisions on the User Charge Statute have held that charges that are simply "revenue raisers" are actually taxes, and must be based on specific statutory authority.
The Coast Guard currently collects legitimate user fees for the specific services it provides to specific
individuals, including ship inspections, licensing of and issuance of documents to merchant mariners and documentation of vessels.
Section 207 of the Coast Guard Authorization Act of 1998, Public Law 105-383, prohibits the Secretary of Transportation from planning, implementing or finalizing any regulation that would promulgate any new maritime user fee which was not implemented and collected prior to January 1, 1998, including a fee or charge for any domestic icebreaking service or any other navigational assistance service through September 30, 2001.
ENVIRONMENTAL COMPLIANCE AND RESTORATION
For environmental compliance and restoration, funding of $19.5 million, $1.5 million less than was appropriated for fiscal year 1999, has been requested to mitigate environmental problems resulting from the operation of former and current Coast Guard facilities, and to ensure that Coast Guard facilities are in compliance with applicable laws and regulations.
Major clean-up projects for fiscal year 2000 are at Kodiak, Alaska; Elizabeth City, North Carolina; and Cape Code, Massachusetts.
ALTERATION OF BRIDGES
The Bridge Alteration program provides the Federal government's share of the costs for altering or removing bridges determined to be obstructions to navigation.
Currently, under the Truman-Hobbs Act of 1940, (33 U.S.C. 511 et seq.), the Coast Guard shares, with the bridge owner, the cost of altering railroad and publicly-owned highway bridges which obstruct the free movement of vessel traffic.
The Administration recommends that funding for the alteration of obstructive highway and railroad bridges be provided from the Federal Aid Highways program.
Under the proposal, the Secretary would make available $11 million in fiscal year 2000 for the alteration of railroad and highway bridges which have been determined to be unreasonable obstructions to navigation.
The Coast Guard would continue to administer the program.
The Congress has consistently rejected the President's bridge administration funding proposal over the past several years.
RESERVE TRAINING
The Coast Guard provides qualified individuals and a limited number of trained Port Security Units for mobilization in the event of national emergency or disaster.
The reservists maintain readiness through mobilization exercises and duty alongside regular Coast Guard members during routine and emergency operations.
For example, Coast Guard Reservists provided additional personnel for the 1996 recovery/salvage operation arising from the crash of TWA Flight 800 off Long Island, NY.
The fiscal year 2000 Coast Guard budget request proposes funding of $72 million for Coast Guard Reserve training to support a 7,600-member Selected Reserve program, a level below the authorized strength of 8,000, and far short of the Coast Guard wartime mobilization requirement of 11,000.
RESEARCH, DEVELOPMENT, TEST AND EVALUATION
For research, development, test and evaluation, the Administration proposes to spend $21.7 million, a $4.7 million increase above fiscal year 1999 levels.
This account funds the development of techniques, methods, research, hardware, systems, and planning to improve the productivity of existing Coast Guard missions.
BOAT SAFETY
In 1984, the Wallop-Breaux amendments to the Deficit Reduction Act of 1984 created the Aquatic Resources Trust Fund.
The Wallop-Breaux Trust Fund consists of two accounts, the Sport Fish Restoration Account and the Boat Safety Account.
Annually, up to $70 million of the motorboat fuel taxes paid by recreational boaters are deposited in the Boat Safety Account to fund state boating safety grant programs coordinated by the Coast Guard.
Subtitle D of title VII of the Transportation Equity Act for the 21^st Century, P.L. 105-178, is the Sportfishing and Boating Safety Act of 1998.
This legislation amends the Sport Fish Restoration Program administered by the Secretary of Interior through the Fish and Wildlife Service, and the Recreational Boating Safety Program administered by the Secretary of Transportation through the Coast Guard.
Changes to these two programs include establishing a new boating and fishing outreach and communications initiative called the National Outreach and Communications Program, ensuring that individual States receive between $59 million and $72 million annually for State boating safety programs, and establishing a program to improve boating infrastructure by providing funds to the States for the development and maintenance of public facilities for transient nontrailerable recreational vessels.
This legislation also provides the Coast Guard with $5 million annually to coordinate and carry out the national recreational boating safety program.
The Administration does not ask for any additional funding above the amount permanently appropriated for the boating safety program.
RETIRED PAY
The Administration's fiscal year 2000 request for retired pay is $730 million, an increase of $46 million over the fiscal year 1999 level.
These funds provide annuities and medical care for retired military personnel and former Lighthouse Service members, their dependents, and survivors.
OIL SPILL LIABILITY TRUST FUND
Established by the Oil Pollution Act of 1990, the Oil Spill Liability Trust Fund provides a source of funds, not subject to appropriation, to pay oil spill removal costs and damages, including assessment of natural resources damages, and Federal expenses necessary to administer the Fund.
Each year, the Fund may provide up to $50 million for emergency response costs and pay all valid claims for oil spill damages resulting from oil spills.
The Administration's fiscal year 2000 request from the Oil Spill Liability Trust Fund is $61.2 million, including $50 million for emergency response costs, $10 million for payment of claims, and $1.2 million for support of the Prince William Sound Oil Spill Recovery Institute in Cordova, Alaska.
DEEPWATER MISSION PROJECT
Within the Acquisition, Construction and Improvements appropriation, the President has requested $34 million to continue analysis of the Coast Guard's long-term capital needs for the response/patrol zone beyond fifty nautical miles from U.S. shores.
Coast Guard activities in this zone typically require either extended on-scene presence, long transit distance to reach the operating area, forward deployment of forces, or a combination of these approaches.
The Coast Guard has identified fourteen missions in this zone, including alien migration interdiction operations, drug interdiction, and fisheries law enforcement.
These missions have traditionally employed various aircraft, capital ships, large patrol boats, communications and sensor systems.
As the Coast Guard considers recapitalizing the asset base that has been used in the deep water mission zone, it seeks to achieve long-term savings through judicious, coordinated procurement decisions.
To accomplish this, the Coast Guard is searching for options which employ complementary systems of assets that can be operated with fewer personnel and significantly lower life-cycle costs, without compromising overall performance.
Rather than simply planning for like-kind replacement of ships, aircraft, and sensors, the deep water project aims to develop a network that can achieve the functional capabilities required to achieve mission success, safely.
The Coast Guard estimates that like-kind replacement of the existing deep water assets whose service life will end before 2020 would cost $7.25 billion to $15 billion, in 1998 dollars.
The $34 million requested in the President's budget will continue to fund three private sector consortia who will submit competing plans, specifications, and costs estimates for a system of deep water assets to provide the mission capability required by the Coast Guard.
On October 26, 1998, the General Accounting Office (GAO) released a report to Congress on the Coast Guard's Deepwater Capability Replacement Project.
The GAO found that the Coast Guard's justification for the Deepwater project, particularly its conclusion about the expected life of its current aircraft assets, could not be validated from the information available.
In fact, the Coast Guard withdrew its justification for the Deepwater project after concerns about its accuracy were expressed by the Office of Management and Budget.
Currently, the Coast Guard is developing more accurate and updated information to justify this project even as contracting teams have already begun work on their initial deepwater proposals.
The GAO also questioned the future funding for this project.
At a projected $500 million a year, expenditures for the project would take virtually all of the Coast Guard projected spending for all capital projects.
While the Coast Guard expects more than $165 million of the annual funding for the Deepwater project to come from new user fees for domestic ice-breaking and navigational services that the Coast Guard currently provides, the GAO reports that Congress has prohibited any new user fees for the near future.
The GAO recommended that the Coast Guard expedite the issuance of information that it has developed or is developing on the condition and capabilities of its ships and aircraft, improve its acquisition guidelines for evaluating the condition of its assets, and evaluate whether the contracting teams should be instructed to base their proposals on the assumption of a lower, more realistic funding level than $500 million a year.
FEDERAL MARITIME COMMISSION BACKGROUND
The Administration requests $15.3 million for the operation of the Federal Maritime Commission for fiscal year 2000.
Approximately $14.3 million was appropriated for FMC operations if fiscal year 1999.
The Federal Maritime Commission (FMC) is an independent agency formed in 1961 following the abolition of the Federal Maritime Board.
The Commission is responsible for enforcing international shipping rules and regulations involving carriers (container ship operators), shippers (companies owning goods to be transported), and transportation facilitators such as freight forwarders, nonvessel operating common carriers, and customs brokers.
The FMC is composed of five commissioners, appointed by the President with the advice and consent of the Senate.
The current Chairman of the FMC is the Honorable Harold J. Creel, Jr.
The FMC is primarily engaged in administering the Shipping Act of 1984.
However, the FMC also enforces the Foreign Shipping Practices Act and Section 19 of the Merchant Marine Act, 1920.
Under these authorities, the FMC protects shippers and carriers from restrictive or unfair practices of foreign governments and foreign-flag carriers.
Under these laws, the FMC has the authority to take action against the offending carriers, including the imposition of per voyage fees and preventing them from operating in trade with the United States.
The final responsibility of the FMC is enforcement of the laws related to cruise vessel financial responsibility.
Under sections 2 and 3 of P.L. 89-777, the FMC ensures that cruise vessel operators have sufficient resources to pay judgments to passengers for personal injury or death or for nonperformance of a voyage.
The major responsibility of the Federal Maritime Commission is to enforce the provisions of the Shipping Act of 1984, the Act which establishes the system of economic regulation of the international waterborne commerce of the United States.
Most goods move in international commerce either as bulk commodities or as dry cargo.
Bulk cargoes, such as oil, coal, or bulk grains are normally shipped as full shiploads chartered expressly for the purpose of carrying the cargo to a given location at a given time.
Most other goods, including all manufactured goods and finished products, are shipped by "liner" service.
Liner shipping operates on a given route and schedule, by taking partial shiploads from many different cargo owners.
Ships in liner service hold out their services as "common carriers", requiring them to charge a given rate for carrying the same cargo to the same destination.
Traditionally, these international liner shipping companies (carriers), have organized into small groups in a given trade route (conferences) to set rates, and make other agreements related to ocean transportation in a given trade.
Before the Shipping Act of 1984 was enacted, international ocean shipping was regulated under the Shipping Act of 1916.
The 1916 Act required "open" conferences and limited the antitrust immunity available to conferences for collective actions such as rate-setting.
The 1916 Act required conferences to file agreements with the FMC, which were reviewed and approved for antitrust purposes under a "public interest" test.
The Act also contained prohibited practices, such as deferred rebates and retaliatory or discriminatory rates or services.
Public Law 105-258, the Ocean Shipping Reform Act of 1998 (the Reform Act), amends the Shipping Act of 1984 and other related U.S. shipping laws to encourage competition in international ocean shipping and growth in Unites States exports.
The most important provisions of P.L. 105-258 provide American businesses with the freedom to keep their ocean transportation contract prices confidential from their foreign competitors.
These provisions will increase the competitiveness of American businesses internationally.
The Reform Act is a major step forward in the process of deregulating international ocean shipping.
The Reform Act maintains antitrust immunity for ocean carrier conferences, requires private tariff publication and continued enforcement of tariffs by the Federal Maritime Commission, as well as authorizes confidential transportation prices for shippers.
The Reform Act also eliminates the requirement for ocean common carriers to file tariffs with the FMC.
Instead, carriers must make their tariffs publicly available by means of an electronic filing system.
The Reform Act reduces the number of days before which a member of an ocean shipping conference is required to give notice to conference members of an independent action on a rate or service item from 10 to five days.
The Reform Act also forbids ocean conferences from prohibiting or restricting conference members from negotiating service contracts, requiring conference members to disclose negotiations on service contracts; or adopting mandatory rules or requirements affecting the rights of conference members to negotiate and enter into service contracts.
Finally, the Reform Act clarifies section 19 of the Merchant Marine Act of 1920 to prohibit unfair pricing of liner services by foreign carriers and further tightens the oversight of controlled carrier tariffs.
The Federal Maritime Commission must issue regulations to implement the amendments in this bill by March 1, 1999.
The amendments contained in the bill become effective on May 1, 1999.
WITNESSES
