The Subcommittee on Coast Guard and Maritime Transportation Hearing Oversight on the Coast Guard's Search and Rescue Mission __________________________________________________________________ TABLE OF CONTENTS(Click on Section) PURPOSE OF HEARING BACKGROUND WITNESSES HEARING TRANSCRIPT __________________________________________________________________ PURPOSE OF HEARING On November 3, 1999, the Subcommittee on Coast Guard and Maritime Transportation will conduct an oversight hearing on the U.S. Coast Guards search and rescue mission.
The Subcommittee will investigate the Coast Guards system of response to requests for assistance from mariners and new Coast Guard initiatives to improve its search and rescue capabilities.
The Subcommittee will also inquire about the adequacy of the current National Distress and Response System and the Coast Guards recommendations to modernize its search and rescue communication system.
At this hearing, the Subcommittee will receive testimony from the U.S. Coast Guard, the National Transportation Safety Board (NTSB), and the National Association of Boating Law Administrators.
BACKGROUND
In 1837, Congress first authorized the Revenue Cutter Service to monitor our coastlines and to afford aid to distressed navigators.
Today, Federal law authorizes the Coast Guard to render aid to distressed persons, vessels, and aircraft on and under the high seas and on and under the waters over which the United States has jurisdiction.
The Coast Guard conducts more than 40,000 search and rescue cases annually, and on a typical day the Coast Guard saves 14 lives and assists 328 people.
The Coast Guards search and rescue goals are:1) to minimize the loss of life, personal injury, and property loss and damage in the maritime environment; 2) to take the search out of search and rescue through the employment of technology, education, research and development, regulation and enforcement; and 3) to maintain world leadership in maritime search and rescue.
The Coast Guard accomplishes its search and rescue mission by deploying multi-mission stations, cutters, aircraft and boats linked by a communications network.
The Coast Guards response standards require that search and rescue units be ready to proceed within 30 minutes of notification of a distress call and on scene within the search area within 90 minutes of getting underway.
While the number of registered boaters in the U.S. has increased to more than 12 million, the total number of search and rescue cases has steadily decreased since 1994 from approximately 53,000 to 40,000 cases annually.
However, the vessel and aircraft hours spent in conducting search and rescue cases has increased over the last 5 years.
National Distress and Response System
The National Distress System provides two-way voice communications coverage for the majority of Coast Guard missions in coastal areas and navigable waterways where commercial and recreational traffic exists.
The system, built in the 1970s, consists of approximately 300 remotely controlled VHF transceivers and antenna sites.
The Coast Guards system monitors the international VHF maritime distress frequency (Channel 16) and acts as the primary command and control network to coordinate Coast Guard search and rescue response activities.
The secondary function of the system is to provide command, control, and communications for Coast Guard missions involving National Security, Maritime Safety, Law Enforcement, and Marine Environmental Protection.
The current National Distress System was intended to provide 100 percent VHF-FM continuous coverage extending out 20 nautical miles from the U.S. shore around the Atlantic, Pacific, Gulf of Mexico and Great Lakes coasts.
The present system now suffers from multiple deficiencies including:
? Sporadic gaps in coverage to 20 nautical miles ? Interrupted Channel 16 reception during transmissions ? Limited channels (presently operates with six in a given region) ? Lack of a technical ability to operate with other government/public safety agencies and commercial partners ? Non-standard mixture of aging equipment (1970s technology) ? Limited information protection (secure communications) ? No data communication capacity (i.e. a system that determines and preserves an electronic fix every time a signal is received) ? Limited direction finding ability
The Coast Guard is concerned that there is a vast disparity between the communications capability that the public thinks is in place and the capabilities of the current communications system.
Due to the deficiencies of the current system, the Coast Guard has initiated the National Distress and Response System Modernization project.
The project will fully modernize the existing VHF-FM National Distress System and provide improved distress alerting and response coordination capability, along with improved command and control for all Coast Guard missions.
The new system will include direction finding, asset tracking, digital selective calling, and multi-channel transmitting and receiving capability.
The recent tragic sinking of the recreational sailing vessel MORNING DEW highlights the need to modernize the Coast Guards communications system.
MORNING DEW
During the early morning hours of December 29, 1997, the 34-foot sailing vessel MORNING DEW struck the rock jetty on the north side of the shipping channel outside the entrance to the harbor in Charleston, South Carolina.
The boat was later found about 15 yards south of the jetty submerged in about 12 feet of water.
The owner and operator of the vessel and his three passengers, all members of the same family, died as a result of the accident.
The planned route of the voyage was from Myrtle Beach, South Carolina, via the Intracoastal Waterway, to Jacksonville, Florida.
.
On December 28th, at 2:30 p.m., the operator of a salvage vessel saw the MORNING DEW heading outbound in Winyah Bay, moving towards the open ocean.
The operator of the salvage vessel assumed the MORNING DEW had missed the turn into the Intracoastal Waterway and tried to hail the sailboat on VHF-FM, but was unable to establish communications.
No one knows why the operator headed to sea, but at some point he realized that his boat was heading out to sea and made the decision to continue.
At the time the sailboat went to sea, there were small craft advisories posted, winds were from the east at 25 knots and gusting, and seas were running five to six feet.
Areas of rain and embedded thunderstorms reduced visibility to less than one nautical mile.
The water temperature was 55 degrees.
At 2:17 a.m., the Coast Guard radio watchstander heard a partial transmission on Channel 16 VHF-FM calling U.S. Coast Guard.
U.S. Coast Guard.
He tried twice to reestablish communications with the vessel, but got no response.
A later analysis of the tape found that the call was the voice of the operators thirteen-year-old son, yelling Mayday! U.S. Coast Guard.
Come in.
The next morning at 6:28 a.m., the Coast Guard received a report from the Charleston Harbor pilot dispatcher, advising the operations duty officer that a crew member aboard an inbound automobile carrier had reported hearing someone, in the vicinity of the north jetty, screaming for help.
The pilot aboard the inbound ship had already taken it upon himself to direct his pilot boat to search the area, but reported negative results from his search.
The operations duty officer did not deploy Coast Guard assets to investigate the situation nor did he report the information to his supervisor.
At 11:15 a.m. two bodies washed up in the surf.
The third body was found in the early afternoon.
The fathers body was found four weeks later.
NTSB Recommendations
Last month, the NTSB concluded their investigation of the MORNING DEW accident.
The NTSB concluded that the probable cause of the MORNING DEWs sinking was the operators failure to adequately assess, prepare for, and respond to the known risks of a journey into the open ocean.
The NTSB also determined that contributing to the loss of life in this accident was the substandard performance of U.S. Coast Guard Group Charleston in initiating a search and rescue response to the accident.
While the full NTSB report has not yet been released, the executive summary recommends several safety initiatives for the Coast Guard to implement.
The 16 recommendations focus on toughening the standards for telecommunications specialists, improved management oversight of communications and operations centers, periodic operational readiness inspections, better cooperation with state agencies after an accident, and communications equipment upgrades.
Coast Guard Search and Rescue Improvements
Under an international treaty implementing the new Global Maritime Distress and Safety System (replacing Morse Code with digital transmissions), the Coast Guard is planning to modernize its National Distress and Response System.
These improvements include:
? Digital Selective Calling (DSC) and automatic mayday calls.
This technology will allow a VHF radio to function more like a telephone and allow vessel operators to make ship-to-ship private calls.
It will also include the ability for the operator to press a mayday button on his radio and automatically broadcast the vessels location.
? Direction finding capacity to trace a radio call, even a garbled one, to within 25 square miles.
? Elimination of any gaps in VHF radio coverage for U.S. coasts, the Great Lakes and major rivers.
? Automatic tracking of Coast Guard ships and aircraft that go out on a mission.
The distress system modernization project has been on the drawing board for nearly 20 years.
To date, the Coast Guard has spent $9 million on this project and has the approval to spend $16 million in fiscal year 2000.
The estimated total cost of the National Distress and Response System modernization project is estimated to be between $240 and $300 million.
The Coast Guard plans to release a National Distress and Response System design request for proposals in November, 1999.
Private contractors will have until April of next year to submit proposals for constructing the new system.
The Coast Guard will choose three of the proposals for final review next fall.
After the three contractors submit detailed designs, the Coast Guard will issue a final contract award in fiscal year 2003.
Currently, the Coast Guard plans to complete the National Distress System modernization project in fiscal year 2005, but is evaluating the feasibility of accelerating the project.
The Coast Guard has completed a Search and Rescue Case Study of the incident which provides an in depth self-assessment of the various aspects of its Search and Rescue System.
As a result of the study, the Coast Guard has placed two additional positions at Group Charleston to bring it up to a staffing standard of one supervisor and four watchstanders.
The Coast Guard also began an immediate Coast Guard review of the staffing standards at all Group operational centers, the mayday response policy, the assignment criteria for watchstanders, district command center work requirements, and the policy on notification and coordination with local authorities.
In addition, the Coast Guard has established a system to provide uniformity of practice in search and rescue cases at all Coast Guard operational centers as well as to establish guidelines in contacting the next of kin of search and rescue case victims.
Finally, the Coast Guard provided funding for replacement of the recording equipment in Charleston as well the replacement of other inadequate voice recorders throughout the Coast Guard.
Hoax Cases:
The Coast Guard receives approximately 600 to 700 hoax calls a year.
The Coast Guard estimates that hoax calls cost taxpayers at least one million dollars annually.
In addition to the unnecessary cost, hoaxes place Coast Guard personnel in unnecessary danger through their operation of the ships, boats, and aircraft which must respond to these false distress calls.
Hoaxes also hurt mariners in distress by interfering with legitimate search and rescue cases.
Enhancement to the National Distress and Response System would assist the Coast Guard in evaluating potential hoax calls by allowing it to pin point the locations of the caller.
(Many hoax calls are made from locations on land.)
The new communications equipment would also greatly assist the Federal Communications Commission in prosecuting hoax callers.
Readiness:
The MORNING DEW case also highlights a trend in readiness shortfalls within the Coast Guard.
Due to the Administrations work force streamlining in the early 1990s, the Coast Guards current 35,000 active-duty force is the same size as it was in 1963.
The Coast Guard, like the other Armed Forces, has been having problems recruiting and retaining adequate personnel to meet its missions.
The Coast Guards operational pace has significantly increased in recent years due to increased drug, illegal migrant interdiction, and fisheries law enforcement operations.
This increased operational tempo has resulted in personnel standing longer watches.
There are several trends within the Coast Guard that indicate a reduction in readiness.
The crew located in 81 percent of small boat stations are working long hours each week.
Many vital Coast Guard positions, such as radarmen, are going unfilled, and the availability of certain Coast Guard cutters have been reduced 20 to 35 percent due to a lack of personnel to maintain the vessels.
Only about half of the Coast Guard surfman positions are filled by individuals certified to operate Coast Guard vessels in rough seas.
The average boat crew experience throughout the Coast Guard has dropped to less than one year.
The Coast Guard reports that the increased operational tempo and the longer working hours have resulted in a 29 percent increase in Coast Guard shore injuries while aircraft ground mishaps rates are up almost 50 percent.
WITNESSES
PANEL I Libby Cornett
PANEL II The Honorable Jim Hall, Chairman, National Transportation Safety Board accompanied by Marjorie Murtagh, Director, Office of Marine Safety
Admiral James M. Loy, Commandant, United States Coast Guard
PANEL III Paul Donheffner, President, National Association of State Boating Law Administrators, and Director, State of Oregon Marine Board
Captain Dean Scarborough, Regional Commander, Maryland National Resource Police
