[newbanner.jpg] STATE DRAMATICALLY INCREASES ENFORCEMENT OF WAGE AND HOUR LAWS IN 2002 More than $18.4 million in wages recovered for New Jersey workers in the past 15 months TRENTON, April 17, 2003- The state continues to heighten enforcement of laws guaranteeing that workers are paid fairly for their work, Department of Labor Commissioner Albert G. Kroll announced today.
From January of 2002 through April 15, 2003, the Department of Labor has collected more than $18.4 million owed to workers due to violations of the state's prevailing wage, wage and hour, and wage collection laws.
" Governor McGreevey and I have, from the very beginning of this administration, made it clear that strict enforcement of the New Jersey Prevailing Wage Act is a top-priority and that the Division of Wage and Hour Compliance will be given all the support it needs," Kroll said.
"Our law-abiding contractors and subcontractors and their employees must be protected from the effects of an uneven playing field resulting from the actions of willful violators."
In 2002, the department cited 1,250 contractors and subcontractors for violations of the Prevailing Wage Act, an increase of 550 over 2001.
Also in 2002, the department debarred as ineligible for public works projects 91 contractors and subcontractors and 119 individuals of those companies, an increase of 51 contractors and subcontractors and 71 individuals over 2001.
The department collected $1,649,999 in prevailing wages owed to employees and an additional $3 million of back wages for various other wage and hour laws under its jurisdiction in 2002.
The department is also working closely with the Attorney General's Office and the School Construction Corporation to ensure the integrity of the contractors and subcontractors seeking to engage in the multi-billion dollar school construction program.
" It's not enough for our department to provide the world-class job training and job creation programs our workers and employers have come to expect," Kroll said.
"These wages earned by hard-working New Jerseyans are likely to be reinvested in the state's economy.
In addition to making it clear that workers' rights will be protected, strong enforcement provides a long-term benefit to the state."
There are several examples of the department's recent efforts to secure wages due to workers.
This month, unpaid back wages totaling $21,803.77 for 280 employees was received from the Short Hills Hilton in Short Hills.
The recovery was initiated when a former employee who filed a complaint concerning employees being required to work through their meal period and not being compensated for actual time worked.
Subsequently, the firm's attorney agreed to provide a two-year self-audit of both active and terminated employees.
There were also incidents where the employer failed to pay overtime wages.
The company failed to comply with the provisions of the New Jersey Wage Payment Law and the New Jersey Wage and Hour Law.
In February, the Wage and Hour Division completed an investigation of Atlanticom/Acentra Technologies of Trenton, New Jersey for failure to pay prevailing wages to 38 employees installing teledata systems at four schools and the National Guard Armory in Lawrenceville.
The company agreed to pay $79,325.86 in back wages.
Other recent examples of failure to provide prevailing wages include: Andrzes Makarewicz Mason, which underpaid four employees $15,389.88; Franklin Masonry Association, Inc., which underpaid 13 workers $5,846.66; Pfister Maintenance, Inc., which underpaid five workers $18,025.89; P
These enforcements of wage and hour laws are part of the department's ongoing commitment to protecting its workforce.
From enforcing labor laws and standards to guaranteeing support will be there in times of need, the Department of Labor is making a deep commitment to ensuring its workforce has the support it needs to contend with the challenges of the new economy.
For more information about wage and hour law enforcement, please visit the department's website at:
http://www.nj.gov/labor.
