The Subcommittee on Coast Guard and Maritime Transportation Hearing on Coast Guard Fiscal Year 2003 Budget __________________________________________________________________ TABLE OF CONTENTS(Click on Section) PURPOSE BACKGROUND WITNESSES __________________________________________________________________ PURPOSE The purpose of this hearing is to consider the Administrations fiscal year 2003 budget request for the U. S. Coast Guard.
BACKGROUND
Fiscal Year 2003 Coast Guard Budget Request
The Administration requests $7.1 billion for fiscal year 2003 for Coast Guard activities that are subject to appropriation.
This request is $1.6 billion (28 percent) more than the amount appropriated for the Coast Guard in fiscal year 2002.
This request places specific emphasis on the Coast Guards search and rescue and homeland security focused missions.
Approximately $700 million of the increase is provided for new military entitlement programs and to enhance Coast Guard operations.
The remaining increase of $900 million is due to an accounting change which fully accrues the Coast Guards retirements and health care costs.
Both of these accounting initiatives would require the enactment of legislation to become effective.
The following table compares the fiscal year 2001 and 2002 Coast Guard appropriations (with and without the accrual) with the fiscal year 2003 Coast Guard budget request (in millions of dollars):
Major Coast Guard Account Fiscal Year 2001 Actual Fiscal Year 2002 Enacted + $209M Emergency Supplemental Fiscal Year 2002 Enacted + $209M Emergency Supplemental + Accrual Fiscal Year 2003 Presidents Budget Request Operating Expenses 3,295.2 3,589.7 3,902.7 4,635.3 Acquisition,Construction,
OPERATING EXPENSES (OE)
General
The budget request for Coast Guard operating expenses in fiscal year 2003 is $4.6 billion, an increase of $733 million, or nineteen percent, over the fiscal year 2002 appropriated level (these figures include the retirement and health care accruals for fiscal years 2002 and 2003).
Operating expenses account for about two-thirds of the Coast Guards budget and fund Coast Guard search and rescue, port security, aids to navigation, marine safety, marine environmental protection, and law enforcement operations.
This includes funding for 37,249 military and 6,390 civilian personnel.
The Coast Guards operating expense request includes an additional $266 million to continue maritime homeland security projects originally funded in the fiscal year 2002 supplemental appropriation and to continue the operation of other assets acquired in 2002.
The President also requests an additional $213 million to further improve Coast Guard maritime homeland security systems as well as the Coast Guards search and rescue and maritime safety operations.
The Presidents announced pay raises in fiscal year 2003 for Coast Guard military personnel, 4.1percent, and civilian personnel, 2.6percent, would cost the Coast Guard $98 million.
In addition, this request increases Coast Guard military personnel by 1,978 and civilians by 220.
ACQUISITION, CONSTRUCTION AND IMPROVEMENTS (AC
The Administration requests $736 million in acquisitions funding for fiscal year 2003, a $92 million, or 14 percent, increase over the amount appropriated in fiscal year 2002 (these figures include the retirement and health care accruals for fiscal years 2002 and 2003).
This request places specific emphasis on the Coast Guard search and rescue and homeland security missions.
These activities include the acquisition, construction, renovation, and improvement of vessels, aircraft, other equipment, and shore facilities.
This account also funds the Coast Guards Deepwater Capability Replacement Project and the Coast Guard personnel responsible for acquisition.
ENVIRONMENTAL COMPLIANCE AND RESTORATION
For environmental compliance and restoration, funding of $17 million, $105,000 more than the amount appropriated for fiscal year 2002, has been requested to mitigate environmental problems resulting from the operation of former and current Coast Guard facilities, and to ensure that Coast Guard facilities are in compliance with applicable laws and regulations.
This funding would be used to clean up thousands of batteries disposed of by the Coast Guard in many locations.
Another part of this program is to continue to clean up hazardous waste sites in Kodiak, Alaska, and Elizabeth City, North Carolina.
Finally, this request includes $500,000 to conduct remedial action at the Coast Guard Yard in Baltimore, Maryland.
ALTERATION OF BRIDGES
The Bridge Alternation program provides the Federal governments share of the costs for altering or removing bridges determined to be obstructions to navigation.
Under the Truman-Hobbs Act of 1940, (33 U.S.C. 511et seq.), the Coast Guard shares, with the bridge owner, the cost of altering railroad and publicly-owned highway bridges which obstruct the free movement of vessel traffic.
The Administration requests no funding for the alteration or removal of obstructive railroad bridges.
RESERVE TRAINING
The Coast Guard provides qualified individuals and a limited number of trained Port Security Units for mobilization in the event of national emergency or disaster.
The reservists maintain readiness through mobilization exercises and duty alongside regular Coast Guard members during routine and emergency operations.
In addition, the Coast Guard Reserve fills critical national security and national defense roles in both Homeland Security and in direct support of the Department of Defense.
In the immediate wake of the September 11, 2001 terrorist attacks, over 2,500 Coast Guard Reserve personnel were recalled to active duty.
Today, approximately 1900 Coast Guard Reservists remain on active duty.
The fiscal year 2003 budget request proposes funding of $113 million, an increase of $13 million, for Coast Guard Reserve training to support the authorized strength of 9,000, an increase of 1,000 reservists.
RESEARCH, DEVELOPMENT, TEST AND EVALUATION (RDT
For research, development, test and evaluation, the Administration proposes to spend $23 million, a $2 million increase above fiscal year 2003 appropriated level.
This account funds the development of techniques, methods, research, hardware, systems, and planning to improve the productivity of existing Coast Guard missions.
The RDT
BOAT SAFETY
In 1984, the Wallop-Breaux amendments to the Deficit Reduction Act of 1984 created the Aquatic Resources Trust Fund.
The Wallop-Breaux Trust Fund consists of two accounts, the Sport Fish Restoration Account and the Boat Safety Account.
Annually, up to $70 million of the motorboat fuel taxes paid by recreational boaters are deposited in the Boat Safety Account to fund state boating safety grant programs coordinated by the Coast Guard.
Subtitle D of title VII of the Transportation Equity Act for the 21st Century, P.L. 105-178, is the Sportfishing and Boating Safety Act of 1998.
This legislation amends the Recreational Boating Safety Program, administered by the Coast Guard.
Under these amendments, states receive $59 million without appropriation for boating safety programs.
An additional $13 million may be appropriated from the Coast Guards budget for boating safety programs.
This legislation also provides the Coast Guard with $5 million annually to coordinate and carry out the national recreational boating safety program.
The Administration does not request additional funding above the $64 million permanently appropriated for the boating safety program and Coast Guard administrative expenses.
RETIRED PAY
The Coast Guards mandatory fiscal year 2003 retired pay liability is $935 million.
This year the Administration has proposed legislation to shift retirement costs from a central mandatory account to the affected programs discretionary accounts (see below section).
OIL SPILL LIABILITY TRUST FUND
Established by the Oil Pollution Act of 1990, the Oil Spill Liability Trust Fund provides a source of funds, not subject to appropriation, to pay oil spill removal costs and damages, including assessment of natural resources damages, and Federal expenses necessary to administer the Fund.
Each year, the Fund may provide up to $50 million for emergency response costs and pay all valid claims for oil spill damages resulting from oil spills.
The Administrations fiscal year 2003 request from the Oil Spill Liability Trust Fund is $61.2 million, including $50 million for emergency response costs, $10 million for payment of claims, and $1.2 million for support of the Prince William Sound Oil Spill Recovery Institute in Cordova, Alaska
KEY ISSUES ASSOCIATED WITH THE BUDGET REQUEST
Homeland Maritime Security
The Presidents 2003 budget request increases the Coast Guards homeland security-related missions funding by $282 million, to an overall level of $2.9 billion.
After September 11, 2001, the Coast Guards port security mission grew from approximately one to two percent of daily operations to between 50 and 60 percent today.
The President includes $88 million in funding to build what the Coast Guard calls maritime domain awareness.
The goal of maritime domain awareness is the timely possession of information and intelligence, and the ability to conduct surveillance and reconnaissance of all vessels, cargo, and people that operate in the maritime domain well before a potential threat enters U.S. maritime boarders.
This amount includes $10 million to conduct 29 port vulnerability assessments for the Nations most critical ports.
The Coast Guards maritime domain awareness initiative also provides $34 million to significantly enhance the Coast Guards ability to receive, fuse, disseminate, and transmit secure and non-secure information both internally and among other agencies.
The Presidents budget provides funding to ensure the control of high interest vessels by increasing vessel boarding and escort operations as well as the tracking of inbound vessels.
The Administration requests $18 million to fund 160 active duty sea marshals for the armed escort of high interest vessels and $4 million to increase harbor safety patrols for all 49 Captains of the Port.
The Presidents budget proposal enhances Coast Guard presence and response capabilities by providing $48 million to support six Coast Guard maritime safety and security teams.
Each team will consist of 71 active duty personnel with the capability for harbor patrols, establishment of security zones, vessel interdiction and waterborne incident response within most critical U.S. ports.
The Administration requests $51 million for the Coast Guard to protect its personnel, physical plant, and information technology capability.
This amount includes $18 million to provide chemical, biological and radiological protection, detection, and decontamination capabilities to Coast Guard units and strike teams.
In addition, the President requests $9.1 million for the acquisition of Coast Guard small arms thereby enabling Coast Guard units and personnel to operate and maintain an adequate small arms weapons inventory.
The Presidents budget request includes $29 million to increase Coast Guard domestic and international outreach activities.
This amount includes $27 million for 110 contingency response planners for worldwide seaport infrastructure security.
In addition, the President requests $2 million for personnel and resources to manage all command, control, and communications aspects for response to an act of terrorism.
Specifically, this funding will allow the Coast Guard to manage the implementation of an incident command system throughout the agency, which will ensure integrated planning and response operations.
Search and Rescue
The Presidents budget places specific emphasis on the Coast Guards search and rescue mission by providing an additional $122 million to enhance the Coast Guards ability to plan and respond to maritime incidents.
Annually the Coast Guard responds to approximately 40,000 calls for assistance.
This amount includes $22 million to provide an additional 138 search and rescue personnel during fiscal year 2003 to fill critical personnel shortages at Coast Guard field search and rescue units.
In addition, the President requests $10 million to begin replacing the aging 41-foot utility boat fleet and to purchase several small boats.
Also included in the request is $90 million to overhaul the critical National Response System (discussed below).
Deepwater Capability Replacement Project
The Coast Guards Deepwater Capability Replacement Project is intended to replace or modernize all assets used in the Coast Guards Deepwater missions, which generally occur more than 50 miles offshore.
Coast Guard activities in this zone typically require either extended on-scene presence, long transit distance to reach the operating area, forward deployment of forces, or a combination of these approaches.
The Coast Guard has identified fourteen missions in this zone, including alien migration interdiction operations, drug interdiction, and fisheries law enforcement.
The Coast Guard began planning for replacing assets in 1996 because Deepwater-capable assets are nearing the end of their service lives, are technologically limited for performing deepwater missions effectively, and are expensive to operate because of relatively high crew requirements.
Instead of proposing a traditional one-for-one asset-replacement program, the Coast Guard has hired three industry teams to develop competing proposals to develop a single, integrated package of ships, aircraft, and associated systems that will optimize performance of deepwater missions while minimizing life-cycle costs.
To date, the Coast Guard has spent $436.3 million for three industry teams to develop a plan for replacing or modernizing existing assets.
The winning team is to be selected the third quarter of fiscal year 2002.
The Administration has requested $500 million in fiscal year 2003 to fund the second year of implementation of the selected teams proposed plan.
Both the Secretary of Transportation and the Office of Budget and Management have jointly certified full funding for the Deepwater project for fiscal years 2003-2007.
The Coast Guard estimates the acquisition cost of the Deepwater project at $10 billion over the next twenty years, but this figure could change.
National Distress and Response System Modernization (NDRSM) Project
The National Distress System provides two-way voice communications coverage for the majority of Coast Guard missions in coastal areas and navigable waterways where commercial and recreational traffic exists.
The Coast Guards system monitors the international VHF maritime distress frequency (Channel 16) and acts as the primary command and control network to coordinate Coast Guard search and rescue response activities.
The secondary function of the system is to provide command, control, and communications for Coast Guard missions involving national security, maritime safety, law enforcement, and marine environmental protection.
The national distress and communication capability of the existing communications system, built in the 1970s, is inadequate.
The current system is unable to accommodate the significant growth in maritime commerce and recreational boating.
The Presidents request provides $90 million to conduct independent environmental assessments of potential site locations, complete test and evaluation plans, as well as conduct site surveys of potential tower locations.
This project will fully modernize the existing VHF-FM National Distress System and provide improved distress alerting and response coordination capability, along with improved command and control for all Coast Guard missions.
The new system will include direction finding, asset tracking, digital selective calling, and multi-channel transmitting and receiving capability.
To date, the Coast Guard has spent $91.2 million on this project.
The future cost of the National Distress System project is still to be determined.
The Department of Transportation fiscal year 2002 appropriation requires this project to be completed by the end of fiscal year 2006.
Full Funding of Coast Guard Retiree Cost and Health Benefits
Last year, the Administration proposed legislation, the Managerial Flexibility Act of 2001, to fully accrue the retirement and health care costs of Coast Guard military personnel as well as other Federal government personnel whose agencies do not use an accrual system at the present time.
This legislation requires the establishment of the Coast Guard Military Retirement Fund.
The new fund will make payments to current retirees, receive the accrual payments from Coast Guard accounts for current active duty members, and receive annual payments from the general fund to pay over time the previously unfunded retirement liabilities of current Coast Guard personnel.
The Presidents fiscal year 2003 budget assumes passage of this proposed legislation.
Starting in fiscal year 2003, retirement costs will be shifted from a mandatory central account to the discretionary affected program account.
The proposal does not increase or lower total budget outlays or alter the surplus/deficit since the higher payment will be offset by receipts in the pension fund.
The shift will reduce reported costs from central mandatory accounts and increase reported costs in affected discretionary accounts.
The Administration requests $889 million for the Coast Guard Military Retirement Fund to pay current retirees during fiscal year 2003.
All of the Coast Guards fiscal year 2003 requested budget accounts include an additional funding level for the accrual payments for current active duty members, as reflected in the above table.
In addition, the Administration is requesting a $736 million payment from the general fund to the retirement fund.
This payment is to fund the unfunded liability of Coast Guard personnel that accrued prior to this change in the law, amortized over 40 years.
In addition, the National Defense Authorization Act of 2001 changed health care benefits of retirees over age 64 from a pay-as-you-go basis to an accrual system starting in fiscal year 2003.
The proposed Managerial Flexibility Act of 2001 would also convert under age 65 retiree health benefits to an accrual system starting in fiscal year 2004.
User Fees
The fiscal year 2003 budget proposes that Congress enact legislation which would establish user fees for Coast Guard navigation assistance services to commercial vessels arriving in U.S. ports.
Coast Guard navigation assistance services include buoy placement and maintenance, vessel traffic services, radio and satellite navigation systems, and waterways regulations.
The fiscal year 2003 fee collections are estimated to be $165 million.
The Clinton Administration proposed user fees of this type, but Congress rejected the proposals.
WITNESSES PANEL I Admiral James M. Loy Commandant United States Coast Guard Master Chief Petty Officer Vincent Patton, III United States Coast Guard
