The Subcommittee on Coast Guard 
A detailed background memorandum on the Coast Guards fiscal year 2001 budget request was distributed in preparation for the Subcommittees first hearing on the Coast Guards fiscal year 2001 budget held February 29, 2000.
BACKGROUND
THE FISCAL YEAR 2001 COAST GUARD BUDGET REQUEST
The Administration requests $4.6 billion for fiscal year 2001 for Coast Guard activities that are subject to appropriation.
This request is $429 million (10.3 percent) more than the amount appropriated for the Coast Guard in fiscal year 2000.
The following table compares the fiscal year 2000 Coast Guard appropriations, the fiscal year 2001 Coast Guard authorization (passed by the House), and the fiscal year 2001 Coast Guard budget request (in millions of dollars):
Major Coast Guard Account Fiscal Year 2000 Enacted Fiscal Year 2001 House-passed Authorized Fiscal Year 2001 Presidents Budget Request^2 Operating Expenses 2,939^1 3,207.8 3,199.0^3 Acquisition,Construction,
1.
Includes the $160 million from the FY 99 Kosovo Supplemental.
2.
Includes a $212 million offset for proposed user fees.
Section 207 of P.L. 105-383, prohibits new maritime user fees through September 30, 2001.
3.
Includes $341 million from budgetary function "054" which would allocate funds from the defense budget to support the Coast Guards military readiness.
__________________________________________________________________
ISSUES OF INTEREST TO OUTSIDE WITNESSES
DEEPWATER CAPABILITY REPLACEMENT PROJECT
The President has requested $42.3 million in fiscal year 2001 to continue the analysis of the Coast Guards long-term capital needs for operations which occur fifty nautical miles beyond U.S. shores ("deepwater").
Coast Guard activities in this zone typically require either extended on-scene presence, long transit distance to reach the operating area, forward deployment of forces, or a combination of these approaches.
The Coast Guard has identified fourteen missions in this zone, including alien migration interdiction operations, drug interdiction, and fisheries law enforcement.
As the Coast Guard considers replacing the ships and planes used in the deepwater mission zone, it seeks to achieve long-term savings through a coordinated procurement process.
To accomplish this, the Coast Guard is searching for options which employ a complementary system of assets that can be operated with fewer personnel and lower costs, without compromising overall performance.
The $42.3 million requested for the Deepwater Project in the Presidents budget will continue to fund three industry teams that were awarded contracts to develop competing proposals for the project.
The winning team is to be selected in fiscal year 2002, and the first Coast Guard assets are to be in service by fiscal year 2005.
The total cost of the project is still to be determined by the three industry teams.
Through the end of fiscal year 2000, $73.9 million has been spent on the project.
The General Accounting Office (GAO) and the Department of Transportations Inspector Generals Office have raised concerns about the Coast Guards Deepwater Capability Replacement Project.
On October 26, 1998, the GAO released a report to Congress on the Coast Guards Deepwater Capability Replacement Project.
The GAO found that the Coast Guards justification for the Deepwater Project, particularly its conclusion about the expected life of its current aircraft assets, could not be validated from the information available.
The GAO concluded that proceeding without this key data increases the risk that the contractors will develop alternatives that are not the most cost-effective to meet the needs of the Coast Guard.
The Coast Guard and its contractors are currently developing the updated justification information, but some of the data may not be available until after key procurement decisions are made.
The GAO has also questioned the Coast Guards ability to afford the high cost of the Deepwater Project.
Initial estimates of $500 million annually would consume more than the agency now spends for all its capital projects.
The Department of Transportation Inspector General (IG) reviewed the Deepwater Project at the request of the Coast Guard Commandant.
The IG has found that the Coast Guards Deepwater planning process is sound and innovative.
The IG also found that the Coast Guard had strengthened its Deepwater planning process following IG and GAO recommendations.
The IG reported that the Coast Guard plans to request approximately $350 million to begin acquisition of Deepwater assets in fiscal year 2002.
The IG is concerned that the Coast Guard plans to submit this budget request to Congress in February, 2001, before the Deepwater planning process is completed in July, 2001.
Like the GAO, the IG questions the feasibility of funding such a costly multi-year project in a tight Federal budget environment.
In anticipation of Coast Guard budget requests for the Deepwater Project, the President established the Interagency Task Force on the Roles and Missions of the United States Coast Guard in 1999.
This Task Force reviewed the future roles and missions for the Coast Guard and supported the current Coast Guard roles and missions, including the national defense mission.
The Task Force also endorsed the Deepwater Projects process and timetable.
BOATING SAFETY GRANTS
The National Association of State Boating Law Administrators (NASBLA) is an association of state officials who are responsible for administering and enforcing state boating laws.
NASBLA will testify in support of additional funds for the Federal Boating Safety Grant program.
In 1984, the Wallop-Breaux amendments to the Deficit Reduction Act of 1984 created the Aquatic Resources Trust Fund.
The Wallop-Breaux Trust Fund consists of two accounts, the Sport Fish Restoration Account and the Boat Safety Account.
Annually, up to $70 million of the motorboat fuel taxes paid by recreational boaters are deposited in the Boat Safety Account to fund state boating safety grant programs coordinated by the Coast Guard.
Subtitle D of title VII of the Transportation Equity Act for the 21st Century, P.L. 105-178, is the Sportfishing and Boating Safety Act of 1998.
This legislation amends the Recreational Boating Safety Program, administered by the Coast Guard.
The new law set up a formula under which states may receive $59 million from the Wallop-Breaux Trust Fund annually without appropriation.
Additional boating safety funds may be appropriated for state boating safety grants from the Coast Guards budget.
COAST GUARD MILITARY ENLISTED PAY
The Fleet Reserve Association is a Congressionally chartered nonprofit organization which represents the enlisted personnel of the U.S. Navy, Marine Corps and Coast Guard.
The Fleet Reserve Association will testify about its study on pay reform for mid-career noncommissioned and petty officers.
The U.S. Department of Defense Authorization Act for fiscal year 2000 provided a 4.8 percent military pay raise on January 1, 2000, as well as a system of future percentage pay raises in addition to the traditional cost of living military pay raise.
This legislation also reforms certain rates of monthly basic pay for members of the uniformed services within each pay grade.
The Fleet Reserve Associations study concludes that this reform of the military pay tables fails to adequately compensate mid-career petty officers and noncommissioned officers and has been a growing concern within the enlisted ranks.
The study further finds that these mid-career enlisted personnel are integral to training both enlisted and officers and are a key pathway for bringing people into the enlisted ranks of the Armed Forces.
NATIONAL DISTRESS AND RESPONSE SYSTEM MODERNIZATION PROJECT
Boat U.S. is the largest organization of recreational boaters in the United States, representing over 500,000 members.
Boat U.S. will testify about its concerns over the Coast Guards outdated and inadequate marine distress communications system.
Last November, the Subcommittee held a hearing on the sinking of the MORNING DEW off the coast of South Carolina, and the need to replace the National Distress System.
The National Distress System provides two-way voice communications coverage for the majority of Coast Guard missions in coastal areas and navigable waterways where commercial and recreational traffic exists.
The Coast Guards system monitors the international VHF maritime distress frequency (Channel 16) and acts as the primary command and control network to coordinate Coast Guard search and rescue response activities.
The secondary function of the system is to provide command, control, and communications for Coast Guard missions involving National Security, Maritime Safety, Law Enforcement, and Marine Environmental Protection.
The national distress and communication capability of the existing communications system, built in the 1970s, is inadequate.
The current system is unable to accommodate the significant growth in maritime commerce and recreational boating.
The Presidents request provides $22 million to fund the initial procurement costs for the NDRSM project.
This project will fully modernize the existing VHF-FM National Distress System and provide improved distress alerting and response coordination capability, along with improved command and control for all Coast Guard missions.
The new system will include direction finding, asset tracking, digital selective calling, and multi-channel transmitting and receiving capability.
The future cost of the National Distress System project is estimated at $220 million.
The project is to be completed in fiscal year 2006.
There is concern that the implementation time for the project is too long, since there is a vast disparity between the communications capability that the public thinks is in place and the actual capabilities of the current communications system.
H.R. 820, the Coast Guard Authorization Act of 1999, provides for the implementation of the improved National Distress System by the end of fiscal year 2001.
Specifically, this House-passed bill authorizes an additional $100 million in fiscal year 2000 and $110 million in fiscal year 2001 above the Presidents budget request for this system.
WITNESSES
PANEL I
The Honorable Bart Stupak (D-MI)
PANEL II
John H. Anderson, Jr.
Director Transportaion Issues General Accounting Office
Thomas J. Howard Deputy Assistant Inspector General for Maritime and Departmental Programs Department of Transportation
PANEL III
Charles L. Calkins National Executive Secretary accompanied by Joe Barnes Director Legislative Programs Fleet Reserve Association
Paul Donheffner President National Association of Boating Law Administration
Michael G. Sciulla Vice President and Director of Government and Public Affairs Boat US
