HOME Carl Levin Senate Floor Statement Congressional Record 107th Congress First Session Thursday, July 19, 2001 In Recognition of the Hmong Special Guerrilla Units MR. LEVIN: Mr. President, this weekend members of the Lao-Hmong American Coalition, Michigan Chapter, their friends and supporters will gather in my home state of Michigan to pay tribute to thousands of courageous Hmongs who selflessly fought alongside of and in support of the United States military during the Vietman War.
The efforts of the Hmong Special Guerrilla Units were unknown to the American public during the conflict in Vietnam, and the 6th Annual Commemoration of the U.S. Lao-Hmong Special Guerrilla Units Veterans Recognition Day is part of the important effort to acknowledge the role played by the Hmong people in this war.
MS. STABENOW: My colleague from Michigan is correct in stating that Hmong Special Guerrilla Units played an important role in assisting US efforts in the Vietnam conflict, often times at great sacrifice to themselves.
From 1961 to 1975 it is estimated that about 25,000 young Hmong men and boys were fighting the Communist Lao and North Vietnamese.
The Hmong Special Guerrilla Units were known as the United States' Secret Army, and their valiant efforts ensured the safety and survival of countless U.S. soldiers.
MR. LEVIN: The Senator is correct.
Hmong Special Guerrilla Units actively supported the United States, and risked great loss of life to save downed United States pilots and protect our troops.
While the Special Guerrilla Units may have operated in secret, their efforts, courage and sacrifices have been kept secret for far too long.
The word Hmong means "free people," and celebrations such as this Commemoration will raise awareness of the loyalty, bravery and independence exhibited by the Hmong people.
MS. STABENOW: It is important that the sacrifices made by the Hmong people are honored by all Americans.
These rugged people, from the hills of Laos, paid a great cost because of their love of freedom and their support of the United States.
It is estimated that over 40,000 Hmong died during the Vietnam War.
Thousands more were forced to flee to refugee camps, and approximately 60,000 Hmongs immigrated to United States.
MR. LEVIN: As the Senator from Michigan knows, thousands of Hmongs immigrated to the United States after the Vietnam War.
The transition to life in the United States has not always been easy, but the Hmong community has grown and is prospering.
There are nearly 200,000 Hmong in the United States, and many of them live in our home state of Michigan.
It is important that those who fought in the Special Guerrilla Units are honored for their actions.
These Units, like all those who served the cause of freedom, must know that we appreciate the great sacrifices made by the Special Guerrilla Units.
MS. STABENOW: I would concur with my good friend that events such as the 6th Annual Commemoration of U.S. Lao-Hmong Special Guerrilla Units Veterans Recognition Day play an important role in honoring these courageous veterans.
This celebration will also educate future generations of Americans about the sacrifices made by this independent and freedom loving people.
I know that my Senate colleagues will join myself, and my fellow colleague from the State of Michigan, in commending the Hmong Special Guerrilla Units for their bravery, sacrifice and commitment to freedom.
# # #
[brblgrv.gif]
Carl's Bio* Photo Gallery* Michigan Services* Senate Activity
Press Page* Federal Links* Student Info* Contact Carl
