[smimgd.gif] DESCRIPTION OF RESOURCES CULTURAL RESOURCES Significant cultural resources associated with El Camino Real are archeological and historic sites, cultural landscapes, and sites with high potential for public benefit, which were identified in accordance with the National Trails System Act, sections 12 (1) and 12 (2).
Many of the archeological and historic structures along El Camino Real have a direct thematic relation to the trail.
The sites listed in this section are those that have a significant, direct connection to El Camino Real.
Many sites that are well beyond the Rio Grande valley and are not directly related to the route have not been included in this discussion.
The sites and segments described are those along El Camino Real de Tierra Adentro from El Paso, Texas, to San Juan, San Gabriel, and Santa Fe, New Mexico.
Archeological Resources
El Camino Real has been described as the longest and most extensive "archeological site complex" of New Mexico.
It is a major archeological resource that provides new light into significant periods of the history of New Mexico and the United States.
The artifacts, campsites, and structures that investigators have identified along the trail provide a unique view into New Mexican history and the lives of those who made it.
The sites identified in this section are not managed for public use.
These resources, which are on both public and private lands, potentially could be made available for public use, provided such use could be managed to avoid resource degradation.
Most of the archeological investigations (Marshall and Walt 1984; Marshall 1991a, 1991b) have focused on the period after 1598.
One of the most extensive studies of El Camino Real was conducted by Michael Marshall (1991a, 1991b) through a grant from the New Mexico Historic Preservation Division.
The application for the grant was prepared by the Camino Real Project, Inc.
This investigation, which focused on 67 miles (108 kilometers) of the trail, uncovered information to document 39 sites and identified 127 road segments.
Most of this work concentrated on three geographic areas, La Jornada del Muerto, Bosque del Apache, and the regions of La Bajada and Santa Fe.
Marshall's investigation revealed evidence of early colonial use.
One of the earliest sites associated with the colonial period is Las Bocas encampment, where Glaze E Pecos Polychrome and olive jar ceramics (dating from 1598 to 1625) were found.
Other pre-Pueblo Revolt sites have been found in La Jornada del Muerto near Paraje de San Diego and Rincon Arroyo (see segments 6 and 7 of the map of El Camino Real in the United States in the "Alternatives" chapter).
La Majada North road is another area where scattered artifacts document the prehistoric, colonial, Mexican, and territorial use of El Camino Real.
Prehistoric early Glaze period ceramics were found over the mesa, an area that apparently was farmed during this time.
Three ceramics clusters from the colonial period also have been identified: two Tewa polychrome from ca. 1650 to 1725 and a plain red soup bowl.
A variety of territorial period artifacts have also been found along the road: hole-in-cap cans, sardine cans, bottle glass, and sherds of ironstone.
An important archeological site is the Paraje de San Diego, near the southern end of La Jornada del Muerto.
It was an important campsite where northbound travelers prepared for the journey and southbound travelers rested.
A wide range of colonial period ceramics have been found at this site.
This sensitive site, which appears to be in an undisturbed condition, has been recommended for further archeological investigation.
The Archaeological Conservancy, a nonprofit preservation organization based in Albuquerque, has acquired several sites that are important to the history of El Camino Real.
San Jose de las Huertas is considered to be the best preserved Spanish colonial village in New Mexico.
This 28-acre site north of Albuquerque, in the vicinity of Placitas, was occupied from 1764 to 1823.
The walled village contains as many as 10 undisturbed house mounds.
The Archaeological Conservancy also owns what is described as "El Camino Real" site.
This Spanish colonial ranch is one of numerous sites known to date from the colonial period in New Mexico history.
The site, with four rooms and a circular torreón (tower) feature, was built just south of Santa Fe along the Santa Fe River between 1610 and 1680.
Historic Resources
Several national historic landmarks and sites that are listed on the National Register of Historic Places lie within the corridor of El Camino Real.
However, only some of them are strongly associated with the development and history of the road.
It is quite possible that additional research will be necessary to more clearly establish the connection of additional properties and sites to significant aspects of the history of El Camino Real de Tierra Adentro.
The development of El Camino Real is closely tied to the many prehistoric and historic American Indian groups who lived along the corridor and who used it for centuries.
Because of the magnitude of the potential sites, only those with strong thematic relationships with the trail have been included.
This section contains descriptions of the historic sites and segments of El Camino Real that are publicly accessible, are closely related to the history of the road, exhibit distinctive physical characteristics, and have potential for historic/recreation enjoyment.
The "high potential" sites and segments described here are those on the part of El Camino Real de Tierra Adentro that runs from El Paso through San Juan de los Caballeros and San Gabriel de los Españoles to Santa Fe.
El Paso Missions Trail.
The El Paso Missions trail, which is in El Paso County, Texas is today an auto tour following contemporary roadways.
It links Missions Socorro and Isleta with Presidio San Elizario.
This segment offers the opportunity to experience the interaction of various themes of importance in the history of El Camino Real: the Spaniards' missionary zeal; the ethnographic history of New Mexico, particularly the Pueblo Rebellion; and the close relationship between military and religious institutions in a rural/urban milieu.
All of the missions are listed on the National Register of Historic Places.
The Texas Historical Commission is in the process of completing the nomination packet for the San Elizario National Historic District.
The district includes more than 40 contributing properties, including both buildings and archeological sites.
El Paso to Mesilla.
This segment from El Paso, Texas, to Mesilla, New Mexico, is mostly in Doña Ana County, New Mexico.
Mesilla, 2 miles from Las Cruces, is a farming community that was officially established in 1850.
The Mesilla Plaza is a national historic landmark and a historic district.
Mesilla became a commercial center of trade activities along El Camino Real during the second half of the 19th century, and an important shipping point for ore from the Pinos Altos and Silver City mines after 1870.
Several properties related to El Camino Real in Las Cruces are listed on the national register.
Among the most important are the Nestor Armijo House and the Mesquite Street original townsite historic district.
Armijo was a leading New Mexican merchant who lived in Chihuahua from 1865 to 1876.
His commercial operations were among the most important along El Camino Real during the second half of the 19th century.
Mesilla to Paraje de San Diego.
Fort Selden, in Doña Ana County, New Mexico, a historic site about 15 miles north of Las Cruces, has been listed on the National Register of Historic Places.
Troops were stationed here between 1865 and 1879 to protect El Camino Real travelers from Indian activity.
The fort is an important architectural landmark in an area where visible remnants of El Camino Real are scarce.
This area offers excellent views of the Rio Grande Valley with its irrigated fields of cotton and chili and its pecan orchards.
Paraje de San Diego to Engle to Paraje Fray Cristóbal.
This segment, in Doña Ana and Sierra Counties, encompasses the southern half of La Jornada del Muerto, one of the most important remaining resources associated with El Camino Real, and the privately owned northern half of La Jornada del Muerto.
Paraje Fray Cristóbal, which marks the northern end of La Jornada del Muerto, is significant because it was the area where travelers camped before entering La Jornada del Muerto on their way south and where they rested after the stressful crossing.
Like Paraje de San Diego, Paraje Robledo was situated at the southernmost end of the Jornada del Muerto and was a place where travelers rested and where their draft animals had an opportunity to prepare for or recover from the demands of the journey.
Fort Craig, which is listed in the National Register of Historic Places, is the northern anchor for La Jornada del Muerto.
Fort Craig was built by Col. E. V. Sumner in 1851 north of its present site.
Its purpose was to protect the lower Rio Grande Valley, but three years later the troops moved south to its current location on the west side of the Rio Grande, about 35 miles south of Socorro.
Fort Craig was established to provide rest and resupply for northbound travelers after their journey through the Jornada del Muerto and to allow southbound travelers to prepare for the journey through the Jornada.
Fort Craig became known during the Civil War as the place to which the Union soldiers returned after the battle of Valverde.
Today the site consists of the remains of walls, foundations, and connecting courtyard paths.
Fray Cristóbal to Socorro.
Bosque del Apache is a wildlife refuge managed by the U. S. Fish and Wildlife Service.
It spans the Rio Grande between San Antonio and San Marcial in Socorro County.
This site, which is now flooded by Elephant Butte Lake, was a favorite camping place described by many early travelers.
In 1845 governor Manuel Armijo granted the land to Antonio Sandoval, one of New Mexico's most successful sheep breeders.
Socorro contains several sites associated with El Camino Real that are listed on the National Register of Historic Places.
A mining center between 1867 and 1890, Socorro was for a while the largest city in the territory.
Important shipments of ore were transported north along El Camino Real during this period.
Socorro to Isleta Pueblo.
The area of present-day Valencia County is strongly linked to El Camino Real's developments, particularly after 1821.
Several properties in this area are closely associated with the historic trail, among them the Felipe Chávez house.
Chávez was one of New Mexico's leading merchants, trading with both Mexico and the United States during the second half of the 19th century.
Tomé also is in Valencia County.
The name Tomé can be traced to Tomé Domínguez de Mendoza, who was the quartermaster of the New Mexican governor at the time of the Pueblo Rebellion.
He built a house near the volcanic hill known as Cerro de Tomé before the rebellion.
He was among those who fled south, but he never returned.
The area attracted many settlers and became well known because it was well cultivated and had fine irrigated fields, and livestock grazed on ample pastures.
Aerial photography from the 1930s indicates that a branch of El Camino Real skirted the upper east end of the hill (Scurlock, Gerow, and Kammer 1995; Marshall 1991a, 1991b).
Los Lunas is another Valencia County community closely linked to the trail.
It is named after the Luna family, people who were very influential during much of New Mexico's history.
An important site in this community listed on the National Register of Historic Places is the Tranquilino Luna-Otero house.
The Luna-Otero family was involved in the economic activities typical of merchants who for generations used El Camino Real to transport goods into New Mexico and to export local products.
Isleta Pueblo is 13 miles south of Albuquerque, in Bernalillo County.
The word isleta means small island.
When the Spanish first arrived in this area, the Rio Grande had overflowed its banks, and the pueblo was literally on an island, with the river curving around both sides.
During the Pueblo Rebellion of 1680 the Isleta Indians gave shelter to the fleeing Spaniards who came here.
According to Spanish records, some joined them in their flight south to present-day El Paso, where they established Ysleta Mission.
The inhabitants of Ysleta del Sur are descendants of the Isleta Indians, but they maintain that they were taken prisoner and forced to accompany the Spaniards.
The church at Isleta, built in 1613, is believed to have been built from the surviving walls of the burned-out pre-revolt church of San Antonio De Padua.
It is one of the oldest churches in New Mexico, and it is still in use.
Isleta Pueblo to Bernalillo.
Atrisco is on the west side of the Rio Grande south of Albuquerque, in Bernalillo County.
It was the site of a common river crossing.
Until recently the Atrisco land grant was one of a few relatively intact Spanish colonial grants.
It has been continuously owned by the original settlers and their heirs since the 17th century (Metzgar 1977, 269).
Part of this grant now lies within the boundaries of Petroglyph National Monument.
It contains more than 15,000 prehistoric and historic petroglyphs, remnants of sheep corrals and walls, and the remains of a 1,000- room Pueblo dating from 1300 to 1600.
Albuquerque was established in 1706.
Its site was selected in part because it was on El Camino Real, near a good crossing of the river (Atrisco), and directly west of Tijeras Pass, which joined the settlement with the eastern plains.
Bernalillo to La Bajada.
The segment of the trail that goes from Bernalillo to La Bajada passes through Sandoval and Santa Fe Counties.
Bernalillo, settled in 1698, marks the approximate site of Coronado's headquarters in 1540-1542 and the point from which he departed for Kansas in 1541.
Isolated Spanish ranches and haciendas existed in the vicinity before the Pueblo Rebellion of 1680.
Situated in a rich part of the Rio Grande Valley, Bernalillo became the focus of commercial activities associated with El Camino Real.
It was the home of José Leandro Perea, a leading New Mexican merchant and the wealthiest man in the territory during the second half of the 19th century.
The town is now a trading center and shipping point for cattle and lumber from the Jemez country.
La Bajada to Santa Fe.
The segment of the trail from La Bajada to Santa Fe lies in Santa Fe County.
Three roughly parallel routes were used by travelers along El Camino Real to reach the capital city: Las Bocas Road, La Bajada Hill Road, and Galisteo Road.
Las Bocas Road.
For most of the colonial period the main route followed the Santa Fe River through Las Bocas and up Ciénega Creek, over Cieneguilla, and up the river to the location of the capital.
This route was first used by Don Pedro de Peralta, the founder of Santa Fe, and the Spanish settlers who accompanied him in 1610.
La Bajada Road.
Sometime before 1776 another branch (La Bajada Hill) came into use.
It branched off the main road above the head of Las Bocas Canyon and paralleled the canyon to La Bajada Hill, traversed the hill, and then connected with the main road from Las Bocas canyon.
Galisteo Road.
The third route crossed the Rio Grande at San Felipe (4 miles north of Algodones), turned northeast and followed the colonial road from Galisteo and Santa Domingo as far as Los Alamitos (on the Galisteo River).
From there it turned north and went through Cerro de la Cruz and Bonanza Hill.
The colonial road from Galisteo to Santa Fe was called the "wagon road" because it was the preferred route of the mission supply trains.
La Bajada Village is a small community that was a freight depot and trading center for freighters during the 19th century.
Incoming freighters had to travel a winding route down the face of the nearby black basalt cliff, bracing their wagon wheels with boulders when they stopped.
Northbound caravans rested before ascending the Santa Fe River Canyon, one of the more difficult passages of the entire route.
The exact location of the pueblo of La Ciénega is undetermined, but it may have been in the vicinity of present La Ciénega village, which is southwest of Santa Fe.
During the 18th and 19th centuries El Rancho de las Golondrinas was a day's travel from Santa Fe.
It was the first night's stop for southbound travelers or the last stop before Santa Fe for those going north.
Miguel Vega y Coca acquired the ranch as a royal purchase in 1710.
Today El Rancho de las Golondrinas is operated by a charitable trust as a living history museum to depict the essential elements of Spanish colonial culture.
The original ranch buildings have been supplemented by bringing vintage log and adobe cabins from other northern villages of New Mexico.
Three reconstructed carretas (wagons) are also on the site.
Santa Fe.
The capital of New Mexico was founded by Pedro de Peralta in 1610 at a spot known to the Pueblo Indians as Poga, or "the place of the shell beads near the water."
Ruins, almost obliterated when the Spaniards came, showed that it was once the site of a Tano Indian village.
From the beginning the relations with the area, Indians were troubled in spite of the heavy missionary effort.
During the Pueblo Revolt the Spanish colonists sought refuge in the Palace of the Governors but soon fled to El Paso del Norte.
The reconquest of the town by Vargas strengthened its character as a center for government.
After 1821 Santa Fe became a major commercial center that linked the United States and Europe through the Santa Fe Trail with Mexico by the route of El Camino Real de Tierra Adentro.
Santa Fe to San Juan Pueblo.
North from Santa Fe, the trail to San Juan Pueblo passes through Santa Fe and Rio Arriba counties.
Tesuque Pueblo was built around A.D. 1300 about 3 miles east of its present site.
Tesuque Pueblo leaders figured prominently in the 1680 Pueblo Revolt, and Spanish domination was not reestablished here until 1694.
Before the revolt the Tesuque mission was known as San Lorenzo.
The pueblo is listed on the National Register of Historic Places.
The Tewa-speaking people of San Ildefonso Pueblo trace their ancestry to an area north of Mesa Verde in Colorado.
The pueblo, which was the largest of the Tewa villages, apparently served as a Spanish expedition headquarters in 1593.
In 1598 Oñate gave the name Boue to the old village, which was about a mile from the present pueblo.
After Tewa leaders were accused of bewitching a priest in 1676, the pueblo became a major participant in the Pueblo Revolt.
The San Ildefonso residents barricaded themselves on Black Mesa and held out against the Spanish until 1694.
Santa Cruz de la Cañada was the second Spanish village established in New Mexico.
Founded in 1695 by Diego de Vargas on the site of an earlier pueblo, the villa was originally known as La Villa Nueva de Santa Cruz de los Españoles del Rey Nuestro Señor Carlos Segundo (the new village of Santa Cruz of the Spaniards of Our King Charles II).
Families from Zacatecas, Mexico, settled the villa.
Abandoned for a time because of inadequate military protection, it was resettled in 1706, reaching a population of more than 2,000 by the early 1800s.
Santa Cruz was the locale for the Rio Arriba Rebellion of 1837 and played a role in the Taos Revolt of 1847.
San Juan Pueblo, the largest and northernmost of the six Tewa-speaking pueblos, is on the east bank of the Rio Grande northeast of the convergence of the Rio Grande and the Rio Chama.
Originally known by its Indian name of O'ke, the pueblo was renamed San Juan de los Caballeros by Oñate in 1598.
Oñate displaced the pueblo's Tewa inhabitants, confiscated their possessions, and moved in his men and 7,000 head of livestock.
After the Spaniards moved on to San Gabriel, the Tewas returned to their looted village.
The pueblo, which was later rebuilt, still bears the name Oñate gave it.
Perhaps the most famous of the Indian leaders who planned the 1680 revolt was a San Juan medicine man named Popé.
A mission church built in San Juan after the reconquest stood until 1913, and some of the original adobe homes are still extant.
The pueblo is listed on the National Register of Historic Places.
Yunque (San Gabriel de Yunque-Ouinge) is on the west side of the Rio Grande, directly across from San Juan.
Excavations conducted in the 1960s clearly demonstrate that the Spanish occupied the pueblo for a time (1598 to 1610).
San Juan itself, in the same location as today, housed the Spanish for a few months in 1598 until they arranged to make use of the abandoned pueblo on the west bank.
Cultural Landscapes
Further study of the cultural landscapes along El Real Camino Real would be conducted as part of a comprehensive management plan.
Examples of segments and sites that may have significance as cultural landscapes are the Jornada del Muerto, Tomé Hill, and the Santa Fe River Canyon, which are discussed in the "Natural Resources" section.
Like Paraje de San Diego, Paraje Robledo was situated at the southernmost end of the Jornada del Muerto and was a place where travelers rested and where their draft animals had an opportunity to prepare for or recover from the demands of the journey.
NATURAL RESOURCES
Ecoregions on El Camino Real
The part of El Camino Real de Tierra Adentro in the United States passes through three ecological and physiographic regions known as ecoregions (as defined by Omernik 1995, and FS, USDA 1980).The Chihuahuan Desert ecoregion begins roughly at Belen and extends southward through most of central and southern New Mexico and west Texas to the Mexican border.
The New Mexican Plateau, which starts north of Belen, includes the trail corridor to Santa Fe.
Some stretches of the Upper Road to San Juan Pueblo fall within the Rocky Mountain Forest ecoregion.
Chihuahuan Desert.
The land-surface form of the Chihuahuan Desert ecoregion is mostly desert.
The only permanent streams are a few large rivers that originate in more humid provinces.
The Rio Grande and the Pecos River and a few of their larger tributaries are the only perennial streams.
The area has undulating plains with elevations near 4,000 feet (1,200 m), from which relatively isolated mountains rise 2,000 to 5,000 feet (600 to 1,500 m).
Washes are dry most of the year but fill with water after summer thunderstorms.
Basins that have no outlet drain into shallow playa lakes, which dry up during rainless periods.
Small whirlwinds constantly play over these dry playas when they are heated by the summer sun.
Extensive dunes of silica sand are also common.
In a few places there are dunes of gypsum sand, such as White Sands.
Small beds and isolated buttes of blackish lava occur in scattered areas.
The climate is distinctly arid, and spring and early summer are extremely dry.
Summer rains usually begin in July and continue through October.
The summer rains are torrential storms, mostly local.
The northern part of the province also receives winter rains; these are more gentle and more widespread.
The average annual temperature ranges from 50 to 65 F (10 to 18 C).
Summers are long and hot.
Winters are short, but temperatures may fall below freezing for brief periods.
The characteristic vegetation is a number of shrubs, most of them thorny.
These shrubs frequently grow in open stands but sometimes form low, closed thickets.
Short grass grows in association with the shrubs in many places.
On deep soils, mesquite is often the dominant plant.
A few cottonwoods and other trees grow beside the widely separated rivers.
Creosote bush covers great areas in its characteristic open stand; it is especially common on gravel fans.
The ocotillo is conspicuous on rocky slopes; the ceniza shrub dominates the slopes leading down to the Rio Grande.
Junipers and piñons are limited to rocky outcrops.
Some isolated mountains rise high enough to carry a belt of oak and juniper woodland.
Pines grow around the oaks on a few of the highest mountains, but locally they sometimes grow in nearly pure stands.
Soils in the northern portions are primarily Aridisols, but both Aridisols and Entisols are present in the south.
Pronghorn antelope and mule deer are the most widely distributed large game animals.
The common white-tailed deer is present in Texas.
The collared peccary, or javelina, is common in the southern part of the region.
Scaled quail and Gambel's quail are present in most of the area.
Black-tailed jackrabbit, desert cottontail, kangaroo rat, wood rat, and numerous smaller rodents compete with domestic and wild herbivores for available forage and are preyed upon by coyote, bobcat, golden eagle, great horned owl, red-tailed hawk, and ferruginous hawk.
New Mexico Plateau.
The land-surface form of the New Mexico Plateau ecoregion includes tablelands having moderate to considerable relief.
The elevations of the plateau tops range from 5,000 to 7,000 feet (1,500 to 2,100 m).
Local relief is from 500 to more than 3,000 feet (150 to 900 m) in some of the deeper canyons that dissect these surfaces.
In some sections, volcanic mountains rise 1,000 to 3,000 feet (300 to 900 m) above the plateau surface.
Stream valleys are narrow and widely spaced.
Because of its generally high altitude, the climate of this ecoregion is characterized by cold winters.
Summer days are usually hot, but nights are cool; accordingly, the diurnal variation in temperature is considerable.
The average annual temperatures are 40 to 55 F (4 to 13 C) and decrease as altitude increases.
The average annual precipitation is about 20 inches (500 mm) except in the high mountains; some parts of the province receive less than 10 inches (250mm).
Summer rains are thunderstorms, but ordinary rains come in winter.
Vegetational zones are conspicuous, but they are not uniform over the whole province, nor even in adjacent areas.
In the lowest zone, which is covered by arid grasslands, the short grass sod seldom covers the ground completely, and there are many bare areas.
Xeric shrubs often grow in open stands among the grasses.
Sagebrush is dominant over extensive areas.
A profusion of annuals and perennials blooms during the summer rainy season.
At low elevations in the south, several kind of cacti and yucca are common.
Cottonwoods and, more rarely, other tress grow along some of the permanent streams.
The woodland zone is the most extensive.
It is dominated by open stands of piñon pine and several species of juniper.
Between the trees the ground is sparsely covered by grama, other grasses, herbs, and various shrubs.
The montane zone extends over considerable areas on the high plateaus and mountains, but it is a much smaller area than the piñon-juniper zone.
Vegetation varies considerably over the different parts of the province.
In the southern part, ponderosa pine is the dominant forest tree.
Douglas-fir either is associated with ponderosa pine or grows in more sheltered locations or at higher elevations.
The subalpine zone is characterized by abundance of Engelmann spruce and subalpine fir.
Since only a few isolated mountains rise above timberline, the alpine zone is not extensive.
Soils found in this ecoregion are Entisols along the floodplains of major streams and Aridisols on the plateau tops, older terraces, and alluvial fans.
Badlands of rough broken land are extensive in the mountains and on plateaus.
The major mammals in this ecoregion are mule deer, mountain lion, coyote, and bobcat.
Elk are locally important.
Pronghorn antelope are the primary large mammal in the arid grasslands.
Smaller species include wood rat, white-footed mouse, cliff chipmunk, jackrabbit, cottontail, rock squirrel, porcupine, and gray fox.
The ring-tailed cat and spotted skunk occur rarely.
The most abundant birds are plain titmouse, scrub jay, red-tailed hawk, golden eagle, red-shafted flicker, piñon jay, lead-colored bushtit, and rock wren.
Summer residents include chipping sparrows, night hawks, black-throated gray warblers, northern cliff swallows, lark sparrows, and mourning doves.
Common winter residents are pink-sided junco, dark-eyed junco, white-breasted nuthatch, mountain bluebird, robin, and Steller's jay. Turkeys are locally abundant during the winter.
Reptiles in this ecoregion include the horned lizard, collared lizard, and rattlesnake.
Rocky Mountain Forest.
The land-surface forms in the Rocky Mountain Forest ecoregion are rugged glaciated mountains that rise to more than13,000 feet (4,000 m).
Local relief is between 3,000 feet (900 m) and 7,000 feet (2,100 m).
Several sections have intermontane depressions of "parks" that have floors less than 6,000 feet (1,800 m) in altitude.
Despite considerable variation in climate with altitude, precipitation falls in winter in this semiarid steppe regime.
The total precipitation is moderate, but it is greater than on the plains to the west and the east.
In the highest mountains, a considerable part of the annual precipitation is snow; however, permanent snowfields and glaciers cover only relatively small areas.
The bases of these mountains receive only 10 to 20 inches (250 to 500 mm) of rainfall per year.
At higher elevations, precipitation increases to 40 inches (1,000 mm), and temperatures decrease.
Climate is influenced by the prevailing west winds and the general north-south orientation of the mountain ranges.
East slopes are much drier than west slopes.
Within this region, the individual mountain ranges have similar east-west slope differences.
Average annual temperatures are mainly 35 to 45 F (2 to 7 C), but they can reach 50 F (10 C) in the lower valleys.
Well-marked vegetational zones are a striking feature.
Their distribution is controlled mostly by a combination of altitude, latitude, direction of prevailing winds, and slope exposure.
Generally, the various zones are at higher altitudes in the southern part of the province than in the northern.
The uppermost zone, the alpine, is characterized by alpine tundra and the absence of trees.
Next below is the subalpine zone, dominated in most places by Engelmann spruce and subalpine fir.
The montane zone, immediately below the subalpine, is characterized by the dominance of ponderosa pine and Douglas-fir.
Frequently there is alternation in the occurrence of these two trees; ponderosa pine is dominant on the lower, drier, more exposed slopes and Douglas-fir on the higher, moister, more sheltered ones.
After fire in the subalpine zone and in the upper part of the montane zone, the original forest trees are usually replaced by aspen or lodgepole pine.
Grass, often mixed with sagebrush, regularly covers the ground under open ponderosa pine forests and some treeless areas.
These treeless openings usually are small, and they often alternate, according to slope exposure, with ponderosa pine forest.
At the lower edge of the montane zone, they may be continuous with the adjacent grass and sagebrush belt.
Below the montane belt is the foothill (woodland) zone.
Dry rocky slopes in this zone often have a growth of shrubs in which mountain-mahogany and several kinds of scrub oak are conspicuous.
Along the border of the Colorado Plateau, the ponderosa pine and piñon-juniper associations frequently alternate extensively according to exposure of the slopes.
Unforested parks are a conspicuous feature of this province.
Many are dominated by grasses, but some are covered largely by sagebrush and other shrubs.
Soils range from Molisols and Alfisols in the montane zone to Aridisols in the foothill zone.
In addition, because of steep slopes and recent glaciation, there are areas of Inceptisols.
Common large mammals in this ecoregion are elk, deer, mountain lion, bobcat, and black bear.
Grizzly bear and moose are in the northern portions.
Small mammals include mice, squirrels, martens, chipmunks, and bushy-tailed rats.
Hawks and owls inhabit most of the region.
The numerous, more common birds are chestnut-backed chickadee, red-breasted nuthatch, gray jay, and Steller's jay.
Blue and ruffed grouse are the most common upland game birds.
Natural Landmarks
Natural landmarks are the geographic features that have played an important role in guiding travelers and traders who lived and worked along the trail.
The Rio Grande Valley is the predominant natural feature associated with El Camino Real in Texas and New Mexico.
The Rio Grande Valley is defined by imposing mountain ranges.
Among the most prominent are the Franklin and Organ Mountains, the San Andres, the Black Range, the San Mateos, the Magdalena, Ladron Peak, the Manzanos, the Sandias, the Ortiz, the Jemez, and the Sangre de Cristo Mountains.
In addition to the mountains along the Rio Grande Valley, there are several other interesting features along El Camino Real: the Jornada del Muerto, Tomé Hill, and the Santa Fe River Canyon.
La Jornada del Muerto, stretching for almost 80 miles, is a segment of El Camino Real.
It is framed by the San Andres Mountains to the east and the Caballo Mountains to the west.
The mountains frame an almost pristine landscape -- an excellent example of the Chihuahuan desert landscape that contains abundant evidence of its use throughout the period of significance.
It retains a substantial amount of integrity in some stretches, which are evocative of the scenery travelers experienced centuries ago.
The only intrusions on the landscape are a periodic glimpse of an interstate highway.
Noise from the highway and the railroad tracks disrupt the solitude and the feeling that the bright sweeping views produce.
The present lack of shelter and water highlight the remoteness of the area and recall the anxiety that many travelers experienced when they were getting ready to cross La Jornada del Muerto.
Along this stretch of the trail, shallow ruts are often visible amidst the typical Chihuahuan desert vegetation: mesquite, yucca, creosote bush, four-wing salt bush, and snakeweed.
Basins with no outlet drain into shallow playas.
Dust devils hover over these playas during the hot summer months.
Sand dunes are common, and in a few locations are small beds and isolated buttes of black lava.
After the July-October torrential summer rains, the sparse brown and ocher vegetation experiences a dramatic change.
Yellow, pink, red, and white flowers appear almost overnight, and bright green grasses invade the normally bare soil.
The usually dry arroyos fill with water.
In some areas of La Jornada, reddish soils highlight the greenness of the desert vegetation and the darkness of the lava outcroppings.
Tomé Hill (Cerro de Tomé) is in a transition zone between the Chihuahuan Desert and the New Mexico Plateau.
This distinctive site, 5 miles north of Belen, rises about 350 feet from the valley floor.
The vegetation includes mostly four-wing saltbush and scattered mesquite, as well as desert shrubs.
It is much more sparse than in the southern stretches of the Chihuahua desert; in many areas it is found principally along the road.
The gray-brownish sandy soils that predominate in this landscape highlight even more the greenness of the lush vegetation that grows along the acequias (irrigation ditches) and the Rio Grande.
The original route of El Camino Real followed by Oñate in 1598 passed around the base of the hill, which subsequently became a significant landmark for travelers on the road.
The hill itself, which has been a Catholic shrine, remains a site for pilgrimage, with several crosses on its crest.
Petroglyphs in this area are similar to those found elsewhere along the Rio Grande.
Scattered ruins and an occasional old homestead lend a picturesque character to the area.
The Santa Fe Canyon segment (formerly called Cañon de las Bocas) a stretch of El Camino Real along the Santa Fe river near the capital of the New Mexico, has highly attractive visual qualities.
This area, mostly in public ownership, crosses a region that typifies the New Mexico plateau.
The most salient feature of this landscape is the tablelands with moderate to sizable relief.
The area also contains large basalt blocks that were cleared from a bench surface and placed in two parallel lines adjacent to the road.
The canyon is fairly narrow and not particularly deep.
Along the stream that flows year-round are a few sizable cottonwoods and the typical riparian vegetation found in permanent streams in this ecoregion.
Grasses seldom cover the ground completely; many areas remain bare.
Sagebrush, rabbit brush, four-wing saltbush, snakeweed, cholla, and prickly pear are prevalent in the flats or in disturbed areas.
The ground is blanketed with flowers during the rainy summer season.
Several species of juniper cover the north-facing hillsides.
The canyon, which has Pueblo ruins at its southern end, retains a degree of integrity, particularly considering its proximity to Santa Fe.
Trail ruts are important character-defining features of the site, but the most impressive feature is the steepness of the canyon, which early trail users had to negotiate.
The imposing entrance to the canyon can be seen from miles away to the south.
SOCIOECONOMIC RESOURCES
The United States part of El Camino Real crosses El Paso County, Texas, and the New Mexico counties of Dona Ana, Sierra, Socorro, Valencia, Bernalillo, Sandoval, Santa Fe, Rio Arriba, and Taos.
The route passes through three metropolitan statistical areas (MSAs) in New Mexico -- Las Cruces, Albuquerque, and Santa Fe, and the Texas MSA of El Paso.
The combined population of the four MSAs is about 1,595,500.
Across the border from El Paso is Juarez, the fifth largest city in Mexico, the 1990 population of which was 1,286,700.
More than two-thirds of the population of New Mexico lives along the route of El Camino Real.
Outside of these statistical areas, the route is almost entirely undeveloped.
About 38% of New Mexico's population is Hispanic and 10 % is American Indian.
Because of the state's border location, there is a high immigration rate from Mexico and Central America
New Mexico's economy is heavily dependent on government expenditures, both military and private.
Other active sectors are mining, oil and gas extraction, agriculture, and science and technology.
The moderate climate, cultural diversity, and public lands provide the basis for New Mexico's tourism industry.
El Paso's economy is based on serving the region's livestock and agricultural industries, as well as on the production and processing of oil and gas.
LANDOWNERSHIP AND LAND USE
The route from San Juan Pueblo, New Mexico, to El Paso, Texas, is approximately 400 miles long.
About 55% of this route is privately owned; the rest is divided among federal and state agencies and American Indian lands.
Landownership is detailed in table 1.
Segments of the trail pass through or near to the cities of Santa Fe, Albuquerque, Socorro, Las Cruces, and El Paso.
These urban areas total approximately 14% (58 miles) of the total length of the trail from San Juan Pueblo to El Paso (see table 2).
Approximately 16% (60 miles) of this distance is in rural development and/or farming.
Most of the trail (about 77%) is in a less developed condition, with most of this land being in private ownership.
Table 1: Landownership
San Juan Pueblo, NM-El Paso, TX
Ownership/Management
Total Mileage Owned/Managed
% Mileage Owned/Managed
Private
222
55
State
24
6
Federal/BLM
57
14
Federal/FS
11
3
Federal/USFWS
28
7
American Indian
62
15
Total
404
100
Abbreviations: BLM = Bureau of Land Management, U.S. Department of the Interior; FS = Forest Service, U.S. Department of Agriculture; USFWS = U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, U.S. Department of the Interior.
Table 2: Land Use
San Juan Pueblo, NM-El Paso, TX
Land Use/Land Cover
Total Mileage
% of Trail
Urban areas
65
16
Agriculture
45
12
Rangeland
212
52
Forestland
69
17
Water/wetlands
13
3
Total
404
100
PUBLIC USE SITES
There are many existing public use sites along the El Camino Real corridor (see appendix E) -- state parks, state historic sites, state monuments, historical highway markers, welcome centers, rest stops, recreation areas, campgrounds, picnic areas, national monuments, and various museums.
Many of these public use areas (such as historic sites, historical highway markers, and museums) have some thematic relationship either directly or indirectly to El Camino Real.
Others (such as highway rest stops) do not relate directly to the history of El Camino Real but could offer opportunities for the public to appreciate the trail.
These sites could provide many opportunities for the public to learn about, see, and experience El Camino Real.
Not all public use sites would qualify as officially certified or Federal components of a national historic trail (see "Alternative 1" for a discussion of certified sites).
American Indian Pueblos
A number of American Indian Pueblos are closely linked to the history and evolution of El Camino Real: Ysleta del Sur, Isleta, Acoma, Laguna, Zuni, Jemez, Sandia, Santa Ana, San Felipe, Santo Domingo, Cochiti, Tesuque, Pojoaque, Nambe, San Ildefonso, Santa Clara, and San Juan.
American Indians, particularly the Pueblos, established routes for trade and communications long before the arrival of the Spanish.
These trade routes are what Spanish travelers later followed as El Camino Real.
Pueblos provided food, goods, and services to the Spanish as they traveled and settled along El Camino Real.
The cultural interaction of the Spanish and American Indian cultures is apparent at the Pueblo missions and throughout rural New Mexico.
Some pueblos are open to the public year round and encourage tourism and recreation.
Others are open only by reservation and during special events (feast day celebrations and dances), and some are closed to the public.
Ysleta del Sur Pueblo and Mission.
Ysleta del Sur, in the middle Rio Grande Valley, is the southernmost home of the Tigua people.
Isleta Pueblo provided a gathering place for Spaniards retreating from the Pueblo Revolt in the north.
In 1613 the Franciscans founded the first mission at Isleta.
The mission that stands today was erected in 1710, using some of the original mission walls.
Santa Clara Pueblo and Puyé Cliff Dwellings and Communal House Ruins.
Santa Clara people are living descendants of the Puyé cliff dwellers.
Tours of the pueblo, the historic church, and Puyé Ruins are available.
The Anasazi settled in the cliffs of the Pajarito Plateau late in the 12th century.
The area was abandoned in the 1500s because of severe drought.
The cliff ruins are more than a mile long and one to three stories high.
The house ruins on the mesa top are believed to have contained more than 1,200 rooms.
San Juan Pueblo.
In 1598 Juan de Oñate named this pueblo San Juan de los Caballeros.
In the same year Oñate also occupied a pueblo across the river, naming it San Gabriel de los Españoles.
San Gabriel was declared the first Spanish capital of New Mexico.
All that remains of San Gabriel is a cross, a stone marker and mounds.
Nearly 100 of the original 700-year-old homes still stand as part of San Juan Pueblo.
National Parks
The National Park Service manages the Santa Fe National Historic Trail, whose route extends 1, 203 miles from a point near Franklin, Missouri, through Kansas, Oklahoma, and Colorado to Santa Fe, New Mexico.
From 1821 to the completion of the railroad in 1880, the Santa Fe Trail played a critical role in the westward expansion of the United States and was an important two-way avenue for commerce and cultural exchanges.
There are about 50 certified sites for public use and recreation along the trail.
National Forests
The Forest Service, U.S. Department of Agriculture, manages Cibola National Forest and Santa Fe National Forest.
The mountain ranges in these national forests are landscape-defining features that characterize the trail and define the Rio Grande Valley.
The Sangre de Cristo, Sandia, Manzano, Magdalena, and San Mateo mountain ranges are landmarks that were used by El Camino Real travelers for centuries.
Lands Managed by Bureau of Land Management
The Bureau of Land Management, U.S. Department of the Interior, manages the Organ Mountains Recreation Area and Fort Craig.
The Organ Mountains are part of the San Andres Range.
The San Andres Range defines La Jornada del Muerto and the Rio Grande Valley.
The area provides a vantage point from which El Camino Real can be seen.
Both archeological and historic sites related to El Camino Real can be found in the Organ Mountains; among them Aguirre's Spring.
The mountains were a landmark referred to in diaries and descriptions written by travelers of El Camino Real.
Fort Craig lies at the northern end of La Jornada del Muerto.
The fort was established in the 1850s to protect settlers and travelers along El Camino Real.
Self guided walking tours of the fort ruins are available.
National Wildlife Refuges
The U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, U.S. Department of the Interior, manages Bosque del Apache Wildlife Refuge.
In this refuge, 57,191 acres of marsh, grasslands, and desert uplands provide habitat for some 320 bird species and more than 115 other animal species, which can be seen on a 15-mile automobile tour.
The east bank of the refuge contains numerous braided and parallel road alignments, which are the old roadbed of El Camino Real.
This part of the refuge also includes trail-related archeological sites (Marshall 1991a, 1991b), which are not open to the public.
Many of these sites may have been occupied during the early decades of use of El Camino Real.
The visitor center, which is devoted is mainly to wildlife exhibits, also provides some history on El Camino Real.
State and Local Parks, Monuments, and Sites
El Paso Missions and Mission Trail.
The road from Ysleta to San Elizario is the designated Mission Trail auto route connecting the communities of San Elizario, Socorro, and Ysleta.
This route represents the historic connection of Socorro and Ysleta Missions with the San Elizario presidio on El Camino Real.
San Elizario Presidio Chapel and Plaza -- San Elizario was established as a presidio in 1789 to protect settlements in the lower Rio Grande Valley.
The chapel was originally built in 1853 as part the fort compound.
The present chapel, built in 1877, is enhanced by the village plaza, jail, and other historic adobe structures that reflect Spanish colonial settlement.
Socorro Mission and Ysleta Mission -- The missions were established in the 1680s as a result of the Pueblo Revolt.
Franciscan monks established Mission Socorro and Mission Ysleta del Sur to provide refuge for Piro and Tigua Indians and Spanish settlers who had retreated from the north.
Because of changes in the Rio Grande channel, flooding, and fire, the missions have been relocated and reconstructed several times.
Fort Selden State Monument.
Situated on the banks of the Rio Grande, Fort Selden was one of a series of frontier military posts established in 1865 to protect trade routes to the north and travelers and settlers in the Mesilla Valley.
Self-guided walking tours through the adobe ruins are available, and a visitor center and museum offer exhibits of frontier life.
La Mesilla, New Mexico.
La Mesilla includes a historic plaza and surrounding buildings that have been restored to their 19th century appearance.
During the 1800s the area was a camping and foraging spot for both Spaniards and Mexicans.
The first permanent settlers came to La Mesilla after the Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo in 1848.
By 1850 there was an established colony, and later La Mesilla became a main supply center for garrisoned troops.
The Mexican War and the Treaty of Guadalupe Hidalgo left La Mesilla in a "no man's land," a strip of land claimed by both the United States and Mexico.
The Gadsden Purchase in 1854 established that La Mesilla was officially part of the United States.
San Miguel Mission, Socorro.
Franciscans erected a mission in the early 1600s, naming it Virgen del Socorro (Virgin of Relief) to commemorate the aid given by the Piro Indians to Oñate and other weary caravans on El Camino Real.
The present 1819-21 church replaced the earlier mission, but part of one of its walls dates back into the 1600s.
Various artifacts are displayed in the adjoining church office.
Tomé Plaza and Tomé Hill.
The prominent hill of Tomé was a significant landmark for travelers along El Camino Real.
The hill is open to the public for hiking.
Tomé was settled as early as 1650, but it was abandoned after the Pueblo Revolt of 1680 and remained uninhabited until the Tomé land grant was establish in 1793.
Historic Tomé Plaza includes a church, a jail, and several other adobe structures.
Old Town Plaza.
Old Town is the site of Albuquerque's original settlement.
This town situated along El Camino Real benefited from commerce between Santa Fe and Mexico City.
New Mexico Governor Francisco Cuervo y Valdes founded the new "Villa de Alburquerque" in 1706.
Old Town Plaza and San Felipe de Neri Church (1706) are part of Albuquerque's historic district.
These facilities are surrounded by shops, galleries and restaurants.
Coronado State Monument.
The partially reconstructed ruins of Kuaua, the northernmost of the Tewa villages among which Francisco Vásquez de Coronado wintered in 1540, can be found in Coronado State Monument.
The village was first settled in 1300; Spanish explorers found it abandoned in 1598.
A restored kiva painted with symbols illustrates historic figures and ceremonial activities.
Original murals are on display in the visitor center museum.
The visitor center contains exhibits depicting cultural changes brought about by the arrival of the Spaniards.
El Rancho de las Golondrinas.
Las Golondrinas was a historic paraje, or stopping place, along El Camino Real.
There are archeological sites on the premises.
El Rancho de las Golondrinas, founded in the 1700s, is now a 200-acre living history museum with restored, imported, and reconstructed historic buildings and costumed villagers re-creating life in Spanish colonial and territorial New Mexico.
Agua Fría Street.
Farmers drawn to the arable land and freshwater springs in this are settled here in the 1600s.
Caravans entering and leaving Santa Fe on El Camino Real wound their way through the scattered agricultural settlements.
Agua Fría Street, which follows the route of El Camino Real, has not been substantially improved or modified since the colonial period.
Adjacent lands have been altered to a large degree, but areas of historic land use patterns still exist.
San Miguel Mission, Santa Fe.
The San Miguel mission was established in the early 1600s.
Records of its early history were destroyed during the Pueblo Revolt, but the adobe walls were left unharmed.
In the early 1800s the mission walls were reinforced with stone buttresses.
An audio presentation is available for visitors.
