Publications GoldenBuckeye.com: Aging Issues Ohio Department of Aging Joan W. Lawrence, Director
In This Section
Archived Columns
Subscribe
Site Navigation
About Us
Advocacy
Benefits 
Caregivers
Education 
Employment
Events
Get Help In Your Area
Links
Long-Term Care
News 
Publications
Volunteer Opportunities
Web Site Help
Search
Return to Home Page
Contact Us
Another Way to Make Money from Home
Click for Print-Quality Image As Ohioans grow older, many wonder how they continue to make ends meet and still be prepared for the extra expenses that longer life brings.
If you own your home, the solution may be all around you.
Until recently, getting money from your home meant you either sold it or borrowed against it.
This also meant you either had to move or make loan repayments.
But, there's a third option - Reverse Mortgages.
A reverse mortgage is a loan against your home that you do not have to repay as long as you live there.
In a traditional - or "forward" - mortgage, the borrower starts out with a lot of debt and a little equity.
In a reverse mortgage, the borrower starts out with lots of equity and little or no debt.
As the lender pays you, your equity decreases and your debt increases.
Lenders recover their principal plus interest from the value of the home when the loan becomes due (usually at the time of the borrower's death).
There are many benefits to a reverse mortgage, but the most important is its flexibility.
You can use the money to pay off an existing mortgage, pay property taxes, make home improvements, or pay bills.
Since reverse mortgage payments are not considered income, they do not affect Social Security, Medicare or other benefits.
Depending on the type of loan you get, you can take your money as one lump sum, monthly payments or as a credit line to be used as neeeded.
So, what's the catch? All reverse mortgages become due when the last surviving borrower dies, sells the home, or permanently moves out.
You can also default on the loan if you fail to pay property taxes or keep the home insured.
Maintenance is also critical since it is the equity of the home that will repay the loan.
Typically, you are eligible for a reverse mortgage if:
* You (and any co-borrowers) are at least 62 years old and occupy the property as a principle residence.
* You own your home free and clear.
(If you have an existing mortgage it must be paid off to obtain a reverse mortgage.
This can be done from the new loan, but reduces the total amount you will receive.)
* Your house is a single-family, one-unit dwelling.
Since equity on the home repays the loan, there are no income requirements on reverse mortgages.
The Federal Housing Administration and Fannie Mae offer federally insured reverse mortgage programs.
Many banks and private lenders also offer them, although often with substantial fees.
Being the first person you know to consider a reverse mortgage can be frightening.
There are several types of loans and many options for each.
Deciding which decisions are right for you may require help.
Many reverse mortgage programs require that you discuss the decision with an approved counseling agency.
To find a counselor near you, call 1-888-466-3487, or search on-line (www.hudhcc.org).
To learn more about reverse mortgages, download the helpful free guide Home Made Money: A Consumer Guide to Reverse Mortgages from AARP's website (www.aarp.org) or call 1-800-424-3410 to request a copy by mail.
The National Center for Home Equity Conversion's website offers independent information and tools to help you get the most from your home (www.reverse.org).
Joan W. Lawrence January 2002
Other Aging Issues Columns Subscribe
Ohio Department of Aging 50 W. Broad St./9th Fl. Columbus, OH 43215-3363 Bob Taft, Governor Joan W. Lawrence, Director Ohio: So much to Discover
