[clearpixel.gif] Main Arts Banner Graphic folkartsheader2 [clearpixel.gif]
1.
Culture and Arts of India Fund, Salt Lake City East Indian: 50th year anniversary celebration of India's independence.
2.
Fane F. Fisilau, Salt Lake City Tongan: teacher's fee for ta'ovala mat weaving.
3.
Hibernian Society of Utah, Salt Lake City Irish: St. Patrick's Day Siamsa.
4.
Hispanic Fiesta Days, Murray Hispanic: support for festival programming.
5.
Hua Sheng Art Troupe, Salt Lake City Chinese: support of traditional instrument purchase.
6.
Tanja Khvtisiashvili, Salt Lake City Middle Eastern /Georgian: purchase of tapestry loom for "Gobelens" Tapestry.
7.
Korean-American Dance Groups, Salt Lake City Korean: rehearsal space and costume purchase.
8.
Kurdish Community of Utah, Salt Lake City Kurdish: Kurdish New Year (Noruz) celebration.
9.
Mexican Civic Center, Salt Lake City Mexican: performances at Cinco de Mayo.
10.
National Tongan-American Society, Murray Tongan: Second annual Tongan Festival in September.
11.
Pa'u Riders of Utah, Centerville Hawaiian: workshops of Haku Lei Making for Horse Riders in the 1997 Days of '47 Parade.
12.
Salt Lake Afrikan-American Dancers, Salt Lake City African American: drumming workshop.
13.
Samoan Brass Band of Utah, Woods Cross Samoan: sheet music and supplies.
14.
Samoan Cultural Association, West Valley City Samoan: Annual Samoan cultural celebration in July.
15.
Scottish Country Dancers, Salt Lake City Scottish: dance workshop in celebration of the 75th anniversary of the Royal Scottish Country Dance Society.
16.
Laife Tuita, West Valley City Polynesian: costumes and supplies for performance.
17.
University of Utah Pacific Islander Student Association, Salt Lake City Polynesian: fine arts exhibition at Art Access Gallery.
Back to Ethnic Arts Grants Homepage [clearpixel.gif] Folk Arts Home Chase Home Museum Programs Contact Folk Arts Program Folk Arts Program Store Folklife Events Calendar Funding Opportunities Governor's Awards Living Traditions Festival Locate Utah Folk Artists Checkbook Graphic Ethnic Arts Grant Purpose Ethnic Arts Grant Application Ethnic Arts Grant List
[clearpixel.gif]
[clearpixel.gif] 1.
folk_bottmbar 2.
