Lesson Title Group Work on Smokey and Friends Mural Target Grade Level: 2 [SMOKEY.JPG] Category: Interpersonal Fire Prevention Curriculum Outcomes * identifies elements and relationships in a forest habitat * understands the importance of forest habitats to humans * understands the messages: "Don't play with fire," "If you see fire or smoke report it immediately to an adult" Washington State Essential Learnings Addressed Communication 3 Works Cooperatively * demonstrates conversation skills * contributes to the groups with ideas, suggestions, and effort * summarizes a group discussion Arts 2 Work individually and collaboratively to achieve goals * collaborates to implement an arts project using defined criteria Health and Fitness 3 Social Skills * uses social skills to express emotions constructively and form safe and respectful relationships * uses social skills to keep themselves out of trouble and resist pressure from others Materials Required butcher paper placed on large wall area or bulletin board with a brownish lower piece representing soil and a light blue piece representing sky, some water source may be needed in the background of the mural life-sized drawing of Smokey Bear (see Kindergarten Introduction) placed beside mural area tape, glue, staples to attach animal and plant models paper cut-out models of plants and animals from Logical/Mathematical lesson (optional) photos of murals Procedures 1.
Tell students that it is time to assemble the mural.
This is probably best done as a whole class activity so that students can share information they learned about their individual animal or plant with the rest of the class.
2.
Tell students that a mural is generally a painting created on a wall.
Show examples or use locally known murals as examples.
Tell students that the mural they will make is with the cutout paper models they have made.
3.
Have students make recommendations for placement of their cut-out model on the mural ask questions such as: Why would it fit there? What other plant or animal is dependent on this one? Does it live in the soil or in the trees?
4.
When the mural is complete, attach Smokey's messages to the life size Smokey beside the mural.
"Don't play with fire."
"If you see fire or smoke report it immediately to an adult."
Tell students to think about these messages and how they relate to the mural.
[PAW.JPG]
