[default_r1_c1.jpg] [default_r2_c1.jpg]
Festival Home 2003 dates are September 11, 12, 13, 14, 2003
Come and experience a "Wee Bit O'Scotland" at the Kelso Highlander Festival.
The festival begins this year on Thursday night, September 11th, with the Kelso Kiwanis Annual Wine Tasting, Ale 
At beautiful Tam O'Shanter Park on Saturday, September 13th, the festivities begin with a fun run/walk, highland dance competition.
A parade at 10am will wind through downtown Kelso ending at the park with the welcome and parade of clans.
Throughout the weekend at the park, there will be entertainment by various Celtica/Scottish groups.
There also are performances by Clan Gordon pipe band, Washington Scottish pipe band, and the Olympia Highlanders.
With a "FREE" admission to the park you can experience a whole weekend of Scottish and Celtic culture, with the avenue of clans, Scottish vendors.
Saturday evening at the park there will be a clan's dinner with a catered barbecue feast and Heather Alexander will entertain.
Get your tickets now!
On Sunday, September 14th, there will be a Kirkin O' the Tartan worship service at Tam O'Shanter Park at 8:30 am and again at 10:30 am at the First Presbyterian Church in Kelso.
A "Kilted Klassic Golf Tournament" tees off in the morning at Kelso's Three Rivers Golf Course with a great hole in one prize.
The highland games will begin at the park at 9:00 am with those hardy lads and lasses tossing the caber and throwing the stone.
The Kelso Rotary will be holding their annual duck race in the afternoon raising money for charities and scholarships.
Get your Highlander Festival buttons now for only $1.00 each and you could win a $600 Kelso Three Rivers Mall shopping spree as first prize, or a $300 grocery shopping spree as second prize, or $100 in dining gift certificates as third prize.
We will be having lots of other prizes donated from various merchants in Kelso.
Don't pass up a whole weekend of Scottish and Celtic fun with free admission to the park!
The following is a list of the Kelso Highlander Festival Parade award winners (by award category):
BAND or Musical 1st place - Ft. Vancouver Pipe Band
2nd place - Clan Gordon
3rd place - Hilander Brigade
Drill or Dance
1st place - Kelso Kilties
2nd place - Gymnastics 4U
3rd place - MacGregor Scots
ANTIQUE AUTO
1st Place - Arnold Gish
2nd place - Cowlitz Old time Car Club
3rd place - Dutch Curtis
Religious or Youth
1st place - Methodist Church
2nd place - I have a Dream Foundation
3rd place - Girl Scouts
Commercial
1st place - Twiggy's
2nd place - We Care Preschool
3rd place - Stuffy's
Service Organizations
1st place - Sons of Norway
2nd place - MADD
3rd place - Kelso/Longview Elks
Novelty
1st place - AMTGARD
2nd place - Shirners
3rd place - Sutherby family
Best of Theme - Methodist Church
Also, I would like to thank those who voluntered or assisted with the parade including: Marcie Orcutt Rene Butler John 
Mark you calendar now for September 11, 12, 13, 
[eventscalendar.gif]
Places to Stay | River Cities Chamber of Commerce | Cowlitz County Tourism | HOME
