[newbanner.jpg] STATE INVESTS AN ADDITIONAL $210,000 IN MANUFACTURING WORKFORCE TRAINING IN MIDDLESEX, BERGEN AND UNION COUNTIES TRENTON, April 22, 2003 - The Department of Labor has awarded three new grants to aid businesses in training their workforces to deal with the challenges of the global economy, Commissioner Albert G. Kroll announced Thursday.
Customized training grants were awarded to Marcal Paper Mills of Elmwood Park, Bergen County, Wood Textures of Edison, Middlesex County, and White Conveyors of Kenilworth, Union County.
All told, the grants represent an additional $210,000 the state has invested in developing its workforce.
" New Jersey's future economic prosperity will largely depend on the skills of the working men and women of our state," said Gov. James E. McGreevey.
"Grants like these help make the goal of an efficient workforce with exemplary skills a reality."
Wood Textures, a manufacturer of furniture and house ware products, received a grant of $32,000 and will match that with $22,000 of its own money to train 38 employees in English as a Second Language, computer skills, customer service, and the principles of warehousing.
Marcal Paper Mills, which manufactures household paper products, received a grant of $98,100 and will contribute a matching grant of $123,576 to train 213 workers in computer skills and supervisory training.
White Conveyors, which manufactures conveyors for dry cleaners will combine its grant of $80,000 with $92,112 of company money to train 118 employees in occupational, supervisory, and computer skills.
Kroll said the department is working with business, labor, and local community organizations to make good investments in businesses and workers.
"These type of public-private partnerships guarantee our companies and our workers will have the base of knowledge and up-to-date skills in their fields to meet any challenge ahead," Kroll said.
Customized training grants are matching grants awarded to New Jersey businesses to provide training to the company's workforce in skills specifically needed to increase productivity and marketability.
The grants, awarded through the Department of Labor, are funded through the Workforce Development Partnership Program.
From January of last year, 34,903 workers at 293 companies were trained as part of this sizeable public-private partnership.
These grants are part of the department's commitment to devoting resources to the changing requirements of its workforce.
Facing a daunting gap between the demands of the market and the skills of workers, the Department of Labor and the McGreevey administration are making workforce development a central priority.
That includes consolidating workforce development and job training programs under a new "Department of Labor and Workforce Development."
It also involves educating workers and potential workers, providing easy access to job counseling services, and protecting workers who may be exploited or shortchanged.
Information about customized training and literacy grants is available by calling 609-292-2239 or on the Internet on the Department of Labor website:
http://www.nj.gov/labor.
