The Subcommittee on Coast Guard 
BACKGROUND
THE FISCAL YEAR 2001 COAST GUARD BUDGET REQUEST
The Administration requests $4.6 billion for fiscal year 2001 for Coast Guard activities that are subject to appropriation.
This request is $429 million (10.3 percent) more than the amount appropriated for the Coast Guard in fiscal year 2000.
The following table compares the fiscal year 2000 Coast Guard appropriations, the fiscal year 2001 Coast Guard authorization (passed by the House), and the fiscal year 2001 Coast Guard budget request (in millions of dollars):
Major Coast Guard Account
Fiscal Year 2000
Enacted
Fiscal Year 2001
House-passed Authorized
Fiscal Year 2001
Presidents Budget Request^2
Operating
Expenses
2,939^1
3,207.8
3,199.0^3
Acquisition,
Construction,
&
387.5
792.0
520.2
Environmental
Compliance and
Restoration
17.0
21.0
16.7
Alterations of Bridges
15.0
11.0
0.0
Retired Pay
730.3
785.0
778.0
Reserve
Training
72.0
N/A
73.4
Research, Test, and
Evaluation
19.0
23.0
21.3
TOTALS
4179.8
4839.0
4608.6 __________________________________________________________________
^1Includes the $160 million from the FY 99 Kosovo Supplemental.
^2Includes a $212 million offset for proposed user fees.
Section 207 of P.L. 105-383, prohibits new maritime user fees through September 30, 2001.
^3Includes $341 million from budgetary function "054" which would allocate funds from the defense budget to support the Coast Guards military readiness.
__________________________________________________________________
OPERATING EXPENSES
General
The budget request for Coast Guard Operating Expenses (OE) in fiscal year 2001 is $3,199 billion, an increase of $260 million or a 9 percent increase over the fiscal year 2000 appropriated level.
Operating Expenses account for about two-thirds of the Coast
Guard budget and fund Coast Guard search and rescue, aids to navigation, marine safety, marine environmental protection, and law enforcement operations.
One-half of the OE account, or $1.6 billion, covers personnel compensation.
This includes funding for 36,247 military and 5,853 for civilian personnel.
The Coast Guards Operating Expense request includes an additional $171 million for Coast Guard personnel entitlements.
These additional personnel costs include the fiscal year 2001 pay raise of 3.7 percent, the new Basic Allowance for Housing (BAH) entitlements, escalating health care costs, and past pay raises.
The President has requested $24 million to operate new Coast Guard facilities during fiscal year 2001, which includes $12.5 million to operate four new coastal buoy tenders, $2.5 million to upgrade boat crews and maintenance for 84 new 47-foot Motor Lifeboats, and $1 million to increase funding for the New Orleans Vessel Traffic Service (VTS).
In addition, the President has requested $55 million in new Coast Guard initiatives.
These include $17.2 million to develop the next phase in the Airborne Use of Force project, $3.7 million to increase HC-130 aircraft flight hours, $2.4 million to obtain chemical, biological, and radiological protective equipment, and $10.2 million for workforce recruiting and retention initiatives.
The Presidents request also calls for OE reductions of $31.5 million.
These reductions include $3.8 million for decommissioning three buoy tenders slated for replacement in fiscal year 2001 and savings from capital investment in new technology and management efficiencies.
The Coast Guard also plans to collect a significant increase of $7.8 million for reimbursement for polar icebreaking from the National Science Foundation.
Planned Program Activity Funding.
The following table illustrates how the fiscal year 2001 Coast Guard Operating Expense account is allocated among missions compared to the fiscal year 1999 allocation and fiscal year 2000 estimates:
(Actual)
% of OE
In FY 99
(Planned)
% of OE
In FY 00
(Planned)
% of OE
In FY 01
Drug Interdiction
18.6%
17.6%
17.7%
Search and Rescue
13.8%
11.6%
12.0%
Aids to Navigation
15.8%
15.4%
15.1%
Ice Operations
3.3%
3.8%
3.8%
Defense Readiness
2.6%
2.2%
2.3%
Marine Environmental Protection
10.6%
11.5 %
11.4%
Other Law Enforcement
2.3%
2.3 %
2.3%
Marine Transportation Safety
13.7%
13.7%
13.6%
Fisheries Law Enforcement
14.1%
16.5%
16.3%
Migrant Interdiction
5.1%
5.4%
5.5%
ACQUISITION, CONSTRUCTION AND IMPROVEMENTS (AC
The Administration requests $520.2 million in acquisitions funding for fiscal year 2001, a $133 million (34 percent) increase over the amount appropriated in fiscal year 2000.
This account is divided into five main program activities and provides for the acquisition, construction, and improvement of vessels, aircraft, information management resources, shore facilities, and aids to navigation.
In the vessels category, $257.2 million is requested for replacing and renovating vessels and related equipment such as three new seagoing buoy tenders, surface search radar replacement on eleven classes of cutters, 87-foot patrol boat replacement and restoring operational reliability of the two polar icebreakers.
New vessel replacement initiatives include the replacement of the MACKINAW, the Coast Guards Great Lakes icebreaker, and the acquisition of more capable boats on cutters to strengthen the Coast Guards drug interdiction capabilities.
The Administration also requests $42.3 million to continue the Deepwater Capabilities Replacement Analysis to develop an integrated system of assets to execute the Coast Guards mission in the offshore area of operations.
Since fiscal year 1998, $73.9 million dollars has been spent on this project.
Future cost requirements of the Deepwater Capability Replacement Project are still to be determined.
It is anticipated that the cost of the Deepwater project will be close to $10 billion over the next 20-years.
In the Aviation category, $43.7 million is requested for aircraft improvements.
These projects include helicopter computer replacements, an aviation simulator modernization project, and three new helicopters to support the recently commissioned Coast Guard polar icebreaker HEALY.
The Coast Guard also proposes to spend $60.3 million to complete or continue several ongoing information resource management systems.
These information systems include the Marine Information for Safety and Law Enforcement, the Fleet Logistics System, the National Distress and Response System Moderation, and the Commercial Satellite Communications project.
In the Shore and Aids to Navigation category, $61.6 million is requested to support Coast Guard housing, facility improvements and aids to navigation projects.
Finally, $55 million is requested for personnel and core acquisition costs associated with these capital improvement projects.
ENVIRONMENTAL COMPLIANCE AND RESTORATION
For environmental compliance and restoration, funding of $16.7 million, $300,000 less than the amount appropriated for fiscal year 2000, has been requested to mitigate environmental problems resulting from the operation of former and current
Coast Guard facilities, and to ensure that Coast Guard facilities are in compliance with applicable laws and regulations.
This funding would be used to clean up thousands of batteries disposed of by the Coast Guard in many locations.
Another part of this program is to clean up hazardous waste sites in Kodiak, Alaska, and Elizabeth City, North Carolina, as well as to remediate polychlorinated biphenyl (PCB) laden cutters and boats.
ALTERATION OF BRIDGES
The Bridge Alternation program provides the Federal governments share of the costs for altering or removing bridges determined to be obstructions to navigation.
Currently, under Truman-Hobbs Act of 1940, (33 U.S.C. 511et seq.), the Coast Guard shares, with the bridge owner, the cost of altering railroad and publicly-owned highway bridges which obstruct the free movement of vessel traffic.
The Administration recommends that funding for the alterations of obstructive highway and railroad bridges be provided from the Highway Trust Fund under the federal aid highway program.
Under the proposal, the Secretary would make available $11 million in fiscal year 2001 for the alterations of railroad and highway bridges which have been determined to be unreasonable obstructions to navigation.
The Coast Guard would continue to administer the program.
The Congress has rejected the Presidents bridge administration funding proposal over the past several years.
RESERVE TRAINING
The Coast Guard provides qualified individuals and a limited number of trained Port Security Units for mobilization in the event of national emergency or disaster.
The reservists maintain readiness through mobilization exercises and duty alongside regular Coast Guard members during routine and emergency operations.
The fiscal year 2001 budget request proposes funding of $73.3 million for Coast Guard Reserve training to support a 7,300-member Selected Reserve program, a level below the authorized strength of 8,000, and far short of the Coast Guard wartime mobilization requirement of 11,000.
The fiscal year 2001 Select Reserve program will support 600 less reservist than the current number of Coast Guard selected reservists.
RESEARCH, DEVELOPMENT, TEST AND EVALUATION
For research, development, test and evaluation, the Administration proposes to spend $21.3 million, a $2.3 million increase above fiscal year 2000 appropriated level.
This account funds the development of techniques, methods, research, hardware, systems, and planning to improve the productivity of existing Coast Guard missions.
Priorities for the fiscal year 2001 include drug interdiction surveillance, fuel cell vessel propulsion, computerized search-and-rescue tools, and more effective oil spill response techniques.
BOAT SAFETY
In 1984, the Wallop-Breaux amendments to the Deficit Reduction Act of 1984 created the Aquatic Resources Trust Fund.
The Wallop-Breaux Trust Fund consists of two accounts, the Sport Fish Restoration Account and the Boat Safety Account.
Annually, up to $70 million of the motorboat fuel taxes paid by recreational boaters are deposited in the Boat Safety Account to fund state boating safety grant programs coordinated by the Coast Guard.
Subtitle D of title VII of the Transportation Equity Act for the 21^st Century, P.L. 105-178, is the Sportfishing and Boating Safety Act of 1998.
This legislation amends the Recreational Boating Safety Program, administered by the Coast Guard.
Under these amendments, states receive $59 million without appropriation for boating safety programs.
An additional $13 million may be appropriated from the Coast Guard budget for boating safety programs.
This legislation also provides the Coast Guard with $5 million annually to coordinate and carry out the national recreational boating safety program.
The Administration does not request additional funding above the $64 million permanently appropriated for the boating safety program and Coast Guard administrative expenses.
RETIRED PAY
The Administrations fiscal year 2001 request for retired pay is $778 million, an increase of $47.3 million over the fiscal year 2000 level.
These funds provide annuities and medical care for retired military personnel and former Lighthouse Service members, their dependents, and survivors.
OIL SPILL LIABILITY TRUST FUND
Established by the Oil Pollution Act of 1990, the Oil Spill Liability Trust Fund provides a source of funds, not subject to appropriation, to pay oil spill removal costs and damages, including assessment of natural resources damages, and Federal expenses necessary to administer the Fund.
Each year, the Fund may provide up to $50 million for emergency response costs and pay all valid claims for oil spill damages resulting from oil spills.
The Administrations fiscal year 2001 request from the Oil Spill Liability Trust Fund is $61.2 million, including $50 million for emergency response costs, $10 million for payment of claims, and $1.2 million for support of the Prince William Sound Oil Spill Recovery Institute in Cordova, Alaska
KEY ISSUES ASSOCIATED WITH THE BUDGET REQUEST
Coast Guard User Fee Proposal
This year, the Administration will again propose legislation to authorize user fees for Coast Guard navigation assistance services to commercial cargo and cruise vessels.
Coast Guard navigation assistance services include buoy placement and maintenance, vessel traffic services, radio and satellite navigation systems, and waterways regulations.
The fiscal year 2001 fee collections are estimated to be $212 million, of which $116 million will offset the Operating Expenses account and forty-five percent or $96 million will be transferred to the AC
When fully implemented, fees are expected to recover $636 million of the Coast Guards costs annually.
A broad coalition of ship operators, maritime labor representatives, and shippers is strongly opposed to a navigation user charge.
Authority exists for the head of a Federal agency to establish charges for services or things of value provided by the agency under the User Charge Statute, section 9701 of title 31, United States Code.
That authority allows charges to be established administratively in narrow, specific circumstances, and only when involving specific charges for specific services to specific individuals or companies.
Many believe that an attempt to administratively collect fees from vessel operators for general aids to navigation in U.S. ports and waterways would exceed the authority of agency heads to establish charges under the User Charge Statute.
Supreme Court decisions on the User Charge Statute have held that charges that are simply "revenue raisers" are actually taxes, and must be based on specific statutory authority.
The Coast Guard currently collects legitimate user fees for the specific services it provides to specific individuals, including ship inspections, licensing of and issuance of documents to merchant mariners and documentation of vessels.
Section 207 of the Coast Guard Authorization Act of 1998, Public Law 105-383, prohibits the Secretary of Transportation from planning, implementing or finalizing any regulation that would promulgate any new maritime user fee which was not implemented and collected prior to January 1, 1998, including a fee or charge for any domestic icebreaking service or any other navigational assistance service through September 30, 2001.
Drug Interdiction
The fiscal year 2001 budget request includes $565 million in operating expenses for drug interdiction activities, which includes an increase of $27 million for new drug interdiction strategies.
The AC
The Coast Guard plans to increase its drug interdiction efforts over fiscal year 2000 levels by increasing vessel and aircraft operating hours, expanding the use of armed helicopters, and improving the collection of drug smuggling intelligence.
In fiscal year 2001, the Coast Guard will focus on stopping so-called "go-fast" boats, the prime mover of cocaine through the maritime drug transit zone, by increasing the number and capability of both surface and air patrol craft.
The Coast Guard is requesting an additional $17.2 million to lease and operate eight specially equipment helicopters designed to stop suspect vessels using a range of non-deadly actions.
In addition, the Coast Guard is requesting $3.7 million for increased HC-130 aircraft flight hours and support, $1.5 million for four additional Law Enforcement Detachments where Coast Guard law enforcement officers are deployed on Navy vessels, and one million to convert a former Navy PC-170 vessel for use in drug interdiction operations.
H.R. 820, the Coast Guard Authorization Act of 1999, passed the House last March.
That bill authorizes an additional level of funding for the Coast Guards drug interdiction mission consistent with the provisions of the Western Hemisphere Drug Elimination Act.
H.R. 820 authorizes an additional $125 million for Coast Guard drug interdiction operations in fiscal year 2001.
The operating funds would allow the Coast Guard to operate an additional 12 coastal patrol boats and seven Navy PC-170 vessels in the drug transit zone as well as provide for an additional number of aircraft patrol hours in the transit zone.
Finally, H.R. 820 provides an additional $425 million in AC
These funds would allow the Coast Guard to purchase 15 coastal patrol boats, two high endurance cutters, and six medium endurance cutters.
Deepwater Capability Replacement Project
The President has requested $42.3 million to continue the analysis of the Coast Guards long-term capital needs for operations which occur fifty nautical miles beyond U.S. shores.
Coast Guard activities in this zone typically require either extended on-scene presence, long transit distance to reach the operating area, forward deployment of forces, or a combination of these approaches.
The Coast Guard has identified fourteen missions in this zone, including alien migration interdiction operations, drug interdiction, and fisheries law enforcement.
As the Coast Guard considers replacing the ships and planes used in the deepwater mission zone, it seeks to achieve long-term savings through a coordinated procurement process.
To accomplish this, the Coast Guard is searching for options which employ a complementary system of assets that can be operated with fewer personnel and significantly lower costs, without compromising overall performance.
The $42.3 million requested for the Deepwater project in the Presidents budget will continue to fund three industry teams who were awarded contracts to develop competing proposals for the project.
The winning team is to be selected in fiscal year 2002, and the first assets of the new integrated package is to be in service by fiscal year 2005.
The total cost of the project is still to be determined by the three industry teams.
Through the end of fiscal year 2000, $73.9 million has been spent on the project.
On October 26, 1998, the General Accounting Office (GAO) released a report to Congress on the Coast Guards Deepwater Capability Replacement Project.
The GAO found that the Coast Guards justification for the Deepwater project, particularly its conclusion about the expected life of its current aircraft assets, could not be validated from the information available.
In response to the above information, the President in 1999 established the Interagency Task Force on the Roles and Missions of the United States Coast Guard to determine the appropriate roles and missions for the Coast Guard through the year 2020.
Results of this study are expected to be released shortly.
National Distress and Response System Modernization (NDRSM) Project
The National Distress System provides two-way voice communications coverage for the majority of Coast Guard missions in coastal areas and navigable waterways where commercial and recreational traffic exists.
The Coast Guards system monitors the international VHF maritime distress frequency (Channel 16) and acts as the primary command and control network to coordinate Coast Guard search and rescue response activities.
The secondary function of the system is to provide command, control, and communications for Coast Guard missions involving National Security, Maritime Safety, Law Enforcement, and Marine Environmental Protection.
The national distress and communication capability of the existing communications system, built in the 1970s, is inadequate.
The current system is unable to accommodate the significant growth in maritime commerce and recreational boating.
The Presidents request provides $22 million to fund the initial procurement costs for the NDRSM project.
This project will fully modernize the existing VHF-FM National Distress System and provide improved distress alerting and response coordination capability, along with improved command and control for all Coast Guard missions.
The new system will include direction finding, asset tracking, digital selective calling, and multi-channel transmitting and receiving capability.
The future cost of the National Distress System project is estimated at $220 million.
The project is to be completed in fiscal year 2006.
There is concern that the implementation time for the project is too long, since there is a vast disparity between the communications capability that the public thinks is in place and the actual capabilities of the current communications system.
In addition, the recent sinking of the recreational sailing vessel MORNING DEW highlights the need to modernize the Coast Guards communications system as soon as possible.
H.R. 820, the Coast Guard Authorization Act of 1999, provides for the implementation of the improved National Distress System by the end of fiscal year 2001.
Specifically, this House-passed bill authorizes an additional $100 million in fiscal year 2000 and $110 million in fiscal year 2001 above the Presidents budget request for this system.
FEDERAL MARITIME COMMISSION BACKGROUND
The Administration requests $16.22 million for the operation of the Federal Maritime Commission for fiscal year 2001.
Approximately $14.15 million was appropriated for FMC operations if fiscal year 2000.
The Federal Maritime Commission (FMC) is an independent agency formed in 1961 following the abolition of the Federal Maritime Board.
The Commission is responsible for enforcing international shipping rules and regulations involving carriers (container ship operators), shippers (companies owning goods to be transported), and transportation facilitators such as freight forwarders, nonvessel operating common carriers, and customs brokers.
The FMC is composed of five commissioners, appointed by the President with the advice and consent of the Senate.
The current Chairman of the FMC is the Honorable Harold J. Creel, Jr.
The FMC is primarily engaged in administering the Shipping Act of 1984.
However, the FMC also enforces the Foreign Shipping Practices Act and Section 19 of the Merchant Marine Act, 1920.
Under these authorities, the FMC protects shippers and carriers from restrictive or unfair practices of foreign governments and foreign-flag carriers.
Under these laws, the FMC has the authority to take action against the offending
carriers, including the imposition of per voyage fees and preventing them from operating in trade with the United States.
The FMC also enforces the laws related to cruise vessel financial responsibility.
to ensure that cruise vessel operators have sufficient resources to pay judgments to passengers for personal injury or death or for nonperformance of a voyage.
The major responsibility of the Federal Maritime Commission is to enforce the provisions of the Shipping Act of 1984, the Act which establishes the system of economic regulation of the international waterborne commerce of the United States.
Most goods move in international commerce either as bulk commodities or as dry cargo.
Bulk cargoes, such as oil, coal, or bulk grains are normally shipped as full shiploads chartered expressly for the purpose of carrying the cargo to a given location at a given time.
Most other goods, including all manufactured goods and finished products, are shipped by "liner" service.
Liner shipping operates on a given route and schedule, by taking partial shiploads from many different cargo owners.
Ships in liner service hold out their services as "common carriers", requiring them to charge a given rate for carrying the same cargo to the same destination.
Traditionally, these international liner shipping companies (carriers), have organized into small groups in a given trade route (conferences) to set rates, and make other agreements related to ocean transportation in a given trade.
Before the Shipping Act of 1984 was enacted, international ocean shipping was regulated under the Shipping Act of 1916.
The 1916 Act required "open" conferences and limited the antitrust immunity available to conferences for collective actions such as rate-setting.
The 1916 Act required conferences to file agreements with the FMC, which were reviewed and approved for antitrust purposes under a "public interest" test.
The Act also contained prohibited practices, such as deferred rebates and retaliatory or discriminatory rates or services.
Public Law 105-258, the Ocean Shipping Reform Act of 1998 (the Reform Act), amends the Shipping Act of 1984 and other related U.S. shipping laws to encourage competition in international ocean shipping and growth in Unites States exports.
The most important provisions of the Reform Act provide American businesses with the freedom to keep their ocean transportation contract prices confidential.
The Reform Act is a major step forward in the process of deregulating international ocean shipping.
The Reform Act maintains antitrust immunity for ocean carrier conferences, requires private tariff publication and enforcement of tariffs by the Federal Maritime Commission, and authorizes confidential transportation rates.
The Reform Act eliminates the requirement for ocean common carriers to file tariffs with the FMC.
Instead, carriers must make their tariffs publicly available by means of an electronic filing system.
The Reform Act reduces the number of days before which a member of an ocean shipping conference is required to give notice to conference members of an independent action on a rate or service item from 10 to five days.
The Reform Act also forbids ocean conferences from prohibiting or restricting conference members from negotiating service contracts, requiring conference members to disclose negotiations on service contracts; or adopting mandatory rules or requirements affecting the rights of conference members to negotiate and enter into service contracts.
Finally, the Reform Act clarifies section 19 of the Merchant Marine Act of 1920 to prohibit unfair pricing of liner services by foreign carriers and further tightens the oversight of controlled carrier tariffs.
The amendments contained in the bill became effective on May 1, 1999.
The Subcommittee has scheduled a hearing on May 3, 2000, to review the effectiveness of the Ocean Shipping Reform Act.
WITNESSES
PANEL I
Admiral James M. Loy Commandant United States Coast Guard
Master Chief Petty Officer Vincent Patton, III United States Coast Guard
PANEL II
The Honorable Harold J. Creel, Jr. Chairman Federal Maritime Commission
