International Information Programs International Security | Response to Terrorism 23 July 2002 U.S. Hopes to See Iranian People Achieve More Freedom
Boucher Voices U.S. concerns about Iran's support for terrorism
The United States is following developments in Iran and hopes that the Iranian people achieve freedom and "control over their own destiny," said State Department Spokesman Richard Boucher during the July 23 regular briefing.
Referring to the recent demonstrations in Iran calling for reforms, Boucher said, "this is part of a movement that we see based on the Iranian people's desire for more freedom, more accountability from their government."
"Ultimately, it's a matter for the Iranian people to decide," he said.
Boucher said that the United States has urged Iranian leaders "to respond to the will of the people for political and economic freedom," and urged them to cease their support for terrorism and end their pursuit for weapons of mass destruction.
"[A]n Iran that seeks to promote tolerance, that moves towards freedom, an Iran that moves away from terrorism and weapons of mass destruction, will find no better friend than the United States," said Boucher, referring to President Bush's statement on July 12.
Boucher said that although it is concerned with Iran's support of terrorist groups and development of weapons of mass destruction, the United States has found opportunities to engage with the Iranian government on issues of common interest, including cooperating on counter-narcotics, assisting Afghan refugees and the overall international effort to bring peace and stability in Afghanistan.
Following is excerpt from July 23 regular briefing by State Department Spokesman Richard Boucher:
Question: Well, the White House has spoken about the US relationship, or lack of relationship, with Iran.
But there are a couple of things I wanted to ask you.
First, is there any benefit -- has there been any dividend from pursuing the reformists in Iran, if you could enumerate for us?
Mr. Boucher: I'm not quite sure I would describe anything we do as "pursuing the reformists in Iran."
Question: Well, trying to get a dialogue.
Mr. Boucher: Our policy, I think, has been very clear.
First of all, we're very concerned about disturbing and destructive behaviors that Iran has undertaken, the policies and actions that they've undertaken in support of Hezbollah and other terrorist groups, the policies that they've undertaken to support groups that are violently opposed to Israel, as well as terrorist groups that are operating outside the Levant.
Second of all, we've been concerned about their development of weapons of mass destruction, and this has been an effort that we've had underway around the world with potential suppliers to make sure that they adhere to all possible guidelines and prevent Iran from developing weapons of mass destruction.
Third, we've been asking, calling on the Iranian leaders to act like elected leaders now that there's some democracy in Iran, and respond to the will of the people for political and economic freedom, not support terrorism and not pursue weapons of mass destruction.
By the same token, though, we've found opportunities, when it's been in our interest to do so, to engage with the Iranian Government on issues that are important to us, such as counter-narcotics cooperation, refugee assistance -- you remember when people were being pushed out of Afghanistan by the Taliban, and we were able to get some US grain in there -- and just overall in the international effort to bring peace and stability into Afghanistan.
We found opportunities in Bonn and opportunities since then to cooperate with Iran so that all the parties, all the neighbors of Afghanistan were in fact helping the parties work together and not pulling them apart.
And that's an effort that's been in our interest and we'll continue to pursue as long as it is in our interest.
But the President made very, very clear in his statement on July 12th that an Iran seeks to promote tolerance, that moves toward freedom, an Iran that moves away from terrorism and weapons of mass destruction will find no better friend than the United States.
That remains fundamentally what our policy is.
Question: It sounds like that kind of approach would fit whether there's truly a reformist element or not.
I mean, it's an approach to a government whose policies basically you don't like, but occasionally you find some areas of cooperation.
I wondered, though, if there's still a view, as there was strongly in the Clinton-Albright Administration, that there is a genuine reformist element in Tehran, even if -- well, it may not be affecting policy very much.
Mr. Boucher: There has been I think what we've all seen, a tremendous internal debate inside Iran.
There have been some elections.
There have been reformers and people like that elected to various offices.
All of this is part of a movement that we see based on the Iranian people's desire for more freedom, more accountability from their government.
That is certainly something that we follow with great interest.
Ultimately it's a matter for the Iranian people to decide.
They need -- that's what this is all about.
They need to be able to have control over their own destiny.
Question: Two quick ones.
Do you believe that Khatami -- I don't know if you've answered this before I came in -- but do you believe that Khatami himself is a reformer? And I don't know if you mentioned US cooperation with Iran vis-à-vis Iraq, and particularly an organization that is harbored there called Siri.
Mr. Boucher: I didn't mention that.
I don't know if I've ever mentioned that.
Question: Oh, I think you have.
Mr. Boucher: Well, we may have.
If there is -- is this in our terrorism report? Is this a group in our terrorism report?
Question: No, no.
It's not in the terrorism report.
I think you mentioned it in terms of -- I know that Syria has participated in the Group of Four discussions in London that the US has participated in, and I was wondering if you would talk a little bit about -- Iran and Iraq have been regional rivals now for a while --
Mr. Boucher: I can't really at this point.
I think our issues with Iran, the primary ones are the ones that I mentioned, the ones the President's mentioned: Iran's support for terrorism, Iran's support -- opposition to any peaceful process of achieving peace in the Middle East, Iran's development of weapons of mass destruction, the human rights situation inside Iran.
But the overall goal is to see the Iranian people be able to realize the freedoms that they aspire to and to see them be able to take control of their own destiny.
That's the goal that we seek, and we follow developments in Iran in that way with interest.
At the same time, we -- speaking clearly on this, and the President has spoken as clearly as possible on this, when there's an opportunity to do so, we don't hesitate to pursue things that are in our interest.
Question: But could I just follow up --
Question: -- on the Khatami --
Question: Yeah, exactly.
Mr. Boucher: Once again, I think our emphasis is on seeing that there is this movement among the Iranian people for greater freedom and we think that Iran's leaders, whatever faction, group, or origin they come from -- that need to respond to that and allow greater freedom among the people.
Question: Can I just follow up on that? Because in previous formulations of this, people in the administration, including on several occasions the President himself, have portrayed this internal conflict as one between reformists and people who are obstructing the will of the people.
When the President and you came out supporting the demonstrators, it was noticeable that Khatami opposed the demonstrations.
So do we now have three -- are you now thinking of this in terms of three groups and you favor the demonstrators? Is that how we should see it? Or --
Mr. Boucher: I don't think I've tried to characterize it that way.
I don't think the President's statement characterized it that way.
The bottom line for us is what happens.
It's how does Iran act? Does Iran support terrorism? Does Iran support weapons of mass destruction and try to develop them? Does Iran oppose peace in the Middle East? Does Iran respond to the wishes of its people and develop more democracy? It's not a matter of choosing individuals or factions or groups or segments or some kind of, you know, analysis like that.
It's a matter of saying "Let's look at what happens.
Let's look at what goes on inside Iran and what Iran's behavior is."
And that's the basis on which we'll decide.
Where we find areas where we can cooperate, we will.
Where we find areas where their actions are inimicable to our interests and the interests of others in the region, we will oppose that.
Question: But you can't say whether the US used Khatami as a force for change in the right direction or just, you know, in bed with the hardliners?
Mr. Boucher: I'm not going to try to do internal political analysis.
I think you've all seen the debate.
You all know that people line up on different sides of these issues.
But as I said, it's not a matter of picking favorites for us.
It's a matter of looking at Iran's behavior and calling it the way we see it.
That's what the President's done repeatedly and that's what we've done.
__________________________________________________________________
This site is produced and maintained by the U.S. Department of State's Office of International Information Programs (usinfo.state.gov).
Links to other Internet sites should not be construed as an endorsement of the views contained therein.
Back To Top blue rule IIP Home | Index to This Site | Webmaster | Search This Site | Archives | U.S. Department of State
Sorry, you need a JavaScript capable browser to get the best from this page
