June 20, 2001 Q. Representative Petri, before we do anything else, let's review the schedule, so everybody will have some sense of what's coming up.
Okay.
During the week of June 25th, there's a good chance that the House will consider H.R. 7, the Community Solutions Act.
This is the House's proposed version of President Bush's faith-based initiative to help the poor and homeless, the addicted and the hungry, the unemployed, victims of violence and all those we are called on to help.
Our country has tens of thousands of devoted individuals who work with the poor on a daily basis through community and faith-based organizations.
They operate thousands of centers throughout the country which provide services to the underprivileged.
President Bush's faith-based initiative is designed to help non-profit organizations and the people who work for them and who volunteer with them so that people in our society who are in trouble will get help from caring people who view service to the poor and troubled as a personal moral imperative, and not just as a 9-to-5 job.
In saying this, I don't mean to denigrate civil servants who take government jobs with a determination to help people.
But they need reinforcement from non-governmental organizations and caring people who, in their own communities, work with those in need due to deep personal, moral, and often religious convictions.
The Community Solutions Act is designed to increase charitable giving and to form new partnerships between the government and community and faith-based organizations in order to help the poor and others in need.
It's designed to do that without violating the separation of church and state.
Among the groups endorsing the bill are the U.S. Catholic Conference and the Salvation Army.
Q.
What else is coming up?
Also on tap for the week of June 25th in the House is the Patient Protection Act.
This is legislation to make sure that people get a fair deal and appropriate services from their health care providers.
Republicans and Democrats all agree that it's time to spell out consumer protections for patients, and I'm not convinced that the differences between the various versions of the Patient Protection Act are all that great.
However, some Democrats seem convinced that the Republican version would throw patients into the street while some Republicans seem convinced that the Democrats' bill would cause small businesses all across the country to drop health benefits for employees.
I'm hopeful that we can work something out that everybody will be able to consider a major step forward for patients without doing significant harm to employers.
Also coming up is a proposal to protect the American flag from desecration, and possibly consideration of some of the President's energy proposals, including allowing more oil exploration in Alaska.
These are all controversial matters, to say the least.
Then, in early July we are anticipating bringing legislation to the floor of the House to help older Americans pay for their prescription drugs.
And campaign finance reform legislation is supposed to be ready for votes in early July as well.
Q.
Now, of course, a lot of the work of the House goes on in the committees as well as on the House floor.
As Chairman of the Highways and Transit Subcommittee, you're preparing a number of hearings in the near future.
What do you plan to look into?
In July my subcommittee, the Highways and Transit Subcommittee, is planning a hearing on problems with the household moving industry.
When you hire a mover to move your personal belongings from your old home to your new home, it's really important that you get the kind of service you've contracted for you want your property to be delivered safely and on time, and you don't want unscrupulous movers to extort heavy extra fees out of you in order for your property to be delivered properly.
There have been a lot of complaints from consumers about unscrupulous movers, and the Highways and Transit Subcommittee is going to hold a hearing on this, and review consumer protection recommendations recently made by the Congress' General Accounting Office.
Another hearing we're preparing for in July will look into highway workzone safety.
There are almost 900 deaths and 39,000 injuries per year of construction workers on the highways.
This is a serious problem requiring our attention.
We may also hold a hearing on the issue of Mexican trucks operating in the United States.
Under our trade agreements with Mexico, American trucks are supposed to be able to operate in Mexico, and Mexican trucks are supposed to be able to operate in the U.S.
But the Clinton Administration blocked Mexican trucks, claiming that there were safety concerns.
We need good relations with our neighbors to the south, but we also need safe vehicles on our roads.
So we're interested in holding a hearing to get to the bottom of this issue.
Q.
Now, while we're talking about the Highways and Transit Subcommittee, you recently spent a day in Boston inspecting what's known as the "Big Dig" project.
What's this all about?
The Boston Central Artery project is the most massive government construction project in the history of the United States.
In fact, in current dollar terms, it's bigger than the building of the Panama Canal.
Begun in the early 1980s, over my strenuous objections, the Central Artery Project is in the process of replacing bridges over Boston Harbor and downtown highways with a series of tunnels.
Known as the "Big Dig," it was initially slated to cost $2.6 billion but as a junior member of the minority party in the early 80s I unsuccessfully opposed it, charging that it would cost far more than $2.6 billion.
Last year the price tag rose to $14 billion, and a couple of weeks ago cost overruns added another $150 million.
Anyhow, I'm furious about the cost, but so much work has already been done that we have to finish it.
I was in Boston all day June 18th, and it's a remarkable engineering feat.
It's just too bad that we have to pay for it.
Q.
Well, finally, Representative Petri, on June 13th you met with two University of Wisconsin - Madison students to inspect a modified Chevrolet Suburban which they had entered in the Future Truck 2001 competition sponsored by the U.S. Department of Energy and the General Motors Corporation.
That's right.
Eric Schroeder, a Neenah High School graduate and UWM junior in Engineering Mechanics, and Julie Marshaus, a Tomah Senior High School graduate and currently a Masters Student in Mechanical Engineering at UWM showed me their Chevy Suburban SUV which they had modified to run using energy-saving diesel and electric engines.
Q.
Well, here's some tape of Eric Schroeder and Julie Marshaus at that event:
Schroeder: This particular Suburban we've actually been working on for two years now.
This is the second year of the competition the last year that we'll be doing the Suburban.
And next year we're moving on to a Ford Explorer is going to be what we hybridize.
Petri: ... of the competition is to come up with something that's more fuel efficient.
Schroeder: The goal of the competition is to take a vehicle and make it perform the same as a regular automobile, but get good mileage and less emissions make it more environmentally friendly and also to learn....
What we have is we have a 2.5 liter diesel engine out of Europe, and we run it with an electric motor.
Total, we get about 230 horsepower, so it's a pretty good vehicle.
Our initial tests show about 30 miles-per-gallon diesel.
So, that converts to about 28 miles-per-gallon gasoline, and stock is somewhere between 14 and 15, so we've almost doubled the stock mileage.
We're very happy about that.
Petri: And how about performance? Will the van accelerate and go as fast as a regular commercial vehicle?
Schroeder: Yes, it will.
We actually spent the last 10 days testing it at the GM test facility in Milford, MI.
And we had to do acceleration runs and off-road runs.
We actually completed all the off-road events with our vehicle aluminum frame and everything.
So, we had almost as good as stock in all of the categories.
We just need to do some fine tuning and tweaking, and we should be good.
So we're very excited.
Petri (to Marshaus): How did you get interested in the world of automotive engineering?
Marshaus: I actually got interested in automotive engineering when my dad has a 39 Packard at home that we started restoring.
And I went off to college and thought "Well, maybe some type of engineering."
And then I got involved in mechanical engineering and co-oped at [?] Engine Company, and then came back and heard about the future car program at the time.
And since then have become more involved in the Future Car program.
Petri: Not only have they engineered this vehicle for fuel efficiency and performance, but it also has the latest electronic gear on the driver's console, including voice recognition equipment.
So, that instead of having to use mechanical controls, you can actually speak to the car, and it will answer your question by showing you where you are, or various other features.
We're about to learn about it:
Schroeder: You can even program it and tell it where you want to go.
And as you're driving it'll say, "Turn right at the next street."
It's really neat.
We have to play with it yet and get it perfect, but it's a lot of fun.
Petri: Does it sit in the back seat when it tells you to turn right or left?
Schroeder: No.
There's just a little display up in the front.
We also have a DVD player that we put in for watching movies.
So when we're board we can do that.
Petri: That's not for the driver.
Schroeder: No.
Unfortunately.
But, I do believe we get Internet access on that system.
It's amazing what they have out there....
Marshaus: The thing that we've done with our vehicle that I don't know if Eric mentioned, is that we've kept the interior stock.
We still have all the space to put all the kids and the dog and all the camping equipment.
And, everything hybrid is still hidden underneath the vehicle.
Q. Comments, Representative Petri?
The purpose of the competition is to reconfigure a standard vehicle to make it more energy efficient and environmentally friendly without sacrificing performance.
We're in the process of making the transition to electric vehicles, and probably to hydrogen-powered cars.
And I'm glad that Wisconsin's citizens, and Wisconsin-trained students, are a part of the effort.
Blueline Return to: Radio Show Page | Rep. Petri's Home Page
