[jims.jpg] POLICE COMMUNICATIONS DISPATCHER 6300 SUMMARY STATEMENT: Under direct supervision during training period and under limited supervision thereafter, is responsible for simultaneously operating a multi-channel radio console, computer terminal and multi-line telephone while maintaining written logs and records.
Is responsible for receiving, coordinating, and disseminating critical information from various sources.
Performs other duties as required.
This is a competitive classification.
ESSENTIAL FUNCTIONS: 1.
Prioritizes calls in order to provide timely and appropriate response by D.P.S. officers and/or other public safety personnel (e.g. medical, fire, PDs, SOs, etc.) using status sheets, incident cards, telephones, radio in order to assign specific personnel and ensure rapid response.
2.
Communicates orally with Department employees, other law enforcement and criminal justice agencies, emergency service providers and general public to obtain and disseminate information using multi-line telephone system and multi-channel radio.
3.
Dispatches to law enforcement personnel in the field (e.g. patrol officers, investigators, agents, etc.) information (e.g.
All Points Bulletin (APB), Attempt To Locate (ATL), etc.), on calls for service (e.g. 9-1-1, accidents, assistance, etc.), to respond to requests for information in order to meet needs of user groups using a multi-channel radio console, telephone, computer, patrol tracking system, call out lists, status sheets.
4.
Retrieves information from automated files (e.g. ACJIS, NCIC, MIS, TPD, limited international computer information, etc.) to respond to queries from a variety of sources (e.g. law enforcement/criminal justice agencies, radio, telephone, the public, etc.) by typing correct password keys, information masks or special alpha number string formats on computer screen.
5.
Answers and screens incoming multi-line telephone calls to provide assistance or refer call to appropriate person/department (e.g. messages, queries, 9-1-1, etc.) using multi-line telephone system.
6.
Communicates with a variety of callers to obtain complete information for dispatching a variety of law enforcement service (e.g. crimes, traffic accidents medical/fire emergencies, safety hazards, chemical spills, flooded highways/downed power lines etc.) by using telephone, and fire, ambulance, callout manuals, maps and phone listings in order to provide appropriate assistance using the telephone, incident cards, information database and multi-channel radio.
7.
Listens carefully and questions radio and telephone callers to ensure accuracy and completeness of information received by recording and verifying data in/on logs, incident cards, etc. and by redirecting callers to appropriate information source or jurisdiction.
8.
Operates multi-line telephone, records information (on incident cards, phone message forms, E-mail, etc.) while simultaneously operating a multi-channel radio console by depressing foot bar or individual channel select module and computer terminal in order to receive and respond to inquires for service or assistance of a routine or emergency nature from user groups.
9.
Types on a computer terminal keyboard to input, update, request, transmit or query information (Attempt To Locate (ATL), Injured Person (IP), Deceased Person (DP), Duty Log, certified abstracts, Road and Weather System (RAWS), etc.) from a variety of sources (telephone, teletype, radio) to maintain current, accurate records, or to access information data bases (e.g. ACIC/NCIC, El Paso Intelligence Center, etc.) for information, wants and warrant checks, intelligence, driver's license and vehicle registration checks.
10.
Uses standardized codes, language and abbreviations when writing and dispatching information in order to ensure clarity of information and uniformity of communications as directed by supervisor.
11.
Interprets telephone or radio callers' locations from maps by applying knowledge of state highway system and geography in order to provide appropriate and timely assistance.
12.
Maintains status and location of law enforcement units, civilian motorist assists and other department employees using a multi-channel radio console, status sheets coordinate response of units to event or incident.
13.
Maintains handwritten or computer-generated logs (e.g. communication, tow-truck, AZ DOT etc.) to ensure accurate chronology of events (e.g. status of units, shift relief briefing, availability of equipment and services) by writing or inputting necessary information or data to preserve information for legal or evidentiary purposes.
14.
Assesses a situation to determine if other services are needed by applying knowledge of available services or resources to assist callers.
15.
Assesses the nature and priority of calls received in order to determine the appropriate number and type of personnel and equipment to dispatch.
16.
Maintains awareness of other activities in the communications center (e.g. 9-1-1 calls, critical incidents, etc.) in order to connect related information and provide additional support should it be necessary by visually and audibly monitoring the work environment.
17.
Monitors and answers multiple telephone "HOT" lines (direct, dedicated lines to other law enforcement or public safety offices, e.g. Phoenix PD, Phoenix Fire Department, Maricopa County Sheriff's Department, etc.) in order to determine the need for a response.
18.
Monitors a variety of communications equipment (e.g. radio consoles, phones, alarms, etc.) to ensure it is operational by ensuring control panel lights are appropriately lit (e.g. red, green and amber).
19.
Dispatches or requests services of public service units (e.g. traffic signal repair, natural resources, highway maintenance, utilities, etc.) to calls for service in order to respond to needs of user groups through multi-channel radio console, telephone, call-out manuals, etc. 20.
Assesses whether callers and/or visitors should have access to information being requested to ensure confidential information is disseminated only to authorized personnel.
21.
Coordinates in-state/out-of-state emergency calls in order to relay information involving other law enforcement agencies by employing telephones, multi-channel radio and incident cards.
22.
Reads/interprets, city, county, state maps for the public, field personnel and other law enforcement/criminal justice agencies in order to assist in locating certain geographical areas using the state of Arizona map, U.S. Atlas and various city and county maps.
23.
Issues case and/or traffic accident report numbers by accessing specialized databases (e.g. DART, Department Automated Record Tracking) in order to track, locate and cross reference reports at various stages of processing.
24.
Accesses Electronic Mail System (EMS) in order to enter or obtain information pertaining to section's function and personnel by using a computer or CRT. 25.
Notifies/requests services of support services (e.g. Air Rescue, Customs, Game and Fish, National Guard, livestock, FBI, ATF, Border Patrol, NTSB, Agriculture, Religious Affiliations, etc.) by telephone or paging system in order to meet request of authorized personnel.
26.
Reviews daily bulletins (e.g.
All Points Bulletin (APB) summary, Attempt To Locate(s) ATL(s) by reading bulletin summaries, incident cards and teletypes in order to remain current on wanted suspects, stolen vehicles and other officer safety issues.
27.
Reviews shift's activities at end of shift with relieving dispatcher to ensure accurate exchange of information (e.g. review of status sheets, patrol schedules, notes, etc.).
28.
Provides general information to the public (e.g. phone numbers, agency services, etc.) using telephone directories and reference materials in order to serve the needs of the public.
29.
Tracks and logs D.P.S. and other agency fixed and rotary wing aircraft through multi-channel radio and status sheet to ensure safe arrival at destinations and respond to any requests by personnel on board.
30.
Sorts, cross indexes and files communication center information materials (e.g. teletypes, "hits", logs, etc.) alphabetically or numerically, etc., in order to ensure accuracy and availability accessibility of records pertaining o communications operations.
31.
Monitors and maintains 24 hour recorder system of all communication conversations by periodically observing tape movement/and light function, changing tapes every 24 hours, and demagnetizing heads and reel rollers.
32.
Answers and takes calls of an abusive or threatening nature (e.g. irate, emotionally upset, mentally unstable, suicidal callers, bomb threats, etc.) to evaluate the needs and initiate the appropriate response.
33.
Coordinates prisoner relays/transports with duty officers, sergeants and transport officers in order to complete extradition requirements by making the necessary arrangements with the detail personnel.
34.
Types accident re-logs (summaries on all fatalities or accidents involving departmental personnel/equipment) using E-mail in order to provide information to appropriate management or chain of command personnel.
35.
Processes incoming computer message from other criminal justice agencies by reading a computer screen, re-keying and rerouting the message to the appropriate criminal justice agency(s) or terminal in order to relay information/messages by using a computer or CRT terminal.
36.
Records information regarding statewide road and weather conditions on a recorder 24-hour telephone hot line by reading edited script to provide information to the motoring public.
37.
Operates insta-call recorders as needed to repeat and verify information received from personnel in the field during a radio transmission using the insta-call recorder.
38.
Reviews tow logs and queries ACIC to ensure entries are made on abandoned/stored vehicles using tow books, logs and computer.
39.
Communicates with hearing impaired, speech impaired and hearing public by operating a Text Telephone (TDD) communication device; responding to messages by typing a message on the TDD keyboard and receiving the caller's response.
40.
Notifies Department security and technical support personnel of interruptions in building and microwave alarm systems (e.g. intrusions/malfunctions, etc.) to ensure building security.
41.
Monitors and operates a weather wire to disseminate information statewide alerting news media and law enforcement personnel of inclement weather conditions by reading information from a printer, re-keying it on a computer keyboard and sending it out to appropriate agencies using a printer and a terminal keyboard.
42.
Reviews and updates computerized phone database (e.g. MIS PHON) and callout information files by inputting new or amended telephone numbers or notification lists in order to ensure current, accurate data.
43.
Attends meetings and in-service training to maintain knowledge level, exchange information (e.g. issues, problems, suggestions, policies/procedures etc.).
44.
Prints patrol schedules daily by accessing a schedule database in order to have most current information available for oncoming shift.
45.
Remains current on job specific procedures through attending training courses in order to apply appropriate methodologies.
46.
Tracks media release calls and provides information to the media regarding road emergencies (e.g. hazards delays, closures, etc.) at request of officer.
47.
Maintains daily count of statistics on various communication functions (e.g. radio transmissions, incident cards, 911 calls, ACIC/NCIC hits, etc.) in order to provide information to supervisor for statistical reports.
48.
Travels to geographical areas of dispatch responsibility by riding with a patrol officer to become familiar with highways, landmarks, mileposts, spots, patrol boundaries, etc. 49.
Provides relief back-up to switchboard personnel during breaks, leave and training to ensure adequate section coverage.
50.
Monitors a variety of alarms by recognizing alarm signals (alarm box, alarm panel/light) and verifies violation/problem/entry in order to ensure facility safety, building and equipment security.
51.
Copies and distributes miscellaneous forms used in radio, training and clerical functions (e.g. status sheets, logs, section roster, training materials, policies/procedures, handouts, correspondence, etc.) in order to ensure availability of forms for dispatchers at radio console.
52.
Communicates patient information between rural ambulances and receiving hospitals or connects ambulance to hospital to provide emergency care and instructions to emergency medical response personnel by connecting emergency vehicle with hospital by radio or phone using a radio console and telephone.
53.
Operates a multi-channel, battery operated, portable radio while in the field for special events (e.g. concerts, games, DUI Task Force, etc.) emergency situations or for emergency backup when consoles become inoperable or non-functional in order to provide two-way communication (radio contact) between the dispatcher and user groups.
54.
Conducts quality control checks of work performed by all shifts by reviewing status sheets, CAD (Computer Aided Dispatch) system reports, specialized databases, logs and files in order to maintain accuracy and consistency.
55.
Conducts periodic inspections of equipment (e.g. radio consoles, specially marked towers, 9-1-1 printers, weather lines, NLETS, TTY, records, etc.) and center facilities.
56.
Assigns confidential codes (e.g. "NNN" numbers) to requesting law enforcement personnel by issuing a code number to authorized individuals and incorporating the transaction into the unit's computer system in order to ensure their personal safety during high risk activity (e.g. search warrants, buy/busts, etc.) using the telephone.
57.
Answers call box telephones (e.g. interstate 19) by responding to requests for assistance (e.g. accident, medical emergency, fire, broken down vehicles, trucks, etc.) from general public by initiating appropriate action and sending appropriate response.
58.
Shreds highly sensitive written material that is no longer needed in a shredder in order to ensure its restricted status.
59.
Greets visitors (e.g. Departmental personnel, other state or law enforcement agency personnel and the general public) in person in order to provide assistance or refer to appropriate staff member/section.
KNOWLEDGE, SKILLS, AND ABILITIES REQUIRED: 1.
Ability to type at a speed necessary for adequate job performance.
2.
Ability to work in a small, confined area with limited mobility, without breaks, for extended periods of time.
3.
Ability to work irregular hours, holidays and weekends.
4.
Skill to communicate clearly and concisely both orally and in writing.
5.
Skill in effective listening.
6.
Ability to establish and maintain courteous and effective working relationships.
7.
Ability to work effectively under extremely stressful conditions.
8.
Ability to maintain emotional control and function effectively during an emergency or crisis situation.
9.
Ability to develop and maintain effective working relationships.
10.
Ability to write legibly.
11.
Ability to memorize, retain and accurately recall information.
12.
Ability to adapt to constantly changing situations and effectively take appropriate action.
13.
Ability to organize, prioritize and adapt appropriate action.
14.
Ability to read, understand and interpret moderately difficult to complex written information (e.g. policies, procedures, rules, regulations, statutes, etc.).
15.
Ability to work independently with minimal supervision.
16.
Ability to exercise good judgement in the safeguarding of confidential or sensitive information.
17.
Skill in the use of computer/keyboard devices to retrieve and/or enter information.
18.
Skill in effectively making decisions based on a limited amount of information.
19.
Ability to perform detailed work with a high degree of accuracy.
20.
Skill in decision making/problem solving in crisis or emergency situations.
21.
Ability to understand verbal instructions in the use of specialized equipment.
22.
Ability to accurately understand various transmissions (e.g. telephone, radio, etc.) and transcribe information, (e.g. numbers, letters, names and facts) from one source to another in a timely manner.
23.
Skill in the use of modern office equipment (e.g. various keyboards, 24-hour recording machines, demagnetizers, telephone switchboards, photo copiers, specialty telephones, radio devices, FAX machines, shredders, etc.).
24.
Ability to operate a multi-line telephone system and switchboard, answering and appropriately directing multiple incoming calls.
25.
Ability to effectively interpret a variety of maps and dispatch information to field personnel.
26.
Knowledge of business English, spelling, grammar and punctuation required to produce and proofread moderate to complex written documents.
27.
Ability to accurately interpret and follow Department rules and guidelines, (e.g. General Orders, Director's Management Regulations, Law Enforcement Merit System Council Rules, section policies/procedures.).
28.
Ability to work within deadlines in order to complete assignments within a designated time period.
29.
Ability to calculate mathematical problems involving addition, subtraction, multiplication and division of simple to moderate difficulty.
30.
Skill in the operation of a multi-channel radio, with multiple frequencies.
31.
Skill in the accessing and using a variety of computerized databases (e.g. DART, NCIC, ACIC, El Paso Intelligence Center, D.P.S.
Mainframe, etc.) 32.
Ability to travel on a limited basis.
33.
Ability to greet visitors in person in a courteous, professional and effective manner.
34.
Skill in accurately distinguishing a variation of radio voice transmissions.
35.
Ability to develop, lead and participate in teams and work groups.
36.
Skill in recognizing and monitoring communication equipment problems and notifying appropriate personnel for repair.
37.
Ability to compose written materials (e.g. memoranda, letters, reports, studies, manuals, training material, etc.) of moderate to complex difficulty on various subjects for various levels of readership.
MINIMUM QUALIFICATIONS: Entry Level Police Communications Dispatcher requires successful completion of the skills (e.g. typing at a minimum of 40 net words per minute, Perfex, etc.), written, and oral examinations and successful completion of the physical tests (e.g. audiogram, visual acuity, peripheral vision, color vision, etc.) upon acceptance of conditional offer of employment.
Midpoint Level Police Communications Dispatcher requires three (3) years of satisfactory performance at Entry Level Police Communications Dispatcher; or three (3) years of police dispatching experience.
Must type a minimum of 40 net words per minute.
Must successfully complete the examination process.
Maximum Level Police Communications Dispatcher requires three (3) years of satisfactory performance at the Midpoint Level of Police Communications Dispatcher; or six (6) years of police dispatching experience.
Must type a minimum of 40 net words per minute.
Must successfully complete the examination process.
Note: The Director may hire at the Entry, Midpoint or Maximum Level.
1/28/00
