[sub_header.gif] STATEMENT OF DAVID HEINDEL, 2ND VICE CHAIRMAN SEAFARER'S, FISHERIES AND INLAND NAVIGATION SECTION OF THE INTERNATIONAL TRANSPORT WORKERS' FEDERATION BEFORE THE HOUSE ARMED SERVICES COMMITTEE SPECIAL OVERSIGHT PANEL ON THE MERCHANT MARINE VESSEL OPERATIONS UNDER "FLAGS OF CONVENIENCE" AND NATIONAL SECURITY IMPLICATIONS JUNE 13, 2002 Mr. Chairman and Members of the Panel:
I am David Heindel, Second Vice Chairman of the Seafarers, Fisheries and Inland Navigation Section of the International Transport Workers Federation (ITF) and am appearing this morning on behalf of David Cockroft, the organizations General Secretary.
The ITF is an international federation of 594 transport trade unions in 136 countries representing approximately five million transport workers.
The ITF appreciates the opportunity to express its views with regard to the phenomenal growth of flag-of-convenience (FOC) vessels and registers, their negative impact on national and maritime security, and the social and economic consequences resulting from this continued propagation.
I ask that the ITFs prepared in-depth testimony be submitted for the record in its totality.
Meanwhile, I will attempt to cover its most salient points.
But first, David Cockroft has personally asked that I convey to you on this sad nine-month observance his and the organizations shock and disdain at the terrorist attacks against the United States on September 11^th and by the fact that transport workers workplaces were used as weapons of mass destruction.
Mr. Chairman, I am also the Secretary-Treasurer of the Seafarers International Union (SIU), which represents thousands of merchant seamen employed on U.S.-flag vessels engaged in both domestic and international maritime trades.
As such, I concur with the observations made in the ITFs submitted testimony regarding flag-of-convenience vessels and will take this opportunity to also share some of the SIUs views representing American mariners on this subject.
Throughout the history of the debate over the flag registration of world shipping, various terms have been used to describe this phenomenon.
Oftentimes, they have referred to convenience flags as runaway flags, meaning that the operators of those vessels escape legitimate scrutiny, regulation and obligations to national security.
They have also been referred to as mercenary flags because of the belief that they are literally for sale, where flag loyalty and protections become a matter of profitable annual registration fees rather than the honest legacy of a true nation.
Flags-of-convenience are the maritime ensigns of those countries whose laws allow, indeed in some cases make it easy for, ships owned by foreign nationals or foreign companies to fly their flags.
These governments do not see registration as a means of imposing sovereignty and control over their flag shipping.
Instead, these governments see registrations as a service that can be sold to foreign ship owners wishing to escape the financial, safety, and social consequences of registration under their own national flags.
The convenience countries likewise have neither the desire, the power, nor the administrative machinery to impose regulations that temper the narrowest private economic concerns with social objectives.
If they tried to, they would cease to be convenient.
Those who exploit the existence of the FOC system lack any form of genuine link with the state of registration.
As cited in the ITF testimony, the FOC system provides a hiding place for ship owners to avoid the restrictions of international law, where states sell their sovereignty to those wishing to avoid flag state interference in safety, environmental or labor standards and the transparency of their corporate structure.
And herein lies one of the most serious deficiencies with the FOC system -- the lack of transparency in corporate structure -- that both the ITF and SIU view as a facilitator of transnational criminal activities and terrorism.
FOC vessels have been linked to the registration of hijacked ships, phantom ships, fraudulent mariner documentation, illegal unreported and unregulated fishing, illegal alien smuggling and, most recently to international terrorism.
The ITF submission clearly demonstrates the link between the Liberian flag, money laundering, and terrorism.
Mr. Chairman, we applaud your recognition of this fact as expressed in your remarks on National Maritime Day.
In your statement you acknowledged that we see nations like Liberia using flagging dollars, flagging fees that companies that used to flag American are paying into that dictatorship, into terrorist groups and into terrorist operations.
Yet FOC forces attempt at every opportunity to portray themselves as supporters of an open registry in both philosophy and practice.
The term, though entirely inaccurate, is designed to appeal to the public.
In a free society, such as the United States, the term open has positive connotations and implies access, disclosure and availability.
The term registry implies a record of operations and the two terms combined imply that records of ship operations are available for public scrutiny.
In fact, this is merely an illusion that FOC supporters attempt to pass as reality.
The ongoing and frustrating search for Osama bin Ladens ships, as outlined in the ITF testimony, illustrates the supposed openness of convenience registries and the problems that this system has spawned.
The international hunt for the business interests of Osama bin Laden and the al-Qaeda network has thrown into sharp relief the secret nature of shipping and the FOC system.
Soon after the terrorist attacks on September 11^th, specialist corporate investigators were hired to track down companies owned by al-Qaeda members.
The group is thought to control up to 80 front companies in 50 countries worldwide, involved in construction, trade in products such as sugar and peanut oil, and shipping, according to press reports.
There is speculation that al-Qaeda vessels have been used to smuggle heroin and hashish from Afghanistan.
Bin Ladens covert shipping interests were first revealed during the trial of suspected bombers of the U.S. embassies in Kenya and Tanzania in 1998.
A rusting freighter was found to have delivered supplies for the bombers to the port of Mombassa, Kenya.
Ships can also be used to move personnel, equipment, and even weapons of mass destruction around the world.
For example, just recently, it was reported that 25 terrorists linked to Osama bin Ladens al-Qaeda network illegally entered the United States as stowaways aboard cargo vessels through ports of Miami, Savannah and Long Beach.
The news emerged in a classified U.S. Coast Guard report, although the agency has declined to make any further comment.
Senator Bob Graham, chair of the Senate Select Committee on Intelligence stated that the Islamic extremists slipped through security disguised as stevedores and might have been wearing safety jackets and protective helmets to give the appearance of dockworkers.
In a recent decision brief by the Center for Security Policy, a non-profit, non-partisan organization committed to the time-tested philosophy of promoting international peace through American strength, the group wrote the following frightening scenario:
according to a recent U.N. assessment, the Taliban had roughly 100 Scud shorter-range ballistic missiles.
Al Qaeda is believed to own ships; certainly most terrorist-sponsoring nations do.
In fact, there are an estimated 25,000 vessels at sea on any given day, the majority of them flying flags of convenience.
For the most part, our wildly overtaxed Coast Guard has no clue what even those ships in or near U.S. waters contain, where they are headed and who are their crew.
Sailing 100 miles off our shores, a ship capable of launching one of these Scud-type missiles could range most of the nations largest population centers.
Because of the severity of the situation and the implications to national and maritime security, the trade union movement has sought to have the lack of transparency addressed within the International Maritime Organization.
In a paper submitted to the Legal Committee by the International Confederation of Trade Unions (ICFTU), the organization proposed a definition of beneficial ownership and control to be used in the context of maritime security.
As an aside, generally speaking, the beneficial owner is the person, company or organization gaining ultimate financial benefit from the shipping operation while the operator is the person, company or organization responsible for the day-to-day operation of the ship.
The ICFTU pointed out that the true beneficial owner/controlling interest is cloaked with a veil of secrecy and the fact that the registered owner is disclosed is immaterial since that company will rarely have any real connection to the control and beneficial ownership of the vessel.
In a subsequent paper to the Maritime Safety Committee, the ICFTU proposed that in order to provide for complete transparency of ownership, there should be available on board at all times details of the beneficial ownership of the vessel and the individual or corporation which has effective control of the ship.
The United States, in a delegation headed by the Coast Guard, also submitted a paper on this issue to the Legal Committee noting that transparency of information on the ships owner/operator plays an important role in ensuring that ships are not used to support terrorist activities, either directly or indirectly.
Recognizing that the registered owner of a vessel is no more than a brass plate corporation, i.e., an entity created solely for the purpose of being designated as a vessel owner, with no actual control of the vessel.
Providing such information gives little, if any indication of who actually controls the movements or operations of the ship, or who derives the profits from its trade.
The United States further advanced that the use of brass plate corporations as a means to shield the identity of terrorist organizations that threaten the safety and security of ships, ports, and people cannot be justified on any basis.
Thus, this information should be made readily available.
As succinctly stated by a U.S. Coast Guard Captain, you have to know that a ship is owned and operated by legitimate people.
I feel very strongly about that.
You could have a dummy company operating a vessel, and an owner who wants to ship weapons of mass destruction.
The SIU wholeheartedly supports this position.
We believe that a requirement for transparency of ownership must be a part of any new maritime security regime.
Unfortunately, the ICFTU and U.S. position did not prevail at the Legal Committee for mandatory disclosure of a ships beneficial ownership to relevant authorities upon request.
Ship owners worldwide mobilized against this position.
As a result, the Committee concluded that for the purposes of international legislation, any attempt to keep track of beneficial owners in the interests of maritime security would be futile.
An ICFTU attempt to sustain debate on investigating links between ships to their beneficial owners for further legal consideration was effectively swept away.
And, to our dismay, the U.S. delegation took a conciliatory stance and reasoned that knowledge of the beneficial owner would not necessarily breed greater security.
The Legal Committee concluded that the central or fundamental question in matters relating to ownership and control of vessels for maritime security purposes is who has effective operational control of the ship.
Given this situation and the fact that the United States has been the victim of a terrorist attack of such magnitude, we urge the U.S. Congress on a unilateral basis to enact legislation authorizing the U.S. Coast Guard to refuse entry to U.S. ports to any foreign-flag vessel that does not provide transparency and/or full identify of the vessels beneficial owner.
Undoubtedly, the lack of transparency in the corporate structure of flag of convenience vessels is a threat to national and maritime security.
Speaking as an American labor representative, one can also posture that the nautical prerogative of an American owner registering a vessel under a flag-of-convenience that ignores all legitimate safety, security, environmental and social concerns is similarly a threat to U.S. maritime and defense security.
Today, approximately 562 oceangoing vessels in the U.S.-foreign trade are owned by U.S. companies flying a foreign flag and crewed by a plethora of foreign seamen, while only 147 fly the American flag and are crewed by American seamen.
The option for an American owner to register his ship in a country not his own, predominantly an FOC registry, and use that vessel to ply the U.S. foreign trade negatively impacts the stance of the U.S. flag fleet.
This situation leads to the continued decline of the U.S.-flag merchant marine, a vital asset to this nations defense posture.
As we lose ships, we lose the cadre of skilled American citizen crews needed to man the 100 plus organic ships owned by the Department of Defense and operated by American companies and crews in a contingency.
Further, proponents of the FOC system cite that U.S. citizen-owned vessels registered in Panama, Honduras, Liberia, Bahamas, and the Marshall Islands are under the effective control of the United States (EUSC).
But, in fact, currently only 33 tankers and 25 dry cargo ships in this program are militarily useful to the United States defense needs.
Further, potential changes in attitudes of the flag of convenience host countries and crews make availability and responsiveness questionable.
And we must remember that FOC vessels are crewed by a plethora of nationals -- Philippine, Chinese, Indian, Pakistani, Russian, Ukrainian and South Korean -- as well as those from other foreign countries that could pose a threat to U.S. security.
Data shows that in 2000, the Peoples Republic of China was the second largest labor supplying country for the U.S. trades with 7.9 percent of crews and steadily rising.
The SIU advances that we must, as an international leader of the free world, have the means under our own flag, with our own American crews and under our own control to fulfill our commitments and supply our military programs.
Only then can we be content in Americas maritime and defense security.
Moreover, the United States is a nautically dependent nation and relying on foreign-flag vessels to transport 95 percent of our imports and exports.
Many of those vessels are registered under a flag of convenience.
As noted in the ITF submission, currently available information suggests that FOCs are the main culprits in the recognition and hence legitimization of fraudulently issued licenses and mariner certificates.
In conjunction with the ITF submission, we have attempted to give you an accurate and authentic picture of the dysfunctional aspects of the FOC system and its detrimental impact on national and maritime security.
The SIU and ITF agree that the time has come to eliminate the culture of greed and corruption rooted in the FOC system.
Central to this objective must be the upholding of international law and restoring the genuine link between the vessel and the flag it flies, and in doing so, eliminating the flag-of-convenience phenomenon.
With regard to the United States, in my view, it is the policy decisions of the United States that have served to encourage flag-of-convenience registry.
The problem, as I see it, involves the formulation of maritime policy decisions that conflict with other overriding policies to which the United States is committed a strong U.S. flag capability ready to serve in times of war and peace.
Wittingly or unwittingly, the flag-of-convenience device has been subject to abuse, and if the best interests of the United States are to be protected, some limitation must be placed on the use of that device, if not total elimination.
I welcome any questions or comments you may have.
__________________________________________
House Armed Services Committee 2120 Rayburn House Office Building Washington, D.C. 20515
