US National Archives and Records Administration ...ready access to essential evidence...
Archives Library Information Center (ALIC) Attention users of screen reader software.
There are 4 possible starting points on this page, please select where you want to start using this page from the following choices: Start at the NARA Website Quick-links Skip the NARA Website Quick-links and start from the main navigation choices Skip the Quick-links and the Main Navigation choices and go to the Section-Specific Navigation choices Skip all navigation choices on this page and go directly to the content.
The NARA Website quick-links below provide a way to immediately navigate to frequently accessed areas of NARA's Website.
Where is Hot Topics / What's New Where is The Constitution Where is The Declaration of Independence Where is The Bill of Rights Where is Genealogy Where is Veterans' Service Records Where is Archival Research Catalog (ARC) Where is Access to Archival Databases (AAD) Where is eVetRecs Where is Electronic Records Archives (ERA) Where is Archives Library Info.
Center (ALIC) Where is Calendar of Events Where is FAQs Where is FOIA Reading Room Where is Information Security Oversight Office Where is Interagency Working Group (IWG) Where is Locations and Hours (Facilities) Where is Media Desk Where is Organization Chart Where is Preservation Where is Prologue Magazine Where is Publications How do I Use this Site How do I Order Copies How do I Contact NARA How do I Visit NARA How do I Apply for a Job How do I Volunteer at NARA How do I Research Online How do I Find a Public Law How do I Apply for a Grant How do I Find Records Management Training Attention users of screen reader software.
The NARA Website quick-links above are repeated verbatim in a HTML form below.
The form below is designed for traditional web browsers.
Select this link to skip past the form.
[ Where Is...? / How Do I...?..........]
GO! December 28, 2003
Welcome About Us Research Room Records Management Records Center Program Federal Register NHPRC and Other Grants Exhibit Hall Digital Classroom Records of Congress Presidential Libraries Search Site Index The National Archives Experience Our Documents - A National Initiative on American history, civics, and service Support the National Archives FirstGov: Your First Click to the U.S. Government Print-Friendly Version [clear_pixel.gif]
The New Books Shelf August 1, 1998 _________________________________________________________________
Contents: * Mexican-American War * World War I * World War II * Nazi Era * Military Air Operations * Court Records * New Reference Books * Professional Literature
Mexican-American War
Thanks to Tim Nenninger (NWCCR), the Library has added a number of new histories to the library holdings.
Agent of destiny: the life and times of General Winfield Scott, by John S.D. Eisenhower, is a biography of General Scott, hero of two major wars and the diplomat who prevented at least three other potential wars with Britain.
Eisenhower's book arrives at the NARA Library just in time for the sesquicentennial of the signing of the treaty to end the Mexican War.
The biography tells the story of General Winfield Scott, who not only served as an officer in the United States Army from 1809-1861, but wore the stars of a general from 1814 until his death in 1866.
Eisenhower uses, among other sources, the American State Papers and the Official Records of the War of the Rebellion, which can be found at the library in AI.
General Scott was not only an accomplished general, but also was a key proponent of America's Manifest Destiny, the ideology behind America's expansion during the nineteenth century.
When Scott first joined the Army, America was composed only of the original thirteen states.
By the time he retired, the United States held all of the territory we now know as the forty-eight contiguous states.
Though Eisenhower lists "hero of the War of 1812, conqueror of Mexico City, and Abraham Lincoln's top soldier in the early months of the Civil War" as General Scott's accomplishments, his story does not end there.
We also learn Scott was placed before a military court three times and even convicted once.
A great general in United States history as well as one of its most problematic, Scott's story is one well worth learning.
Mr. Polk's army, by Richard Bruce Winders, also arrives in time for the sesquicentennial of the Mexican War.
The book is more than merely a biography of Polk's life; it focuses on both the military experience of the war with Mexico as well as the political pull-and-tug of the Democrats (led by President Polk and his mostly Democratic officer corps) and Whigs (led by Andrew Jackson and General Winfield Scott).
Using, among other sources, M1034, Orders to General Zachary Taylor of the Army of Occupation in the Mexican War, 1845-1847, and M863, the Compiled Service Records of the Mississippi Volunteers in the War with Mexico, Winders' Mr. Polk's Army is a welcome addition to the National Archives Library collection.
Robert V. Remini's Daniel Webster: the man and his time (E340.W4R36 1997) details the life of a man who pursued more careers than most contemplate.
Remini lists Webster's career as a statesman, one of the five greatest senators in the history of the United States Congress, a magnificent orator, an excellent secretary of state, an outstanding lawyer, and an important contributor to the constitutional development of the United States among his accomplishments.
For those who are interested in more than Webster's professional life, Remini is equally thorough.
Remini writes "In preparing this biography, I came to understand why so many men in his own time disliked Daniel Webster.
I learned that he was untrustworthy, particularly when it came to money or the demands of his ambition...
He used people...
But if Webster's faults were many and grievous, and they were, his talents and contributions to this nation were far greater."
It is perhaps more difficult to be recognized as a great yet despised man rather than simply a great man, but Webster seemingly managed to do so, and Remini spares us no details in reconstructing his life.
Top of Page World War I
Author Charles H. McCormick has donated a copy of his book, Seeing Reds: federal surveillance of radicals in the Pittsburgh Mill District, 1917-1921, to the library.
Based on NARA records, at Archives I and Archives II, Suitland, and Mid-Atlantic-Philadelphia, McCormick's detailed history concentrates on the fact that during World War I, fear that a network of German spies was operating on American soil justified a rapid growth of federal intelligence agencies.
When the threat proved illusory, the agencies targeted antiwar and radical labor groups, particularly the Socialist Party and the Industrial Workers of the World.
McCormick focus is on the federal government's efforts to define, understand, and suppress leftists in the Pittsburgh region during the World War I era.
This book can be found at F159.P657M38 1997.
Top of Page World War II
Citizen Soldiers, by Stephen E. Ambrose, begins at 0001 hours, June 7, 1944 on the Normandy beaches, and ends at 0245 hours, May 7, 1945.
Though the experiences of Generals Eisenhower, Bradley, and Patton are included, part of what makes Citizen Soldiers unique is Ambrose's focus on those soldiers fighting on the front lines.
Not only are battles discussed, but using first-hand accounts, the people who fought and supported them are detailed as well.
Ambrose shows how millions of American men and women made the change from citizens to soldiers, nurses, clerks, and code-breakers to assist in the war effort.
Ambrose's book is shelved at D756 .A52 1997.
How to do research on World War II is the topic of an essay, "Primary published sources and published document," by Eugene L. Rasor and Loyd E. Lee, which appears as a chapter in World War II in Europe, Africa, and the Americas, with general sources: a handbook of literature and research (shelved at D743.42.W67 1997).
Rasor and Lee note the extensive WWII holdings of NARA and cite finding aids by a number of NARA staff members.
Top of Page Nazi Era
Library staff and volunteers have finished the Berlin Document Center Library (BDC) database.
It is available in papercopy for research use in the Library at Archives II, where it is shelved at Z2240.B45 1998 REF.
Volunteers Irving Horn, Christel Converse, Maria and Robert Budway, and Vera Wentworth translated into English the titles of German-language books in the BDC Library.
The volunteers also added subject terms to provider greater access to Nazi era material available on microfilm at Archives II.
A June 1998 supplement to the Preliminary study on U.S. and Allied efforts to recover and restore gold and other assets stolen or hidden by Germany during World War II has been prepared by the State Department's William Slany and Stuart E. Eizenstat with the participation of the Holocaust Memorian Museum and a number of other federal agencies including NARA.
During World War II, Allied officials became convinced that Germany's financial and commercial relations with neutrals were making it possible for Germany to obtain materials and supplies necessary to continue fighting.
After 1943, there was also concern that Nazi leaders were trying to conceal assets in the neutral countries for future use.
Although Switzerland figured prominently in the May 1997 preliminary report on gold looted by the Nazis and the use of that gold in financing Germany's wartime trade, with only brief mention of other countries, the supplement, entitled U.S. and allied wartime and postwar relations and negotiations with Argentina, Portugal, Spain, Sweden, and Turkey on looted gold and other assets stolen or hidden by Germany during World War II, provides a detailed analysis of the economic roles played by the other wartime neutrals
.
Like the 1997 Preliminary Study, this supplement is a guide to federal records of half a century ago, all of which are now declassified and fully available to researchers.
Together, the two studies provide an overall view of the part these neutral powers played in aiding the German war effort.
In the 1998 supplement (shelved at D810.C8U7 1997), there are two chapters which do not fit within the general view of neutrality during World War II.
Research on Argentina did not disclose any receipt by Argentina of Nazi gold; however the chapter was included because of the fascist leanings of some of its wartime leaders, its role as the Western Hemisphere's center for Germany's espionage, propaganda, and smuggling activites, and because of long-standing suspicions that Nazi-looted gold and other looted assets ended up there.
The second chapter that does not fit into the pattern of the report on neutral powers deals with gold looted from Croatia as well as on victim gold.
This chapter also raises questions about aspects of the Vatican's record during and immediately after World War II.
Stockholms Enskilda Bank and the Bosch Group, 1939-1950, was recently donated to the National Archives Library by Sweden's Foundation for Economic History Research within Banking and Enterprise.
In this book, the relations between the Bosch Group and the Stockholms Enskilda Bank (SEB) have been examined in connection with the economic role of neutral countries and Germany during World War II.
The Swedish SEB purchased Bosch Group companies outside Germany during 1939-1940, creating an association with Nazi Germany which colored SEB's international reputation during the post-war years.
Another recent addition to the holdings of the National Archives Library, Tell ye your children... a book about the Holocaust in Europe 1933-1945, was commissioned by the Swedish government as part of its educational project, "Living History", aimed at using the Holocaust as a basis for discussion on matters dealing with common humanity, democracy and the equal worth of all people.
The book, by Stephane Bruchfeld and Paul A. Levine, is intended to be a contribution to the knowledge about the Holocaust in Sweden, and on how to teach the subject.
Top of Page Military Air Operations
Colonel Maurice E. Byrne has contributed the last of three volumes of the History of the 563rd Signal Air Warning Battalion History to the library.
These publications are shelved at D769.363 563rd SG.
To save a city: the Berlin Airlift, 1948-1949, a recent publication of the Air Force History and Museums Program, is a timely addition to our library collection during the 50th Anniversary of the Berlin Crisis.
The author, Roger C. Miller, based much of his research on NARA material located in RG218, RG260, RG319, RG335, RG341, and the Truman Library.
The book is shelved with government documents at D301.82/7:B45.
A second Air Force publication recently added to the library holdings is Airpower against an army: challenge and response in CENTAF's duel with the Republican Guard.
Written by William F. Andrews, this occasional publication, sponsored by the Air University's College of Aerospace Doctrine, Research, and Education (CADRE), examines the air-to-ground onslaught against Iraq's Republican Guard in light of the need to adjust air operations to the realities of combat.
This book is shelved at D301.26/6:Ar5/2.
Tonkin Gulf and the Escalation of the Vietnam War, by Edwin E. Moise (shelved at DS 557.8 .T6 M65 1996), tells of the circumstances surrounding the attacks on United States Navy destroyers August 2nd and 4th, 1964 in the Tonkin Gulf off the coast of Vietnam.
Reports of these attacks led to airstrikes against North Vietnam and the passing of the "Tonkin Gulf Resolution" by Congress on August 7th, 1964, giving President Johnson the authority to take "all necessary measures" to "prevent further aggression."
As Moise details, the August 2nd report was accurate, as three North Vietnamese torpedo boats attacked a United States destroyer.
The August 4th report, Moise states, was an error due to darkness and inaccurate radar.
Moise uses both declassified government documents, including the deck logs of United States naval vessels held by NARA, as well as numerous interviews with both former United States and Vietnamese military personnel.
Top of Page Court Records The 1997 issue of the periodical Western Legal History (Volume 10, Numbers 1
This special issue, marking the tenth anniversary of the publication, reflects on the state of western legal history and includes the work of two NARA staff members.
Larisa Miller, an archivist at the National Archives - Pacific Sierra Region in San Bruno, California, describes how to study the development of the West through federal court records.
Claire Prechtel-Kluskens, a specialist in genealogy at Archives I, describes in depth the types of materials found in the various record groups relating to federal courts.
Other articles in the issue include "Sources for judging judges: state supreme court archives in the Southwest, by Peter Reich, Legal research for historians," by David McFadden, and "What's old about the new western history? Part 3: Law," by John R. Wunder.
Claire Prechtel-Kluskens' article, "The lives and careers of judges and other employees in the federal judicial system: some pointers on research," identifies NARA sources, with an emphasis on nineteenth-century records.
Prechtel-Kluskens notes that researchers should begin their work by exhausting any published sources which often provide biographical data and clues to archival records.
She goes on to describe the materials found in the various record groups relating to the federal courts, citing NARA's published finding aids to facilitate research.
Larisa K. Miller's article, "From courtroom to research room: studying the west in federal court records," uses examples from records on immigration, labor disputes, civil liberties, and environmental issues to demonstrate how court records can be used to study the development of the West.
The examples range from Gold Rush activities and the Chinese Exclusion Act to patents for cable cars and the metal rivets for fastening Levi Strauss' denim trousers.
Top of Page New Reference Books The library has recently acquired a copy of the book, How to access the federal government on the Internet, by Bruce Maxwell, (ZA4201.W37 1998 REF).
Published in 1997 by Congressional Quarterly, Inc., this is a valuable guide to government information free to anyone who has Internet access.
There are detailed descriptions of more than 600 federal government web sites with searching tips on how to search selected sites, as well as advice on where to start a search for federal government information on the Internet.
Another new addition to our reference collection at Archives II is the book, Authoritative guide to web search engines, by Susan Maze, David Moxley, and Donna J. Smith, (TK5105.88.M39 1997 REF).
In the preface, the authors note that not one of the web searchers searches or indexes the entire web or even comes close to it.
None of them provide standardized access terms and, in fact, web search engines perform "quick and dirty" collecting and indexing of web pages.
Given that caveat, in guiding users to effectively employ these search engines, this book indentifies and explains those areas in which the user can exercise significant control.
Finally, using criteria stated in the guide, the authors tested and evaluated the performance of each of the search engines.
They also present to the reader a generic model search engine to help users evaluate and use future search engines.
Top of Page Professional Literature Federal Information Policies in the 1990s: Views and Perspectives, edited by Hernon, McClure (JK468.S4F63 1996), and Relyea, uses a cross-disciplinary approach to examine recent developments concerning Federal government information issues.
Numerous issues are addressed, including the national information infrastructure, Congress and information issues, national security information policy, privacy, and a chapter titled "Managing Federal Records in the Electronic Age: Fundamental Challenges."
This chapter includes essay concerning the essential functions of archives, managing electronic records, and selecting, protecting, and providing electronic records.
This book offers information essential in understanding government information policy.
A Guide to Book Publishers' Archives, by Brodersen, Luey, Morris, and Trujillo, is a directory of the archives of United States publishers who have been active in the twentieth century.
This description can be somewhat misleading, however, as the authors have noted, because few publishers operate only in the United States and many were active in the nineteenth century as well, later closing in the twentieth century.
In some cases they have included magazine publishers and those who operate outside the United States.
In almost every borderline case, they have chosen to be inclusive.
The authors gathered their data in three ways.
Questionnaires were mailed from a list found in Literary Market Place to approximately 3,400 publishers, of which 400 replied, in varying detail.
The second approach was through published print sources, including the National Union Catalog of Manuscript Collections.
Their third method of searching was through the Internet, using the Research Libraries Information Network (RLIN) and World Wide Web (WWW) sites of dozens of libraries.
Their searches uncovered more than nine hundred collections representing about six hundred publishers.
Listings of each collection include publishing company name, the name and size of the collection, description of contents, existence of a finding aid, and restrictions to access.
(Call #Z 475.G86 1996)
Public-Private Competitions: Access to Records Is Inhibiting Work on Congressional Mandates, the Statement of Henry L. Hinton, Jr., Assistant Comptroller General, National Security and International Affairs Division, was presented as testimony before the Subcommittee on Military Readiness Committee on National Security, House of Representatives.
In his report Mr. Hinton discusses, in great length, the problems his division has had in obtaining access to Department of Defense information that is needed regarding these competitions in order to meet their responsibilities under the 1998 Defense Authorization Act.
Gulf War Illnesses: Federal Research Strategy Needs Reexamination, Statement of Donna Heivilin, Director of Planning and Reporting, National Security and International Affairs Division, is a 1998 publication of the United States General Accounting Office.
Called into question the government's methodology and data used in defining, and treating Gulf War illnesses.
The report details the following: 1.
The government was not proactive in researching Gulf War illnesses; 2.
The government's early research emphasized stress as a cause for Gulf War veterans' illnesses and gave other hypotheses, such as multiple chemical sensitivity, little attention; 3.
In contrast, the private sector pursued research on the health effects of low-level exposures to certain chemical warfare agents or industrial chemical compounds; 4.
Government research used an epidemiological approach, but little research on treatment was funded; and 5.
Most of the ongoing epidemiological research focusing on the prevalence or causes of Gulf War-related illnesses will not provide conclusive answers, particularly in identifying risk factors or potential causes due to formidable methodological and data problems.
Top of Page
Privacy and Use Accessibility Frequently Asked Questions Contact Us NARA Home Page NARA Address: 700 Pennsylvania Avenue NW, Washington, DC, 20408, Telephone: 1-86-NARA-NARA or 1-866-272-6272
[nojavascript
