spacer spacer spacer spacer spacer spacer spacer spacer spacer spacer spacer spacer New Jersey State home page spacer My New Jersey spacer People spacer Business spacer Government spacer Departments spacer "" _______________ Search Button Header Inside Corrections The Quarterly Newsletter of the New Jersey Department of Corrections Issue 3, Number 3 Fall 2002 Music Men Bagpipes Are Standard Equipment for These Two Officers A few weeks after beginning classes at the Correctional Staff Training Academy in Sea Girt, Keith Allen decided to spend a portion of his free time practicing his bagpipes.
Photograph of NJDOC Survivors Parade
"I started playing out on the ballfield in the evening," Allen, a 45-year-old native of Haw River, N.C., says in his distinctive Southern drawl.
"To be honest, I wasn't real sure how it would go over.
But it's not the kind of thing you can do in secret, and it didn't take long before the word got around.
Next thing I knew, our class coordinator (Sgt.
Robert Wagner) suggested that I play at our graduation ceremony.
Up until then, the State Police had always played the pipes at graduations.
But since my graduation (in January 2001), I've played at every one of them."
Dan McNeill, 50, a former Philadelphia policeman who has been in corrections for five years, has an equally vivid memory of one of his first assignments as a New Jersey Department of Corrections bagpiper.
However, unlike Allen's recollection, McNeill's reminiscence brings tears to his eyes.
"I was in a band with [NJDOC officer] Fred Baker, who's also an ex-Philly guy, and we became pretty good friends," McNeill relates.
"He's the one who talked me into taking the correction officer's exam.
A few months after I passed the exam and became an officer, Fred Baker was killed in the line of duty.
I was part of the brigade that played at his funeral.
What made it especially tough is that he was one of us.
In fact, he was buried with his practice chanter and a music book.
That was about as emotional a day as I can remember."
McNeill, a senior correction officer at Southern State Correctional Facility in Delmont, met several officers from nearby Bayside State Prison in Leesburg -- where Baker worked -- at the funeral.
Shortly thereafter, he was invited to play the bagpipes at various events with Bayside's honor guard.
"I was the only bagpiper in the department," he says, "until Keith came along."
Allen came along a few years after his 1998 marriage.
He left a job as a police officer in his native North Carolina and settled in Allentown with wife Arleen, a schoolteacher who hails from New Jersey.
When Allen relocated in the Garden State, North Carolina's law enforcement community lost not only a highly regarded officer, it lost one of its few bagpipers.
"I was the only one in the county I lived in as well as the four surrounding counties," says Allen, a senior correction officer at New Jersey State Prison in Trenton.
"As a result, whenever they were looking for someone to play the pipes, I got the job."
Even though Allen didn't learn to play the instrument until he was in his early 30s, his fascination with the bagpipes dates all the way back to his childhood.
"When I was a little kid, my father used to make me watch the Macy's Thanksgiving Day Parade on television," he recalls.
"He said it was culturally enriching.
The only things I ever cared about were the bagpipes and the Popeye balloon.
I knew that one day I wanted to learn how to play the bagpipes."
That day came approximately 12 years ago.
It's a decision he hasn't regretted -- and not just because he met his wife at a bagpipe school.
"People say you have to have Scottish blood in you to play the pipes, but if I have any Scottish ancestry, I don't know about it," says Allen, who also plays the harmonica.
"What I really like is, it's such a unique instrument, one that produces an incredibly rousing, stirring sound.
"Another thing about the pipes is that they're more versatile than people think," he continues.
"I've played at weddings, funerals and memorials, but I've also played at a flag retirement ceremony for a Boy Scout troop and even a bat mitzvah reception.
There I was, playing 'Hava Nagila,' and it went over great.
Everybody was dancing."
Allen, who also is a member of the NJDOC Motorcycle Brigade, is called upon to play the bagpipes two to three times per month, frequently as a representative of the Department of Corrections.
On those occasions, he's often paired with McNeill.
Because of the nature of the instrument, it is a partnership that challenges both men.
"The bagpipes are hard enough to play in tune when you're by yourself, but when you have more than one, you have to be in tune with each other, or it sounds horrible," Allen says.
"Most often, when people say they don't like bagpipe music, it's because they've heard it played badly.
"With Dan, things have worked out pretty well.
The more we play together, the better."
Adds McNeill, whose ancestry is "Irish, with a little bit of Scottish": "We had to adapt in the beginning, because even the songs that both of us knew, we played differently.
But we worked through it and kept improving.
At this point, we pretty much have a routine down."
Like Allen, McNeill's interest in the bagpipes dates back to his youth, yet he didn't learn to play the instrument until he was an adult.
McNeill is an accomplished saxophone player who spent more 20 years as a Mummer, but it wasn't until nine years ago, at age 41, that he learned to play the bagpipes.
"Quite a few years ago, I bought a cheap set of pipes, but I couldn't find anyone to teach me how to play," the North Cape May resident says.
That all changed when numerous members of Cape May's Emerald Society -- an organization for law enforcement officials of Irish descent -- collectively hired a bagpipe instructor.
"Having been a musician, I never imagined how difficult it'd be to learn," McNeill admits.
"The bagpipes aren't easy to conquer, and some of the guys from the Emerald Society eventually stopped taking lessons.
But it was worth it to those of us who stuck it out.
There's just something about the instrument that mesmerizes you."
McNeill estimates that he plays the bagpipes at 50 events annually, at least have of which as an NJDOC representative.
His repertoire has included "Amazing Grace" during the vast majority of those appearances.
"It's an ancient Scottish tune that lends itself real well to the bagpipes," he says.
"At this point, I guess most bagpipers can almost play it in their sleep."
Their ability to play the bagpipes has made both McNeill and Allen celebrities of sorts within the Department of Corrections.
"Even people who never met us know we're the bagpipers," McNeill says.
More accurately, they're known as the guys who dress up in kilts and play the bagpipes.
"I take a lot of ribbing, but it's all in fun" says McNeill, whose son, Sean, also plays the bagpipes.
Allen offers a somewhat more descriptive perspective than his colleague.
"I know some guys would rather eat a bucket of worms than wear a kilt," he says.
"But it doesn't bother me at all.
The kilt is traditional garb, and it predates pants by hundreds of years, so I have no problem with it.
"When people tell me they don't recognize me without my kilt, I say, 'That's the first time I've heard that line ... today.'
"And, of course, I wish I had a nickel for everyone who's asked me what I wear underneath the kilt," he continues, chuckling.
"I take pride in the fact that I've never told anyone, and I never will.
It's part of the mystique."
spacer spacer spacer spacer spacer spacer spacer spacer spacer spacer spacer Contact Us spacer Privacy Policy spacer Legal Statement spacer spacer spacer spacer spacer spacer department: | site map | home | about us | frequently asked questions | contact us | escapes | offender search | capital sentence unit | in the news | | offender statistics | deptcor | careers in corrections | nj admin code 10a | video teleconferencing | doc associated sites | statewide: | nj home | my new jersey | people | business | government | departments | Copyright © State of New Jersey, 1996 - This site is Bobby Approved
