Gettysburg National Military Park SUMMER RANGER PROGRAMS 
Extensive collection of artifacts and exhibits, information station and "Electric Map" the park orientation program which recreates the battle on a large-scale relief map.
This 30-minute program is an excellent way to begin your visit.
(Fee: Adults $3.00, Ages 6-15 $2.00, under 6 Free) Licensed Battlefield Guides can be hired at the Visitor Center.
The guides are individuals tested and licensed by the park to conduct personalized two-hour tours of the field in your vehicle.
(Fee: 1-6 people $40.00, 7-15 people $60.00, 16-49 people $90.00; over 50+ people $120.00)
CYCLORAMA CENTER- Hours: Daily 9:00 AM to 5:00 PM.
Houses the Gettysburg Cyclorama, a colossal canvas painting that surrounds the viewers, placing them in the middle of "Picketts Charge."
A dramatic 20 minute sound and light program brings the painting to life.
Last show at 4:30 PM.
(Fee: Adults $3.00, Ages 6-15 $2.00, under 6 Free)
RANGER CONDUCTED SUMMER PROGRAMS
These free programs are held daily or on special days during the summer season only.
Check our Summer 2003 Ranger Programs Daily Schedule for days and times, or ask for a schedule at the information desk when you visit the park.
For a complete schedule of events, check our Park Events page.
THE FIRST DAY - A 50-minute program that explores why the battle occurred at Gettysburg and how the fighting on July 1 shaped the rest of the battle.
Meet at the Eternal Light Peace Memorial, Auto Tour Stop 2.
THE SECOND DAY - This 50-minute program discusses the events and actions which resulted in some of the most desperate fighting of the American Civil War.
Meet at the Peach Orchard.
THE THIRD DAY AND BEYOND - The Confederate attack upon Cemetery Ridge on July 3, 1863, popularly known as "Picketts Charge," is one of the most well-known events in United States military history.
What did its outcome mean for the Union and Confederacy? Meet at the back patio of the Cyclorama Center.
NATIONAL CEMETERY - Join a guided 35-minute program that explores the meaning and cost of the Battle of Gettysburg, and of Abraham Lincolns Gettysburg Address.
Meet at the red brick rostrum near the cemetery entrance opposite the Visitor Center.
LITTLE ROUND TOP - One of the most famous hills in American military history.
Discover why it was so important and what happened there on July 2.
This walk meets at the General Warren statue on the summit of the hill.
CULPS HILL - This hill, along with Cemetery Hill, played a key role during all three days of the battle.
This program covers the fighting in this area on July 2 and 3.
Meet at the Culps Hill Tower.
EAST CAVALRY FIELD - Visit the scene of one of the largest cavalry battles of the war.
This program explores the role of cavalry during the war and the clash of July 3 east of Gettysburg.
Offered once weekly.
Ask at the information desk for details.
THE CIVIL WAR SOLDIER- Over 160,000 soldiers participated in the Battle of Gettysburg.
Find out why they enlisted, why they fought, and what they endured during the four years of the American Civil War.
Meet on the back patio entrance of the Cyclorama Center.
THE HARD HAND OF WAR - The American Civil War affected more than just the soldiers on the battlefield.
This program examines the enormous impacts of the war on the entire population, both North and South.
Meet on the back patio of the Cyclorama Center.
CASUALTIES OF WAR - There were over 27,000 men wounded in the Battle of Gettysburg.
Learn how they were treated in this fascinating program on Civil War Medicine.
Meet at the front entrance patio of the Cyclorama Center.
A VISIT TO THE PAST - Step back in time with costumed interpreters who portray men and women who witnessed and participated in the events of 1863 at Gettysburg.
Programs offered daily in the National Cemetery and at the Cyclorama Center.
THE MONUMENTS OF GETTYSBURG- The Gettysburg battlefield contains the world's largest collection of outdoor sculpture.
Who created these monuments and what do they symbolize? Learn about the extraordinary stories behind these memorials during this ranger-conducted program.
Meet on the west (second floor) plaza of the Cyclorama Center.
GETTYSBURG: THE AFTERMATH- The story beyond the three days of battle and how it affected the residents of Gettysburg and Adams County, when war arrived on their doorsteps and left behind the dead, the wounded, and the dying.
A long battlefield walk offered twice per week, Tuesdays and Saturdays.
CIVIL WAR STORY TELLING- A program for our youngest visitors and their families.
Come and hear true stories about Honest Abe, our 16th president, adventure stories like the 1862 clash of the first iron warships, funny tales like those told around wartime campfires, and heartfelt stories of soldiers and civilians at Gettysburg.
For ages 4 to 10 and their families.
This program is offered Wednesdays at 2 PM.
Meet at the front (main) entrance patio of the Cyclorama Center.
JOIN THE ARMY! - Children become involved in the life and learn of the hardships of the common Civil War soldier during this 1-hour program.
For ages 7 to 12.
Sign up at the Cyclorama Center information desk (Limited to the 25 participants).
EVENING CAMPFIRE PROGRAMS - Rangers present programs on a wide variety of topics on the Battle of Gettysburg and the American Civil War.
Nightly at the park amphitheater, Pitzer Woods, Auto Tour Stop 6.
BATTLE WALKS - Special two-hour walks explore a different area of the battlefield each day.
Walk the route of Picketts Charge or visit such places as Devils Den, the Wheatfield, East Cemetery Hill and many others.
Check at the information desk for schedule.
Some special walks may last up to three hours.
Water, proper headgear and foot gear is recommended.
HIKE WITH A RANGER - Join a ranger for a three-hour hike on the battlefield.
This informal program examines a wide variety of subjects, including the battle, Gettysburg civilians, monuments, the post-war history of the battlefield and much more.
Offered once weekly on Wednesday.
Meet the ranger on the back patio entrance of the Cyclorama Center.
SPECIAL EVENTS IN 2003
140th Anniversary Battle Walks, July 1 through July 4: Ranger-led walks on the battlefield discuss the three day battle as it progressed.
Two walks each day at 10:00 AM and 3:00 PM, with additional walks by licensed battlefield guides at 6:00 PM.
Check our 140th Anniversary Battle Walks at Gettysburg National Military Park page for a complete schedule and the Park Events page for updates.
Additional questions can be answered at (717) 334-1124, extension 422 or 431.
Living History Encampments: Battlefield encampments by living history/reenactment units are held at various locations throughout the park, demonstrating many aspects of the soldier's life on campaign.
Check our Park Events page for weekends dates, organizations and special encampments.
Wildcat Regimental Band Concert, June 15: In conjunction with the Gettysburg Brass Band Festival, the Wildcat Regimental Band will present a concert on the history of the American Brass Movement in the morning along with a concert in the afternoon at the Cyclorama Center.
__________________________________________________________________
EISENHOWER NATIONAL HISTORIC SITE
Begin your visit to the Eisenhower site at the Gettysburg National Military Park Visitor Center.
Entrance to the site is by shuttle bus only.
Tickets are on a first-come, first-served basis for the next available tour, 9:00 AM - 4:00 PM (Fee - Adults $5.75, Ages 13-16 $3.75, Ages 6-12 $2.50).
For more information, check the Eisenhower National Historic Site web site at http://www.nps.gov/eise
SUMMER PROGRAMS AND ACTIVITIES
EXPLORING EISENHOWER- Explore the life and career of this extraordinary soldier and statesman during a 30 minute program held at the Eisenhower site, at 10:15, 11:15, 2:15, and 3:15 daily.
Check at the Eisenhower Reception center for schedule, subjects, and starting location.
HIKE WITH IKE- This walking tour of downtown Gettysburg explores Eisenhower's life in the community.
Offered every Thursday at 7:15 PM.
Meet the ranger at the Gettysburg College gates on the corner of North Washington and Water Streets.
JUNIOR SECRET SERVICE- Children ages 6-12 visiting Eisenhower NHS with their family earn a Junior Secret Service badge and certificate by completing the self-guided activities in the Jr.
Secret Service Training Manual.
SPECIAL EVENTS AT EISENHOWER
The Eisenhower Academy, July 13-18, 2002- A week long institute for middle and secondary school teachers covering Eisenhowers foreign and domestic policy, 1950's popular culture and Eisenhowers leadership.
Graduate credits or Pennsylvania continuing education credits available.
Fee.
Call (717) 338-9114 for more information.
Remembering Korea, The Forgotten War, July 27- Living History encampment at the Eisenhower National Historic Site.
Demonstrations by a recreated M.A.S.H.
(Mobile Army Surgical Hospital) unit, volunteers, and talks by veterans commemorate the armistice.
Included in site admission.
Call (717) 338-9114 for more information.
Trap and Skeet Shoot, August 16- at President Eisenhowers skeet range at the Eisenhower National Historic Site.
Sponsored by the Friends of the National Parks at Gettysburg.
To participate call (717) 338-9114.
World War II Weekend, September 20-21, 2003- A living history encampment featuring Allied soldiers, a German camp, World War II vintage jeeps, trucks and armored vehicles.
Saturday, 9-5; Sunday, 9-4.
Included in site admission.
Both shuttle service and on-site parking available this weekend only.
Call the Eisenhower National Historic Site at (717) 338-9114 for more information.
Program times and schedule are subject to change.
Program adjustments are sometimes made due to staffing limitations or severe weather.
Upon arrival at the park, check at the information desk for changes and updates.
For more information contact Gettysburg National Military Park at (717) 334-1124, ext. 422 or 431 or visit the park web site at www.nps.gov/gett/home.htm.
For information on the Eisenhower National Historic Site call (717) 338-9114 or visit the web site at www.nps.gov/eise
Gettysburg National Military Park Events
National Park Service Gettysburg National Military Park 97 Taneytown Road Gettysburg, Pennsylvania 17325
Author: Eric Campbell Gettysburg National Military Park May 2003
