Information provided for informational purposes only Note: This information is provided for reference purposes only.
Although the information provided here was accurate and current when first created, it is now outdated.
Papers included in Watershed 96 proceedings reflect the opinions of the authors and do not necessarily represent official positions of the Environmental Protection Agency.
Backyard Actions for a Cleaner Chesapeake Bay: A Cooperative Outreach Program
Merrill Leffler, Environmental Writer University of Maryland Sea Grant College Program, College Park, MD
Rona Flagle, Public Information Maryland Department of Agriculture, Annapolis, MD _________________________________________________________________
Public Education and Water Quality
Increasingly we realize that the key to restoring the health of Chesapeake Bay lies in the hands of individual citizens.
Reaching those citizens, however, represents a daunting challenge, one we have addressed through a multi-media public information campaign described below.
Restoration of Water Quality in Chesapeake Bay
Water quality in the Chesapeake Bay has been on the decline for nearly 40 years-that decline has been especially evident in oxygen-depleted bottom waters, in widespread losses of submerged aquatic vegetation and in periodic fish kills.
We have known for some time now that good water quality begins with land practices-how we use the land, how we eliminate and change its natural topography (e.g., forests and grasslands to farms and suburban development), and how we protect its connections with the water, for instance, the direct discharges from sewage treatment and commercial plants, the indirect loading through runoff and groundwater seepage, and the airborne pollutants released from smokestacks and automobiles.
Years of scientific research have shown that much of the Bay's degradation is the result of excessive nutrients that overwhelm the ecosystem's assimilative capacity.
Overenrichment of nitrogen and phosphorus sets into motion processes that feed massive growths of algae, much of which sinks unconsumed through Bay waters to fuel bacterial growth among the end results is depletion of oxygen, elimination of habitat and deterioration of a healthy ecological infrastructure.
Backyard Actions for a Cleaner Chesapeake Bay: The Outreach Program Goals Called Backyard Actions for a Cleaner Chesapeake Bay, the goals of the education program were three-fold: (1) to inform citizens that their personal actions, even on small plots of land, can impact the health of Chesapeake Bay, (2) to provide hands-on information on gardening and lawn maintenance practices and (3) to show city dwellers and suburbanites that farmers are stewards of the land and what they are doing to protect the Bay.
The educational focus was on wise fertilizer use, alternatives to pesticides and controlling soil erosion.
According to a recent public attitudes survey on the Chesapeake Bay, citizens are still not aware that nonpoint sources of pollution play a major role in the Bay's health: 32 percent of those interviewed said that industries were the major cause of pollution in the Bay and 8 percent that farmers were-7 percent identified individuals (Chesapeake Bay Attitudes Survey 1994).
Maryland Farmers Bay-Wise Guide
Strategy
Three, 30-second video public service announcements (PSAs) and radio scripts, produced by the University of Maryland Sea Grant College, formed the centerpiece of the outreach program to disseminate the conservation message.
The outreach strategy included important and related elements: * Take It from Maryland Farmers Bay-Wise Guides designed to give easily accessible advice on gardening and lawn practices.
By phoning the 800 number at the Maryland Cooperative Extension Service's Home and Garden Information Center, callers received copies of Use Fertilizers Wisely; Control Soil Erosion Around Your Home; Try Pesticide Alternatives.
* Take It From Maryland Farmers posters advertising the availability of the Bay-Wise Guides by calling the 800 number.
These were distributed to libraries, schools and public office buildings.
* Maryland Farmers Partners With the Bay stickers.
Handed out at special events.
* Take It From Maryland Farmers table top exhibit for use at special events such as home and flower shows, National Soil Stewardship Week, Earth Day, Governor's Bay Bridge Walk, Maryland State Fair, Chesapeake Appreciation Days.
* Cooperative Extension Service outreach education programs.
* Chesapeake Regional Information Service (CRIS), Soil Conservation district outreach programs.
* Television and radio appearances with farmers, among them, Martha Clarke, Central Maryland; Don Spickler, Western Maryland; Martha Daughdrill, Southern Maryland; Marty Rice, Frederick County.
Other spokesmen were interviewed, including Maryland Department of Agriculture head, Lou Riley.
Backyard Actions for a Cleaner Chesapeake Bay: The Results
A Cleaner Chesapeake: The Need for Educated Citizens
Notable achievements towards meeting the 40 percent reduction have been made, for instance, through such actions as the banning of phosphorus detergents and through the upgrading of sewage treatment plants to remove phosphorus and, more selectively, nitrogen.
In addition, the federal Clean Water and Clean Air Acts have led to significant reductions in direct discharges of contaminants from industrial processes as well.
As direct discharges of pollutants come under greater control, primarily through regulatory efforts, diffuse, or non-point, sources of pollutants loom as a larger problem to water quality: runoff from highways and streets, farms, and urban and suburban development are not as amenable to regulatory control and enforcement.
The Chesapeake Bay Program has developed a Tributary Strategy that sets goals for nutrient reductions in major river basins that make up the Bay ecosystem.
To meet those goals, nutrient and toxic runoff will have to be severely curtailed from many sources.
While farms constitute a major source of nutrients to the Bay, through runoff and groundwater seepage, state programs, Cooperative Extension Service agencies, and soil conservation districts in the Chesapeake Bay watershed are working with farmers in numerous programs to encourage voluntary reduction of fertilizer and pesticide use and control of soil erosion.
Related efforts are not in place for curtailing nutrient and pesticide runoff from residential areas: few educational programs reach out to citizens.
In Backyard Actions for a Cleaner Chesapeake Bay-a public education outreach program-the Maryland Department of Agriculture, the Maryland Sea Grant College Program, the University of Maryland Cooperative Extension Service, and Maryland farmers joined together in a program in Spring and Summer 1995 to begin educating citizens on practical actions they could take on their lawns and gardens to help protect the Chesapeake Bay.
Backyard Actions for a Cleaner Chesapeake Bay: The Outreach Program Goals Called Backyard Actions for a Cleaner Chesapeake Bay, the goals of the education program were three-fold: (1) to inform citizens that their personal actions, even on small plots of land, can impact the health of Chesapeake Bay, (2) to provide hands-on information on gardening and lawn maintenance practices and (3) to show city dwellers and suburbanites that farmers are stewards of the land and what they are doing to protect the Bay.
The educational focus was on wise fertilizer use, alternatives to pesticides and controlling soil erosion.
According to a recent public attitudes survey on the Chesapeake Bay, citizens are still not aware that nonpoint sources of pollution play a major role in the Bay's health: 32 percent of those interviewed said that industries were the major cause of pollution in the Bay and 8 percent that farmers were-7 percent identified individuals (Chesapeake Bay Attitudes Survey 1994).
Maryland Farmers Bay-Wise Guide
Strategy
Three, 30-second video public service announcements (PSAs) and radio scripts, produced by the University of Maryland Sea Grant College, formed the centerpiece of the outreach program to disseminate the conservation message.
The outreach strategy included important and related elements: * Take It from Maryland Farmers Bay-Wise Guides designed to give easily accessible advice on gardening and lawn practices.
By phoning the 800 number at the Maryland Cooperative Extension Service's Home and Garden Information Center, callers received copies of Use Fertilizers Wisely; Control Soil Erosion Around Your Home; Try Pesticide Alternatives.
* Take It From Maryland Farmers posters advertising the availability of the Bay-Wise Guides by calling the 800 number.
These were distributed to libraries, schools and public office buildings.
* Maryland Farmers Partners With the Bay stickers.
Handed out at special events.
* Take It From Maryland Farmers table top exhibit for use at special events such as home and flower shows, National Soil Stewardship Week, Earth Day, Governor's Bay Bridge Walk, Maryland State Fair, Chesapeake Appreciation Days.
* Cooperative Extension Service outreach education programs.
* Chesapeake Regional Information Service (CRIS), Soil Conservation district outreach programs.
* Television and radio appearances with farmers, among them, Martha Clarke, Central Maryland; Don Spickler, Western Maryland; Martha Daughdrill, Southern Maryland; Marty Rice, Frederick County.
Other spokesmen were interviewed, including Maryland Department of Agriculture head, Lou Riley.
Backyard Actions for a Cleaner Chesapeake Bay: The Results
The Maryland Department of Agriculture was responsible for marketing the PSAs, arranging television and radio interviews, and contacting print journalists for stories on the Backyard Actions campaign.
The Maryland Cooperative Extension Service provided the 800 number and distributed materials-they recived more than 3500 calls.
In addition, Cooperative Extension Service agents used the fact sheets in educational programs in their counties.
While the campaign was slated to run from April to June 1995, television stations are still running the PSAs in winter 1996.
Channel 2 in Baltimore, for example, reported that PSAs were shown four times in December 1995, representing a broadcast value of $850.
The data below are as of October 1995-the estimated value of public service announcements and print media during this time totaled more than $62,000.
Public Service Announcements
The Public Service Announcements were run on at least 44 outlets (15 television and 29 radio) with an average of at least five runs per station: 2,200 hits for a total estimated value of $22,000.
The channels included commercial stations WJLA-7, WBAL-11, WMAR-2, WUSA-9; Maryland Public Television; and cable stations.
Radio stations (throughout Maryland and the Washington metropolitan area) read or adapted PSA scripts, among them, WRC-980, WTOP-1500, WMAL-63.0, WBAL-1090, and National Public Radio.
Television and Radio Interviews
Between April 3 and July 9, ten radio and television on-the-air interviews were placed: they included a WJZ-TV Bob Turk Interview and WBAL-TV Dave Durlen Interview.
WBOC-TV ran programs on the evening and morning news.
Longer programs on television included two 30-minute programs on WJFK (Trish Mahoney) and WLIF (Sloane Brown).
The dollar value of these interviews are estimated at $7,300.
Print Media
Articles or mentions of the Backyard Actions campaign appeared in at least 20 different publications, and ranged from large newspapers such as The Washington Post to more regional newspapers such as the Daily Banner, Maryland Independent, and the Star-Democrat to specialist newspapers such as Delmarva Farmer.
The estimated dollar value of these articles or mentions is $27,884.
Additional Marketing Outlets
While the media outreach markets played a major role in public education, the Bay-Wise Guides were delivered to other outlets for educational programming.
A total of 5,000 guides were delivered to 24 Soil Conservation Districts and to Cooperative Extension Service Offices, Pennsylvania and Virginia Departments of Agriculture and Natural Resources, Maryland Farm Bureau, local government agencies, various homeowners and condominium associations, teachers, Save Our Streams, and Federated Garden Clubs of Maryland.
The 1996 Outreach Campaign and the Future
During spring and summer 1996, we will repeat the Take It From Maryland Farmers campaign; this will include updating the PSAs and adding a 10- or 20-second version on preventing soil erosion.
We have also begun planning a public education effort on the prevention of soil erosion during winter.
We are developing a survey questionnaire for interviews with callers who requested Bay-Wise Guides.
Our aim is to evaluate the effectiveness of PSAs and the value of the guides in gardening and lawn practices.
Using the Backyard Actions campaign as a model, we will explore the potential with other state agencies for extending the campaign throughout the Chesapeake Bay watershed.
References
Chesapeake Bay Attitudes Survey.
(1994).
Chesapeake Bay Program Communications Subcommittee.
U.S. Environmental Protection Agency for the Chesapeake Bay Program.
Office of Wetlands, Oceans 
EPA Home | Office of Water | Search | Comments
