dem1.JPG (6015 bytes) [gr_ln_rgb8.gif] NEWS FROM.
CONGRESSMAN LANE EVANS RANKING DEMOCRATIC MEMBER COMMITTEE ON VETERANS AFFAIRS U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES Room 333 Cannon HOB For More Information Contact: Washington, DC 20515 Mary Ellen Mc Carthy @ 202-225-9756
FOR RELEASE: May 28, 2003
Evans Inquiry Secures Agreement to Keep VA Contract Work in the United States
Washington, D.C.
-- In response to an inquiry from Rep. Lane Evans (D-IL), the Ranking Democratic Member on the House Committee on Veterans Affairs, a Florida firm has agreed to keep jobs under a new VA property management contract in the United States.
Evans, a strong supporter of Buy America, had opposed award of the contract because the company, Ocwen Financial Corporations, has become a leader in outsourcing American jobs to low-paid employees in India.
Evans noted that after he brought the matter to the attention of the Secretary of Veterans Affairs, Anthony J. Principi, the Department of Veterans Affairs (VA) was able to obtain from Ocwen a bilateral agreement declaring that it will not outsource labor for VA property management services to India.
Further, Ocwen has also agreed to provide a right of first refusal to displaced VA employees whom Ocwen determines are qualified for jobs under the contract.
Nonetheless, even if offered jobs with Ocwen, former federal employees will be required to relocate to Florida and will have no guarantee that the wages and benefits provided by Ocwen will be commensurate with those currently provided by VA.
While I am pleased that the jobs under this contract will not be outsourced to other countries, I find it unacceptable that federal workers are being placed at competitive disadvantage due to Ocwens use of low-paid Indian workers to improve its bottom line, said Evans.
By providing government contracts to companies that pride themselves on saving money by moving jobs from the United States to developing countries, our government sends a message that the bottom line for corporations is more important than maintaining jobs for skilled American workers, observed Evans.
Evans has a long history of supporting the rights of American workers.
He persuaded the VA to obtain employee uniforms made by American workers in Illinois rather than low-paid workers in developing countries.
Evans questioned how can the United States prosper if this government is willing to sacrifice American jobs to improve corporate profits? While outsourcing some government work to American workers may be appropriate and cost-effective, Evans strongly opposes placing federal workers at a competitive disadvantage by corporate outsourcing to nations with low wages.
-30-
Back to Press Releases
