State Department seal U.S. Department of State Bureau of Consular Affairs Washington, DC 20520
Consular Information Sheet Consular seal __________________________________________________________________
This information is current as of today,
Panama
January 24, 2003
COUNTRY DESCRIPTION: Panama has a developing economy.
Outside the Panama City area, which has many first-class hotels and restaurants, tourist facilities vary in quality.
U.S. currency is valid in Panama and is exchangeable on a one-to-one basis with the Panamanian balboa.
On December 31, 1999, all former U.S. military facilities in Panama were transferred to Panamanian control.
ENTRY REQUIREMENTS: U.S. citizens are encouraged to obtain a U.S. passport before traveling to Panama.
Although entry into Panama is permitted with any proof of U.S. citizenship (such as a certified birth certificate or a Naturalization Certificate) and official photo identification (such as a driver's license), travelers may experience difficulties entering and/or exiting Panama when not in possession of a valid U.S. passport.
Panamanian law requires that travelers must either purchase a tourist card from the airline serving Panama or obtain a visa from a Panamanian embassy or consulate before traveling to Panama.
Further information may be obtained from the Embassy of Panama, 2862 McGill Terrace, N.W., Washington, D.C. 20009, tel. (202) 483-1407, or the Panamanian consulates in Atlanta, Chicago, Houston, Los Angeles, Miami, New Orleans, New York, Philadelphia or Tampa.
In an effort to prevent international child abduction, many governments have initiated procedures at entry/exit points.
These often include requiring documentary evidence of relationship and permission for the child's travel from the parent(s) or legal guardian not present.
Having such documentation on hand, even if not required, may facilitate entry/departure.
U.S. citizens transiting the Panama Canal as passengers do not need to obtain visas, report to customs, or pay any fees.
U.S. citizens piloting private craft through the canal should contact the U.S. Embassy in Panama City for current details on required procedures.
SAFETY AND SECURITY: U.S. citizens are warned not to travel overland through the eastern area of Darien Province (beyond a line drawn from Punta Carreto in the Comarca de San Blas Province on the Atlantic coast, through Yaviza in the eastern Darien Province, to Punta Pina on the Pacific coast).
This area encompasses parts of the Darien National Park as well as privately-owned nature reserves and tourist resorts.
While no incidents have occurred at these resorts, U.S. citizens, other foreign nationals and Panamanian citizens have been the victims of violent crime, kidnapping and murder in this area.
The Panama-Colombia border area is very dangerous due to the activities of Colombian terrorist groups, drug traffickers and common criminals.
Note: The Secretary of State has designated the Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia (FARC), the National Liberation Army (ELN) and the United Self-Defense Forces of Colombia (AUC) as Foreign Terrorist Organizations.
From time to time, there may be demonstrations or other manifestations of anti-American sentiment by small but vociferous groups.
While most demonstrations relate to labor disputes or other local issues and are typically non-violent, it is nonetheless a good security practice to avoid demonstrations.
U.S. citizens are advised to exercise caution on the campus of the University of Panama.
In 2001, members of radical, anti-U.S. student groups seized and beat an American army officer without provocation.
In a separate incident, a Panamanian police sergeant was beaten, also without provocation.
Both individuals were in civilian clothes at the time.
For updated security information, contact the U.S. Embassy Consular Section at the address below.
Visitors should be cautious when swimming or wading at the beach.
Some beaches, especially those on the Pacific Ocean, have dangerous currents that cause drowning deaths every year.
These beaches are seldom posted with warning signs.
On the Pacific coast, boaters should steer clear of Coiba Island, which houses a penal colony, and be wary of vessels that may be transporting narcotics northward from Colombia.
Similarly, boaters should avoid the southeastern coast of Comarca de San Blas, south of Punta Carreto.
(With the 1999 departure of the U.S. military from Panama, local maritime search and rescue capabilities are greatly diminished.)
CRIME: Crime in Panama City is moderate, but growing, particularly because of the activities of youth gangs.
Colon is a high crime area.
(There is a moderate but growing level of crime in Panama City.
The level of crime in the city of Colon is high.)
Police checkpoints have become commonplace on weekends on roads in both cities.
Based upon reported incidents by local police, the high-crime areas around Panama City are San Miguelito, Rio Abajo, El Chorillo, Ancon, Curundu, Vera Cruz Beach, Panama Viejo, Parque Soberania, and the Madden Dam overlook.
Crimes there are typical of those that plague metropolitan areas and range from rape to armed robberies, muggings, purse-snatchings, "express kidnappings" from ATM banking facilities (in which the victim is briefly kidnapped and robbed after withdrawing cash from an ATM), and petty theft.
(Panama has seen an increase in the number of crimes involving the use of unlawful weapons, as well as an increase in arrests for possession of illegal weapons countrywide.)
There has been a substantial increase in crimes involving the use of weapons.
(incidents of armed violence in metropolitan areas.)
Armed robberies targeting tourists have become more frequent on the beaches of Bocas del Toro province.
Police resources there are limited.
Panama City has a curfew for persons less than 18 years of age.
(A curfew for minors under 18 years of age has been in effect throughout Panama City since October 1996.)
Under the law, students attending night classes must have a carnet, or permit, issued by the school or, if employed, a Certificate of Employment.
Minors who are picked up for a curfew violation are subject to detention at a police station until parents or legal guardians can arrange for them to be released into their custody.
Parents or legal guardians may be fined up to U.S. $50.00 for the violation.
The loss or theft abroad of a passport should be reported immediately to the local police and the nearest U.S. Embassy or Consulate.
U.S. citizens can refer to the Department of State's pamphlet "A Safe Trip Abroad" for ways to promote a more trouble-free journey.
This publication and others, such as Tips For Travelers to Central and South America, are available by mail from the Superintendent of Documents, U.S. Government Printing Office, Washington, DC 20402, via the Internet at http://www.gpoaccess.gov/index.html, or via the Bureau of Consular Affairs home page at http://travel.state.gov.
MEDICAL FACILITIES: Although Panama City has some very good hospitals and clinics, medical facilities outside of the capital are limited.
MEDICAL INSURANCE: The Department of State strongly urges Americans to consult with their medical insurance company prior to traveling abroad to confirm whether their policy applies overseas and whether it will cover emergency expenses such as a medical evacuation.
U.S. medical insurance plans seldom cover health costs incurred outside the United States unless supplemental coverage is purchased.
Further, U.S. Medicare and Medicaid programs do not provide payment for medical services outside the United States.
However, many travel agents and private companies offer insurance plans that will cover health care expenses incurred overseas including emergency services such as medical evacuations.
When making a decision regarding health insurance, Americans should consider that many foreign doctors and hospitals require payment in cash prior to providing service and that a medical evacuation to the U.S. may cost well in excess of $50,000.
Uninsured travelers who require medical care overseas often face extreme difficulties, whereas travelers who have purchased overseas medical insurance have, when a medical emergency occurs, found it life-saving.
When consulting with your insurer prior to your trip, ascertain whether payment will be made to the overseas healthcare provider or whether you will be reimbursed later for expenses you incur.
Some insurance policies also include coverage for psychiatric treatment and for disposition of remains in the event of death.
In Panama, most hospitals accept credit cards for hospital charges, but not for doctors' fees.
Useful information on medical emergencies abroad, including overseas insurance programs, is provided in the Department of State's Bureau of Consular Affairs brochure, "Medical Information for Americans Traveling Abroad", available via the Bureau of Consular Affairs home page or autofax: (202) 647-3000.
OTHER HEALTH INFORMATION: Information on vaccinations and other health precautions, such as safe food and water precautions and insect bite protection, may be obtained from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention's hotline for international travelers at 1-877-FYI-TRIP (1-877-394-8747); fax 1-888-CDC-FAXX (1-888-232-3299), or via CDC's Internet site at http://www.cdc.gov/travel.
For information about outbreaks of infectious diseases abroad consult the World Health Organization's website at http://www.who.int/en.
Further health information for travelers is available at http://www.who.int/ith.
TRAFFIC SAFETY AND ROAD CONDITIONS: While in a foreign country, U.S. citizens may encounter road conditions that differ significantly from those in the United States.
The information below concerning Panama is provided for general reference only, and may not be totally accurate in a particular location or circumstance.
Safety of Public Transportation: Fair Urban Road Conditions/Maintenance: Good Rural Road Conditions/Maintenance: Poor Availability of Roadside Assistance: Fair Panama's roads, traffic and transportation systems are generally safe, but traffic lights often do not exist, even at busy intersections.
Driving is often hazardous and demanding due to dense traffic, undisciplined driving habits, poorly maintained streets, and a lack of effective signs and traffic signals.
On roads where poor lighting and driving conditions prevail, night driving is difficult, and should be approached with caution.
Buses and taxis are not always maintained in safe operating condition due to lack of regulatory enforcement.
Auto insurance is not mandatory and many drivers are uninsured.
If an accident occurs, the law requires that the vehicles remain in place until a police officer responds to investigate.
Traffic in Panama moves on the right (as in the U.S.), and Panamanian law requires that drivers and passengers wear seat belts.
Flooding during the rainy season, which lasts from April to December, often makes city streets impassible and washes out some roads in the interior of the country.
(and renders others impassable by car.)
In addition, (roads in the interior and) rural areas are often poorly maintained and lack illumination at night.
Such roads are generally less traveled and the availability of emergency roadside assistance is very limited.
Road travel is more dangerous during the rainy season and in the interior from Carnival through Good Friday.
(Carnival starts the Saturday prior to Ash Wednesday and goes on for four days) (; from Ash Wednesday there are 45 days to Good Friday.)
Traveling On The Pan American Highway: There is often night construction on Panama's main highway, the Pan American Highway.
There are few signs alerting drivers to such construction and the highway is not well lit at night.
When traveling on the highway, travelers should be aware of possible roadblocks.
The Pan American Highway does not go through to Colombia.
It ends at Yaviza in the Darien Province of Panama.
The highway's final portion from Chepo to Yaviza is reasonably passable only during the dry season (January-April).
If destined for South America, automobile travelers may wish to ship their cars on a freighter.
(The auto/passenger ferry service "Crucero Express" ceased operations in early 1997.)
For additional general information about road safety, including links to foreign government sites, see the Department of State, Bureau of Consular Affairs, home page at http://travel.state.gov/road_safety.html.
AVIATION SAFETY OVERSIGHT: The U.S. Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) has assessed the Government of Panama's civil aviation authority as Category 2 -- not in compliance with international aviation safety standards for the oversight of Panama's air carrier operations.
While consultations to correct the deficiencies are ongoing, the Panamanian air carriers currently flying to the U.S. will be subject to heightened FAA surveillance.
No additional flights or new service to the U.S. by Panamanian air carriers will be permitted unless they arrange to have the flights conducted by an air carrier from a country meeting international safety standards.
For further information, travelers may contact the Department of Transportation within the U.S. at 1-800-322-7873, or visit the FAA's Internet web site at http://www.faa.gov/avr/iasa/.
The U.S. Department of Defense (DOD) separately assesses some foreign carriers for suitability as official providers of air services.
In addition, DOD does not permit its personnel to use air carriers from Category 2 countries for official business except for flights originating from or terminating in the United States.
Local exceptions may apply.
For information regarding the DOD policy on specific carriers, travelers may contact DOD at (618) 229-4801.
DOMESTIC AIR TRAVEL: Several incidents have called into serious question the safety standards of small air carriers flying domestic routes.
[From March through September} In 2000, there were two fatal crashes involving small domestic carriers, while other flights have experienced mechanical problems resulting in cancellations, emergency landings, and non-fatal crashes.
In light of these incidents, U.S. citizens should give serious consideration to alternative modes of travel before booking flights on domestic Panamanian airlines.
Only Tocumen International Airport, serving Panama City, maintains airport security measures known to meet international standards.
Security measures at domestic commuter fields serving popular travel destinations such as Colon, Contadora Island, Bocas Del Toro and the San Blas Islands are lax.
CUSTOMS REGULATIONS: Panamanian customs authorities may enforce strict regulations concerning temporary importation into or export from Panama of items such as firearms and ammunition, cultural property, endangered wildlife species, narcotics, biological material, and food products.
It is advisable to contact the Embassy of Panama in Washington or one of Panama's consulates in the United States for specific information regarding customs requirements.
CRIMINAL PENALTIES: While in a foreign country, a U.S. citizen is subject to that country's laws and regulations, which sometimes differ significantly from those in the U.S. and may not afford the protections available to the individual under U.S. law.
Penalties for breaking the law can be more severe than in the U.S. for similar offenses.
Persons violating Panamanian laws, even unknowingly, may be expelled, arrested or imprisoned.
Penalties for possession, use, or trafficking in illegal drugs in Panama are strict, and convicted offenders can expect jail sentences and heavy fines.
CHILDREN'S ISSUES: Although Panama is a signatory to the Hague Convention on the Civil Aspects of International Child Abduction, it has not enacted domestic implementing legislation.
Without such legislation, the Panamanian code of family justice takes precedence over the convention, which makes the return of children abducted to Panama from the United States and elsewhere uncertain.
For more information on international adoption of children and international parental child abduction, please refer to our Internet site at http://travel.state.gov/children's_issues.html, or telephone 1-888-407-4747.
EMBASSY LOCATION/REGISTRATION: U.S. citizens living in or visiting Panama are encouraged to register at the Consular Section of the U.S. Embassy in Panama and obtain updated information on travel and security within Panama.
The Consular Section of the U.S. Embassy is located on Panama Bay, Panama City, at Balboa Avenue and 39th Street.
The international mailing address is Apartado 6959, Panama 5, Republic of Panama.
The U.S. mailing address is U.S. Embassy Panama, Department of State, Washington, D.C. 20521-9100.
The telephone number of the embassy (consular Section) is 011-507-207-7000/7030 (after hours, 011-507-207-7000); fax 011-507-207-7278; web site http://usembassy.state.gov/panama/.
E-mail inquiries may be addressed to Panama-ACS@state.gov.
*********
This replaces the Consular Information Sheet dated, 2001, to update Safety and Security information.
Return to Consular Information Sheets and Travel Warnings Page
