[smaller_white_top_bar.gif] Governor's Homepage California Homepage Department of Consumer Affairs Homepage About The Board Consumer Info Applicant Info License Verification Licensee Info What's New Forms and Publications California Pharmacy Law and Index Legislation Regulations Compliance Guidelines for Pharmacies Frequently Asked Questions Links Site Map Contact Us Pharmacy Homepage Please send your comments regarding this web site to: rxwebmaster@dca.ca.gov Board of Pharmacy logo Registered Pharmacist [bar.gif]
Licensees are responsible for renewing their licenses even if they do not receive a renewal notice.
The board does not send duplicate renewal applications.
If you have not received the renewal notice within 4 weeks of expiration of the license, you may renew your license by submitting a Request for Renewal of California Pharmacist License.
Click here for the form.
Failure to receive a renewal notice does not relieve you of the responsibility of renewing your license prior to the expiration date.
It is unlicensed activity to practice without an active license for which you can be fined $2,500.
A delinquent fee is added to the renewal fee when the renewal notice and fee are not postmarked before midnight of the expiration date.
Renewal of your license requires that you certify to the completion of continuing education (CE).
Failure to enter the number of CE hours completed and sign the certification will substantially delay the processing of your renewal.
Recent graduates and those recently licensed should refer to the EXCEPTIONS TO THE CONTINUING EDUCATION REQUIREMENTS section below.
If you are not currently working as a pharmacist in California and want your license to be placed on inactive status, there is a checkbox on the renewal form to request a change of status.
See INACTIVE STATUS for more information.
If you have changed your name or address, please refer to the CHANGE OF NAME AND/OR ADDRESS section below.
The renewal form and fee must be submitted to the board's office allowing 4 to 6 weeks for processing.
[bar.gif]
CANCELLATION OF LICENSE
If a pharmacist license is not renewed within three years from the expiration date, the license will be canceled (pursuant to section 4402 of the Business and Professions Code).
Any pharmacist who wishes to resume practice in California after having his or her license cancelled for non-payment of the renewal fees will be required to take and pass the licensure examination.
[bar.gif]
CONTINUING EDUCATION REQUIREMENTS
All California pharmacists are required to have 30 hours (1.25 per month x 24 months) of continuing pharmacy education (CE) as a condition to renewal every two years.
(See section 4231 of the Business and Professions Code and section 1732 of the California Code of Regulations.)
CE coursework must pertain to the practice of pharmacy and be obtained from a provider who is recognized by one of the two accreditation agencies designated by the Board, the American Council of Pharmaceutical Education (ACPE) or the Accreditation Evaluation Service (AES).
[bar.gif]
EXCEPTIONS TO THE CONTINUING EDUCATION REQUIREMENTS
Recent graduates are exempt from the CE requirements for two years from their date of graduation from an accredited school of pharmacy.
CE hours are required for the months remaining in the license period following the 2 year exemption.
Example: If you graduated in June 1998, you are exempt from CE through May 2000.
If your license was issued to expire on November 30, 2000, you are required to have CE hours for the 6 months remaining in the renewal period following the exemption (June 2000 to November 2000).
You will be responsible for completing 7.5 CE hours (6 months x 1.25 hours = 7.5 hours).
New licensees who are not recent graduates are required to earn CE hours at a rate of 1.25 hours per month for each month in the license period.
Example: Your license was issued in September 1999 and will expire in January 2001.
The license period is a total of 16 months.
You will be required to have 20 hours of CE at renewal (16 months x 1.25 hours = 20 hours).
Enrollment in a Health Profession School
Pharmacists may be granted an exemption from CE requirements if they are enrolled as full time students in a health profession school.
Please contact the board for additional information regarding such exemptions.
[bar.gif]
PHARMACIST PETITION FOR CONTINUING EDUCATION CREDIT
Licensees may petition for credit for CE courses offered by non-recognized providers.
The Pharmacist Petition for Continuing Education Credit from a Non-Recognized Provider form must be completed and submitted with the required fee for review and approval.
The fee for this process is $40 per hour of coursework.
[bar.gif]
NON-RECOGNIZED PROVIDER PETITION
Non-recognized providers may petition the board to allow continuing education credit for specific coursework which meets the standards of relevance to pharmacy practice and education quality set forth in section 1732.1 of the California Code of Regulations.
The fee required for review and approval of non-recognized provider courses is $40 per hour of coursework.
The completed Non-Recognized Provider Petition for Continuing Education Credit form must be submitted with the required fee, a copy of the certificate of completion, a copy of the course brochure or advertisement and the syllabus (if applicable) at least 60 days prior to the presentation of the program.
[bar.gif]
CONTINUING EDUCATION AUDITS
The board randomly audits renewal applications to insure that pharmacists have fulfilled their CE requirements.
For this reason it is imperative that you retain your CE completion certificates for four years.
If you are selected for the audit, you will be notified in writing and asked to submit copies of your CE completion certificates.
Failure to comply with this request will result in citation and fine for unlicensed activity.
[bar.gif]
INACTIVE STATUS
Placing a license on inactive status exempts a non-practicing pharmacist from CE requirements, but not from payment of the renewal fee.
To change the status of a license to inactive, you may designate "inactive" on your renewal application, or submit a written request to the board.
If you request that the status be changed during the licensure period (not at time of renewal) you must also submit your current active license.
Your license status will be changed and an inactive license issued.
If your license is on inactive status, you may not practice as a pharmacist in California.
Please see Business and Professions Code Section 462.
To restore an inactive license to active status, you may designate "active" on the license renewal application, or submit a written request to the board.
Changing from inactive to active status requires that you provide copies of the completion certificates verifying 30 hours of CE during the last 2 years.
If you are requesting this change during the licensure period (not at time of renewal), you must return your inactive license along with the completion certificates and a $30 fee for the reissue of the license.
Contact the board if you have questions regarding this process.
[bar.gif]
CHANGE OF NAME AND/OR ADDRESS
You are required to notify the board of any change in name or address within 30 days.
Change of name and/or address may be made on the renewal notice or in writing to the board.
Any change of name must be supported with one of the following: * Copy of marriage certificate.
* Copy of court document authorizing a legal name change.
* Clear copy of driver's license and social security card.
ADDRESS CHANGES CANNOT be accepted over the phone or by e-mail.
We must receive a document bearing the signature of the applicant/licensee in order to change an official address of record.
P.O. BOXES An address other than your residence may be used as your "address of record" however, section 1704 of the California Code of Regulations requires that you also provide your residence address.
Only the address of record will be accessible to the public.
Your address will not be changed to a P.O. Box unless you provide your residence address.
[bar.gif]
DUPLICATE/REPLACEMENT LICENSE
If a license has been misplaced or lost, a duplicate license will be issued upon receipt of a completed Application for Reissue of License and $30 reissue fee.
If you fail to receive a license, the board will reissue a replacement after sufficient time has elapsed for delivery by the postal service.
A completed Request for Duplicate/Replacement License, certifying under penalty of perjury that the license has not been received, must be received before the printing of a new license will be requested.
[bar.gif]
RETIRED PHARMACISTS
A pharmacist who has been licensed in California for 20 years or longer and who holds a current, renewable license that is not suspended, revoked, or otherwise disciplined or subject to pending discipline, may request that the license be placed on retired status.
A pharmacist holding a retired license cannot engage in any activity for which an active license is required.
The retired license does not need to be renewed.
However, to restore the license to active status, the pharmacist must take and pass the examination required for initial licensure.
Application for Retired Pharmacist License
[bar.gif]
BEING A PRECEPTOR
A preceptor is a pharmacist, licensed in good standing, who accepts the responsibility and takes the time to educate and train an intern in practical experiences.
The preceptor is ultimately responsible for the professional activities performed by the intern while under his or her supervision.
(See Appendix C of the Intern/Preceptor manual)
When considering whether to serve as a preceptor ask yourself: * What is the breadth of my experience as a pharmacist and can I share this with an intern? * Do I actively participate in continuing education programs and preceptor training conferences? * Am I able to spend time providing instruction to an intern? * Am I able to use effective communication skills from which the intern can learn? Review "Guidelines for the Preceptor" in the Intern/Preceptor manual.
The setting in which you practice is as important as your willingness to teach.
The ideal pharmacy for pharmacy interns incorporates practices and attitudes befitting the professional activities that are performed.
It has an adequate set of reference materials, a computerized patient profile system, sufficient clerical help to enable you time to work with the intern, and a clean and inviting environment.
The pharmacy should exemplify the highest standards of the profession.
(See "Selecting an Internship Site" for suggested minimum standards in the Intern/Preceptor manual.)
Disclaimer
About the Board · Consumer Information · Applicant Information · License Verification · Licensee Information · News and Events Publications · Legislation Regulations · Compliance Guidelines for Pharmacies · FAQs · Links · Site Map · Contact Us ·Home
