DOJ Seal Computer Crime and Intellectual Property Section (CCIPS) _______________________________________________________________ II.
Trafficking in Counterfeit Goods or Services: 18 U.S.C. § 2320
A. Functions Protected by Trademark B.
The Trademark Counterfeiting Crime and Its Elements B.1.
"Trafficked" in goods or services B.2.
Trafficking was "intentional" B.3.
The defendant used a "counterfeit mark" on or in connection with goods or services B.4.
The defendant "knowingly used" the counterfeit mark C. Defenses to the Crime of Trademark Counterfeiting D. Statutory Penalty for Trafficking in Counterfeit Goods or Services E. Counterfeit Goods That Are Comparable to Legitimate Goods E.1.
Background on comparable goods cases generally E.2.
A case of comparable goods: Remarked computer chips E.2.a.
Market and technical background on computer chip remarking E.2.b.
Charging trademark counterfeiting for trafficking in remarked computer chips __________________________________________________________________
Trademarks and service marks are part of the fabric of American society today.
Americans rely on the brands they represent when purchasing and using all manner of goods and services.
This reliance gives companies an incentive to maintain quality control over the goods they produce and mark.
In addition, companies that sell quality goods invest heavily in their brand.
For example, they pay top dollar to sponsor sporting events, sporting arenas, and have celebrities endorse them.
Black's Law Dictionary defines "trademark" as "a distinctive mark of authenticity, through which the products of particular manufacturers or the vendible commodities of particular merchants may be distinguished from those of others."
Black's Law Dictionary 1493 (6th ed. 1990).
The Lanham Act, which was enacted in 1946 as part of a comprehensive revision of civil trademark law and the trademark registration process, defines "trademark" to include "any word, name, symbol, or device, or any combination thereof -- (1) used by a person, or (2) which a person has a bona fide intention to use in commerce and applies to register on the principal register established by [the Lanham Act], to identify and distinguish his or her goods, including a unique product, from those manufactured or sold by others and to indicate the source of the goods, even if that source is unknown."
15 U.S.C. § 1127.
Among the most widely recognized trademarks are "Kodak" for photography equipment and the Nike "swoosh" for sports apparel.
Service marks identify distinctive features of services, such as athletic events or television shows, rather than goods.
See 15 U.S.C. § 1127.
For simplicity, this manual usually refers to trademarks and sales of goods rather than service marks and selling of services, although the legal analysis is the same.
Commercial trademarks are the currency of modern commerce.
This chapter first discusses the functions protected by trademark, then discusses the trademark counterfeiting statute, elements of the crime, defenses to the crime, and penalties imposed by the statute.
Finally, this chapter discusses cases where the counterfeit goods are arguably of comparable quality to the legitimate goods, and it provides a case study in a cutting edge context: trafficking in remarked computer chips as a counterfeiting crime.
Forms providing sample indictments and jury instructions for trademark counterfeiting, 18 U.S.C. § 2320, are provided in Appendix B. Prosecutors may find other resources to be helpful as well, including treatises, see, e.g., J. Thomas McCarthy, McCarthy on Trademarks and Unfair Competition (1995).
Law review articles may also be of assistance.
See, e.g., Michael Coblenz, Intellectual Property Crimes, 9 Alb.
L.J. Sci. 
Crm. L. Rev. 835 (1999); David J. Goldstone 
L. Rev. 1 (1998).
__________________________________________________________________
II.A.
Functions Protected by Trademark
One commentator has observed that courts recognize and protect four functions performed by trademarks.
These are: (1) identifying a particular seller's goods and distinguishing them from goods sold by others; (2) signifying that all goods bearing the trademark come from or are controlled by a single source; (3) signifying that all goods bearing the trademark are of an equal level of quality; and (4) serving as a prime instrument in advertisement and sale of the goods.
1 J. Thomas McCarthy, McCarthy on Trademarks and Unfair Competition § 3.01[2] (1995).
A trademark is also an important "objective symbol of the good will that a business has built up.
Without the identification function performed by trademarks, buyers would have no way of returning to buy products that they have used and liked."
Id.
NOTE: Prosecutors unfamiliar with trademark law may be more familiar with anti-counterfeiting laws designed to protect traditional national currencies and national symbols.
The purpose of trademark law is similar to the purposes of these laws.
See, e.g., 18 U.S.C. §§ 471-474 (counterfeiting activities relating to obligations or securities of the United States), 478-481 (counterfeiting activities relating to foreign obligations or securities), 501 (counterfeiting postage stamps), 506 (counterfeiting seals of departments or agencies), 706 (Red Cross emblem), 707 (4-H club emblem), 708 (Swiss Confederation coat of arms), 709 (false advertising or misuse of names to indicate federal agency), 711-715 (national symbols, including seals of the United States, Golden Eagle insignia, and Smokey Bear character or name), 1159 (misrepresentation of Indian produced goods and products).
Ownership of a mark arises not through any single act of federal registration, but rather through continued use.
Under its power to regulate interstate commerce, Congress has established a federal administrative process for registering trademarks.
This process coexists with state common-law trademark rights.
However, registration of a mark with the Patent and Trademark Office offers many legal advantages, including -- procedurally -- access to the federal courts under 15 U.S.C. § 1121, and -- substantively -- the possibility of recovery of lost profits, damages, and costs, and the availability of treble damages and attorney fees.
See 15 U.S.C. § 1117.
Most importantly for prosecutors, federal registration is a jurisdictional prerequisite to federal criminal prosecution and is an essential element in a prosecution for trademark counterfeiting, since the government must show that the genuine mark was registered on the principal register in the United States Patent and Trademark Office in order to establish the existence of the "counterfeit" mark.
See 18 U.S.C. § 2320(e)(1)(A)(ii).
To register a trademark on the principal register, the owner must establish (1) distinctiveness of the mark, and (2) use or intent to use the mark in interstate or foreign commerce.
See 15 U.S.C. § 1052.
Although trademark law has been primarily part of civil rather than criminal practice, Congress had important reasons and ample precedent for criminalizing trademark counterfeiting when it did so in 1984.
Indeed, criminal trademark law dates back to at least 1541, when an English statute prohibited obtaining another's property by means of a "false Token or counterfeit Letter made in any other Man's Name."
33 Hen. VIII, c.1 (1541), cited in 2 William R. Lafave 
The criminalization of trademark counterfeiting serves at least four important functions:
1.Protecting the intellectual property assets of a trademark holder from theft or dilution.
A counterfeiter should be no more able to steal a company's good name (and profit stream associated with that name) than a company's profits.
Trademark holders cannot protect their intellectual property through the traditional security means -- such as guards and audits -- used to protect their other assets.
Also, by selling inferior products, the counterfeiter devalues a trademark holder's good name even while profiting from it.
2.Protecting consumers from fraud.
Consumers are entitled to rely on trademarks when making their purchasing decisions.
Yet counterfeit goods can be of much lower quality, and can even present serious health or safety risks to consumers, as in the cases of counterfeit food products, prescription drugs, or automotive parts.
Trademark counterfeiting can be an especially pernicious kind of fraud because counterfeit goods are often distributed widely through layers of intermediaries.
With dispersed victims and small losses per victim, a large- scale counterfeiter can often evade civil and criminal sanctions.
3.Protecting safety in society for non-purchasing users.
Sales of counterfeit products often victimize not only the trademark holder and purchaser, but also non-purchasing users.
For example, airlines may purchase counterfeit airplane parts of which passengers may be victims; hospitals may purchase counterfeit heart pumps of which patients may be victims; and parents may purchase counterfeit infant formula that harms their children.
These examples and others are provided in H.R. Rep. No. 104-556, at 3 (1996), reprinted in 1996 U.S.C.C.A.N.
1074, 1076, and S. Rep. No. 98-526, at 4 (1984), reprinted in 1984 U.S.C.C.A.N.
3627, 3630.
4.Enforcing market rules.
Just as counterfeiting money and forgery are crimes that undermine fundamental market rules, counterfeiting of trademarks weakens modern commercial systems.
__________________________________________________________________
II.B.
The Trademark Counterfeiting Crime and Its Elements
The Trademark Counterfeiting Act, 18 U.S.C. § 2320(a), provides that:
Whoever intentionally traffics or attempts to traffic in goods or services and knowingly uses a counterfeit mark on or in connection with such goods or services shall, if an individual, be fined not more than $2,000,000 or imprisoned not more than 10 years, or both, and, if a person other than an individual, be fined not more than $5,000,000.
In order to establish a criminal offense under 18 U.S.C. § 2320, courts have required the government to prove four elements of which two (the second and fourth elements) are mens rea elements:
1.
The defendant "trafficked" or attempted to traffic in goods or services;
2.
Such trafficking, or the attempt to traffic, was "intentional";
3.
The defendant used a "counterfeit mark" on or in connection with such goods or services;and
4.
The defendant "knew" that the mark so used was counterfeit.
United States v. Giles, 213 F.3d 1247, 1249 (10th Cir. 2000) (reversing conviction for trafficking in counterfeit patches because statute does not prohibit trafficking in counterfeit labels unconnected to any goods); United States v. Sultan, 115 F.3d 321, 325 (5th Cir. 1997) (reversing conviction for trafficking in counterfeit automobile parts because proof was insufficient that defendant knew he was purchasing and selling counterfeit parts).
Aiding and abetting or conspiring to violate the statute can be prosecuted in conjunction with 18 U.S.C. §§ 2 and 371.
See United States v. Yamin, 868 F.2d 130 (5th Cir. 1989) (affirming conviction for conspiracy and trafficking in counterfeit watches), cert. denied, 492 U.S. 924 (1989).
Three significant absences are worth noting.
First, even though there are two knowledge elements under 18 U.S.C. § 2320, there is no requirement of "specific intent": Congress did not require proof of either an intent to defraud or an awareness that the defendant was violating a specific statute.
SeeUnited States v. Gantos, 817 F.2d 41, 42-43 (8th Cir. 1987) (affirming conviction on intent to traffic, rather than "specific intent" to violate a statute), cert. denied, 484 U.S. 860 (1987); United States v. Baker, 807 F.2d 427, 429-30 (5th Cir. 1986) (affirming conviction because defendant need not have known his conduct was a crime).
Second, there is no requirement of loss by any particular victim.
For example, it is not necessary to demonstrate that the product trafficked in is of lesser quality than the genuine product.
Even if the consumer is not defrauded, the counterfeiter is still trading off the name of another without authorization.
Third, the statute provides no minimum requirement of scale for the crime of trademark counterfeiting.
In contrast to the criminal copyright law, even small scale counterfeiting constitutes a felony.
Cf. 18 U.S.C. § 2319(b) (providing punishment for copyright infringement as a felony only if at least ten copies with a retail value of more than $2,500 were reproduced or distributed).
Nevertheless, scale of infringement is relevant for sentencing in determining "loss" for purposes of the Guidelines.
See infra Section VII.A. (discussing the sentencing guidelines for infringement crimes).
Clarifying 18 U.S.C. § 2320 by using civil trademark law.
In interpreting the scope of the provisions of 18 U.S.C. § 2320, it can be helpful to consider sister provisions under the civil trademark law, which was codified in 1946 as the Lanham Act, 15 U.S.C. §§ 1051-1127, and has been the subject of numerous reported cases.
This body of law can be particularly of use in interpreting provisions with similarities or definitions.
Indeed, Lanham Act itself is defined in 18 U.S.C. § 2320(e)(3).
The defenses to 18 U.S.C. § 2320 specifically incorporate the Lanham Act defenses.
See18 U.S.C. § 2320(c).
The legislative history refers repeatedly to the Lanham Act's body of case law as the background against which Congress intended the criminal prohibition to be interpreted.
See, e.g., 130 Cong.
Rec. 31,675 (1984) ("no conduct will be criminalized by this act that does not constitute trademark infringement under the Lanham Act") (Joint Statement on Trademark Counterfeiting Act).
The courts have taken the cue from Congress to adapt civil Lanham Act principles to criminal cases.
For example, in United States v. Petrosian, the Ninth Circuit, in the absence of criminal precedent, affirmed the defendant's conviction by relying exclusively on two civil cases brought under the Lanham Act.
126 F.3d 1232 (9th Cir. 1997), cert. denied, 522 U.S. 1138 (1998).
The court explained its resort to civil case law by noting that the "definition of the term 'counterfeit mark' in the Lanham Act is nearly identical to the definition in 18 U.S.C. § 2320, suggesting that Congress intended to criminalize all of the conduct for which an individual may be civilly liable."
Id. at 1234.
See also United States v. Torkington, 812 F.2d 1347, 1352 (11th Cir. 1987) (applying a standard drawn from the Lanham Act because "Congress . . . manifested its intent that 18 U.S.C. § 2320(d)(1)(A)(iii) be given the same interpretation as is given the identical language in 15 U.S.C. § 1114(1) of the Lanham Act") (citing H.R. Rep. No. 98-997, at 8, 12 (1984); 130 Cong.
Rec. 31,675 (1984) (Joint Statement on Trademark Counterfeiting Act)).
Nevertheless courts have not refrained from noting differences between the criminal and civil trademark statutes even while applying Lanham Act standards to criminal cases.
See United States v. Hon, 904 F.2d 803, 806-07 (2d Cir. 1990) (enumerating differences between 18 U.S.C. § 2320 liability and Lanham Act liability but applying the standard from the Lanham Act), cert. denied, 498 U.S. 1069 (1991); United States v. Torkington, 812 F.2d 1347, 1350 (11th Cir. 1987) (noting that 18 U.S.C. § 2320 is "narrower in scope" than the Lanham Act).
Cases decided under the civil trademark statutes are not necessarily binding precedent on a court deciding a case under 18 U.S.C. § 2320.
See, e.g., United States v. Giles, 213 F.3d 1247, 1250 (10th Cir. 2000) (finding prior case to be "of limited value for several reasons": it dealt with civil liability; it was strictly "confined" to the facts at hand; and it relied upon "a novel and overly broad conception of the rights that a trademark entails").
II.B.1.
"Trafficked" in goods or services
The first element, to "traffic" in goods or services, is defined broadly in 18 U.S.C. § 2320(e)(2) to mean "transport, transfer, or otherwise dispose of, to another, as consideration for anything of value, or make or obtain control of with intent so to transport, transfer or dispose of."
This definition is broad enough to cover all aspects of commercial activity from initial manufacture to sale to ultimate purchasers.
The thing "of value" received as consideration need not be a financial payment.
See United States v. Koehler, 24 F.3d 867, 870-71 (6th Cir. 1994) (affirming conviction based on acceptance of air conditioner compressors in lieu of financial payment), cert. denied, 513 U.S. 1077 (1995).
However, the knowing "purchase" of goods bearing counterfeit marks for personal use was not intended to be covered by 18 U.S.C. § 2320.
See Joint Statement on Trademark Counterfeiting Legislation, 130 Cong.
Rec. 31,675 (1984) (hereinafter "Joint Statement").
II.B.2.
Trafficking was "intentional"
The first of two mens rea elements is that the defendant's trafficking was "intentional"; that is, that he or she acted deliberately or "on purpose."
See, e.g., Baker, 807 F.2d at 428-30 (affirming conviction for trafficking on the basis of intent to traffic rather than knowledge of crime); see also United States v. Hon, 904 F.2d 803, 806 (2d Cir. 1991) (affirming conviction for trafficking and attempting to traffic in counterfeit wristwatches), cert. denied, 498 U.S. 1069 (1991); Joint Statement, 130 Cong.
Rec. 31,674 (1984).
As noted above, however, the statute does not require a specific intent to violate the statute.
Seesupra Section II.B.
II.B.3.
The defendant used a "counterfeit mark" on or in connection with goods or services
The third element of the crime of trademark counterfeiting is that the defendant used a "counterfeit mark" on or in connection with goods or services.
The statute requires some nexus between the "mark" and the "goods or services" sufficient to describe the connection as a "use."
This requirement is essentially duplicated within the definition of the term "counterfeit mark" and is discussed below.
The term "counterfeit mark" is a term of art, and is defined by 18 U.S.C. § 2320(e)(1)(A) as follows:
(A) a spurious mark --
(i) that is used in connection with trafficking in goods or services;
(ii) that is identical with, or substantially indistinguishable from, a mark registered for those goods or services on the principal register in the United States Patent and Trademark Office and in use, whether or not the defendant knew such mark was so registered; and
(iii) the use of which is likely to cause confusion, to cause mistake, or to deceive.
18 U.S.C. § 2320(e)(1)(B) incorporates into the definition trademarks protected by the Olympic Charter Act.
Although by its terms 18 U.S.C. § 2320 seems to require that the "mark" be counterfeit (rather than, for example, requiring that the goods be counterfeit), the courts have not been unduly concerned with this technicality where the trademark holder is deprived of the ability to control the quality of products bearing its name and where consumer confusion is likely, so long as the other formalities have been met.
For example, the defendant in United States v. Petrosian purchased "genuine Coca-Cola bottles," filled them with a cola-like carbonated beverage that was not Coca-Cola, and told purchasers that the beverage was Coca-Cola. 126 F.3d 1232 (9th Cir. 1997), cert. denied, 522 U.S. 1138 (1998).
The Ninth Circuit rejected the defendant's contention that the use of the Coca-Cola mark could not be counterfeit because it was a "genuine" mark, and observed that "[w]hen a genuine trademark is affixed to a counterfeit product, it becomes a spurious mark.
. .
The Coca-Cola mark became spurious when [defendant] affixed it to the counterfeit cola because the mark falsely indicated that Coca-Cola was the source of the beverage in the bottles and falsely identified the beverage in the bottles as Coca-Cola."
Id. at 1234.
The importance of a mark holder being able to control the quality of goods associated with its mark is discussed further below with regard to cases of "comparable" goods.
See infra Section II.E.
The statute itself requires that the "use" of the counterfeit mark be "likely to cause confusion, to cause mistake, or to deceive."
18 U.S.C. § 2320(e)(1)(A)(iii).
In interpreting this provision, courts have held that "[t]he jury need not find actual confusion."
United States v. Yamin, 868 F.2d 130, 133 (5th Cir. 1989) (affirming conviction for conspiracy and trafficking in counterfeit watches), cert. denied, 492 U.S. 924 (1989).
Instead, they consistently have employed an objective standard.
"The statute expressly requires only likelihood of confusion."
Id. AccordUnited States v. Hon, 904 F.2d 803, 806-08 (2d Cir. 1991) (approving jury consideration of likelihood of confusion in addition to actual confusion), cert. denied, 498 U.S. 1069 (1991); United States v. Torkington, 812 F.2d 1347, 1350-52 (11th Cir. 1987) (holding that confusion of direct purchasers is unnecessary, if the purchasing public is likely to be confused) Because subsequent purchasers or recipients of the goods may be duped and because of the need to protect the trademark owner's investment in the quality of the mark and its product's reputation, it is not a defense that the original buyer was told that the goods were counterfeit, or that the buyer was actually not confused for other reasons, e.g., because of the comparatively low price of the fake goods.
See Hon, 904 F.2d at 806-08; Torkington, 812 F.2d at 1350-52; United States v. Gantos, 817 F.2d 41, 43 (8th Cir. 1987) (rejecting defendant's argument that revelation to purchaser that goods were counterfeit exonerates him), cert. denied, 484 U.S. 860 (1987).
The trier of fact may decide whether the possibility of confusion is likely either through a side-by-side comparison of products, through expert testimony, or both.
Yamin, 868 F.2d at 133; United States v. DeFreitas, 92 F. Supp.2d 272, 278 (S.D.N.Y. 2000) (noting that "the jury was free to compare the tags and the marks on the genuine and on the counterfeit Beanie Babies").
The "likelihood of confusion" standard is taken from the Lanham Act, 15 U.S.C. § 1114(1).
According to the legislative history, this phraseology was chosen to ensure that "no conduct [would] be criminalized. . .that does not constitute trademark infringement under the Lanham Act."
130 Cong.
Rec. 31,675 (1984).
Thus, in reviewing the sufficiency of the evidence for purposes of deciding a motion to dismiss an indictment, courts have employed the same factors used in civil proceedings to analyze whether there is a likelihood of confusion between two marks.
See Torkington, 812 F.2d at 1352.
These factors have included: (1) the type of trademark; (2) the similarity of design; (3) the similarity of product; (4) the identity of retailers and purchasers; (5) the similarity of advertising media used; (6) the defendant's intent; and (7) any actual confusion.
Id. at 1354.
See United States v. McEvoy, 820 F.2d 1170, 1172 (11th Cir. 1987); see also Polaroid Corp. v. Polarad Elecs..
Corp., 287 F.2d 492, 495 (2d Cir. 1961) (enumerating so- called Polaroid factors: "the strength of [plaintiff's] mark, the degree of similarity between the two marks, the proximity of the products, the likelihood that the prior owner will bridge the gap, actual confusion, and the reciprocal of defendant's good faith in adopting its own mark, the quality of defendant's product, and the sophistication of the buyers"), cert. denied, 368 U.S. 820 (1961).
The registration and the "in use" requirements are not usually contested, although they are important technical requirements.
The statute requires that genuine mark is "registered" on the "principal register" in the United States Patent and Trademark Office.
18 U.S.C. § 2320(e)(1)(A)(ii).
Federal registration is a jurisdictional prerequisite to federal criminal prosecution and is an essential element in a prosecution for trademark counterfeiting.
SeeUnited States v. DeFreitas, 92 F. Supp.2d 272, 278 (S.D.N.Y. 2000) (finding testimony of mark holder for Beanie Babies along with samples of genuine, marked Beanie Babies and the mark holder's catalog to be sufficient evidence to permit a jury to conclude that the mark was registered).
To register a trademark on the principal register, the owner must establish the distinctiveness of the mark, and use or intent to use the mark in interstate or foreign commerce.
See 15 U.S.C. § 1052.
Often, a prosecutor may prove this element simply by offering a certified copy of the registration, which can be obtained from the U.S. Patent and Trademark Office.
See Appendix A (intellectual property contact lists).
The registration of a trademark by the Federal Patent and Trademark Office establishes a statutory presumption of ownership of the trademark and the validity of the registration.
15 U.S.C. § 1057(b) ("A certificate of registration of a mark upon the principal register . . . shall be prima facie evidence of the validity of the registered mark . . . of the registrant's ownership of the mark, and of the registrant's exclusive right to use the registered mark in commerce or in connection with the goods or services specified in the certificate . . . .").
Indeed, experience with prosecutions brought under the statute is that the genuine mark is treated as "incontestible" because it has been registered on the principal register for more than five consecutive years.
See 15 U.S.C. § 1065 (setting out conditions for "incontestability").
Such well-established marks probably provide the most appealing marks for counterfeiters to misappropriate.
Although the government must prove the mark was so registered, the statute explicitly states that the government need not prove the defendant's awareness of that registration.
See 18 U.S.C. § 2320(e)(1)(A)(ii).
Another requirement is that the genuine mark be "in use."
18 U.S.C. § 2320(e)(1)(A)(ii).
No further definition is provided in the statute, the case law, or the legislative history.
Although this requirement is not normally in dispute, some guidance might be drawn from the Lanham Act registration prerequisite that the mark be "use[d] in commerce," which is defined broadly as "the bona fide use of a mark in the ordinary course of trade, and not made merely to reserve a right in a mark."
15 U.S.C. § 1127.
See ConAgra, Inc. v. George A. Hormel 
The legislative history provides some commentary on other parts of the statute's definition of "counterfeit mark."
Where the statute requires the mark to be "spurious," 18 U.S.C. § 2320(e)(1)(A), the legislative history states that "spurious" means "not genuine or authentic."
130 Cong.
Rec. 31,675 (1984).
Where the statute requires that the counterfeit mark be "identical with, or substantially indistinguishable from" a genuine trademark, 18 U.S.C. § 2320(e)(1)(A)(ii), the legislative history states that the phrase "substantially indistinguishable from" is intended to prevent a counterfeiter from escaping liability by modifying a protected trademark in trivial ways.
Conversely, it also serves to exclude the arguable case of trademark infringement that is merely "reminiscent of" protected trademarks.
130 Cong.
Rec. 31,675-76 (1984).
Incidentally, this standard is the same as that applied in civil actions under the Lanham Act.
See 15 U.S.C. § 1127 (defining "counterfeit" as a spurious mark which is "identical with, or substantially indistinguishable from, a registered mark").
Finally, the statute restricts the "goods or services" with which the mark is "used" to be "those goods or services" for which the genuine mark is registered.
18 U.S.C. § 2320(e)(1)(A)(i)-(ii).
This restriction is an important distinction from civil trademark infringement under the Lanham Act.
As the legislative history notes, "a plaintiff with a Federal registration for.
. .[a mark] on typewriters might have a Lanham Act remedy against a defendant who used that mark to identify typing paper, even though the plaintiff had not registered that mark for use in connection with typing paper.
Under [§ 2320], however, the use of the mark . . . on typing paper would not count as the use of a 'counterfeit mark.'"
130 Cong.
Rec. 31,676 (1984).
One other consequence of this restriction is that knowing trafficking in unattached counterfeit marks would not by itself fulfill the requirements of the statute.
United States v. Giles, 213 F.3d 1247, 1253 (10th Cir. 2000) (reversing conviction for trafficking in counterfeit patches because statute does not prohibit trafficking in counterfeit labels unconnected to any goods).
Nevertheless, it could expose a defendant to liability as an aider and abetter in trademark counterfeiting.
Id. at 1251 n.6.
By contrast, trafficking in counterfeit labels for copyrighted works can be subject to criminal penalties under 18 U.S.C. § 2318 even if the labels are not attached to a work.
See infra Section IV.A.2.
II.B.4.
The defendant "knowingly used" the counterfeit mark
The fourth element of the crime of trademark counterfeiting is that the defendant "knowingly" used the counterfeit mark on or in connection with the trafficked goods or services.
The requisite showing of knowledge, or willful blindness, may be made through direct or circumstantial evidence.
The Seventh Circuit, in an opinion by Judge Easterbrook, noted that the defendant "knew that the marks were on the bottles, caps and boxes," and found this knowledge to be sufficient to uphold a conviction.
United States v. Sung, 51 F.3d 92, 93 (7th Cir. 1995) (holding that the vendor is on duty to inquire into the status of a mark).
Typical circumstantial evidence includes, but is not limited to, evidence of a defendant's purchase or sale of the goods, manipulation of the goods, the method of delivery, packaging conventions, or an unusually low price.
Indeed, the profits and circumstantial evidence regarding knowledge are usually so overwhelming that this element is not often contested.
See, e.g., United States v. McEvoy, 820 F.2d 1170, 1173 (11th Cir. 1987) ("It is telling that the trial record reveals that appellants were very much aware that their actions in selling the watches violated the law."), cert. denied,484 U.S. 902 (1987).
On the other hand, the Fifth Circuit has held that the government failed to satisfy the "knowingly" requirement where the accused trafficker in counterfeit goods did not affix the mark himself and where the government had not shown he knew that the mark was in fact being affixed to it by the counterfeiter.
United States v. Sultan, 115 F.3d 321, 325-30 (5th Cir. 1997) (reversing conviction for trafficking in counterfeit automobile parts).
The legislative history clarifies that the drafters intended that the government should prove that the defendant had "an awareness or a firm belief to that effect."
130 Cong.
Rec. 31,674 (1984) (referring to an awareness or belief to the effect that the mark was counterfeit).
This mens rea is notably different from (and less burdensome to prove than) an "intentional" mental state, as is required by the second element of the crime.
For example, the legislative history states that "if the prosecution proves that the defendant was 'willfully blind' to the counterfeit nature of the mark, it will have met its burden of showing 'knowledge.'"
130 Cong.
Rec. 31,674 (1984) (citing United States v. Jewell, 532 F.2d 697 (9th Cir. 1976), cert. denied,426 U.S. 951 (1976)).
On the other hand, the Congressional sponsors believed that "a manufacturer who believes in good faith that he or she has a prior right to use a particular mark, or that a mark does not infringe a registered mark, could not be said to 'know' that the mark is counterfeit."
130 Cong.
Rec. 31,674 (1984).
CAVEAT: Care must be exercised when offering the so-called "conscious avoidance" or "ostrich" instruction first set forth in United States v. Jewell, 532 F.2d 697 (9th Cir. 1976) (en banc), cert. denied,426 U.S. 951 (1976).
There are significant differences throughout the circuits regarding the appropriateness of such an instruction and the precise language to be used.
Prosecutors should consult local circuit opinion on this matter prior to proceeding with a Jewell instruction.
There are a number of aspects of knowledge that do not have to be shown by the government.
First, the government does not have to show that the defendant knew that a mark was registered for those goods or services on the principal register, because the statute itself states that the definition of counterfeit mark applies "whether or not the defendant knew such mark was so registered."
18 U.S.C. § 2320(e)(1)(A)(ii).
See Sung, 51 F.3d at 94.
Second, just as the government need not show actual confusion, it is not required to prove an intent to mislead.
See United States v. Brooks, 111 F.3d 365, 372 (4th Cir. 1997) (rejecting defense that defendants did not use counterfeit marks "for the purpose of deception or to cause confusion or mistake").
Finally, lack of knowledge of the criminality of the conduct is not an element of the offense.
As previously discussed, the crime does not require a specific intent to violate the statute.
__________________________________________________________________
II.C.
Defenses to the Crime of Trademark Counterfeiting
Overrun and "gray market" goods.
The statute expressly excludes from the definition of "counterfeit mark" any mark used in connection with items (commonly termed "overrun goods") that are:
goods or services of which the manufacturer or producer was, at the time of the manufacture or production in question authorized to use the mark or designation for the type of goods or services so manufactured or produced, by the holder of the right to use such mark or designation.
18 U.S.C. § 2320(e)(1).
The legislative history makes clear that "overrun goods" is an affirmative defense, and that "the burden will be on the defendant to prove that the goods or services in question fall within the overrun exclusion, under both the criminal and civil provisions."
130 Cong.
Rec. 31,676 (1984).
The First Circuit rejected a defendant's vagueness challenge to the overrun exclusion, and held instead, based on the plain language of the statute, that Congress intended the exception to be limited to those goods or services for which authorization existed "during the entire period of production or manufacture."
United States v. Bohai Trading Co., 45 F.3d 577, 579-81 (1st Cir. 1995) (affirming conviction for trafficking in counterfeit goods and importing goods by means of false or fraudulent practices).
The legislative history provides an example: If a licensee was authorized to make 500,000 umbrellas bearing a trademark owner's mark and the licensee manufactured without authorization an additional 500,000 umbrellas bearing that mark during the course of the license, "the contractual and other civil remedies already existing make it inappropriate to criminalize such practices."
130 Cong.
Rec. 31,676 (1984) (citation omitted).
On the other hand, the legislative history also explains that the exclusion cannot be claimed where a licensee produces a type of good other than the one for which he or she is licensed.
For example, "if a licensee is authorized to produce 'Zephyr' trench coats, but without permission manufactures 'Zephyr' wallets, the overrun exception would not apply."
130 Cong.
Rec. 31,677 (1984).
Also excluded from the definition of counterfeit mark are so-called "parallel imports" or "gray market" goods, which are trademarked goods legitimately manufactured and sold overseas, and then imported into the United States outside of the trademark owner's traditional distribution channels.
The mark placed on the gray market goods is not considered counterfeit under the statute because it was placed there with the consent of the trademark owner, and the goods were not subsequently modified or remarked.
Congress carefully considered "gray market" goods, and intended that they fall outside of the statute.
130 Cong.
Rec. 31,676 (1984); S. Rep. No. 98-526, at 11 (1984), reprinted in 1984 U.S.C.C.A.N.
3627, 3637.
Lanham Act defenses.
18 U.S.C. § 2320(c) explicitly incorporates all the civil Lanham Act defenses into the criminal cases: "All defenses, affirmative defenses, and limitations on remedies that would be applicable in an action under the Lanham Act [for trademark infringement] shall be applicable in a prosecution under this section."
In considering this provision, the legislative history notes that "only those defenses, affirmative defenses, and limitations on relief that are relevant under the circumstances will be applicable.
. . ."130 Cong.
Rec. 31,675 (1984).
The legislative history confirms Congress' intent that "any affirmative defense under the Lanham Act will remain an affirmative defense under this Act."
Id.
Lanham Act defenses in cases involving so-called "incontestible marks," which are the most commonly counterfeited and thus provide the basis for most criminal prosecutions, are primarily set out at 15 U.S.C. § 1115(b).
These nine defenses are enumerated as follows: (1) fraud by the mark owner in obtaining the registration; (2) abandonment of the mark by its owner; (3) misrepresentation or unclean hands with respect to use of the mark; (4) fair use; (5) innocent prior use without registration; (6) innocent prior use with registration; (7) use of a trademark in violation of the antitrust laws; (8) use of a functional mark; and (9) equitable defenses, such as laches, estoppel, and acquiescence.
Other Lanham Act defenses or limitations prominently mentioned in the legislative history are those limitations on actions against printers and newspapers in 15 U.S.C. § 1114(2).
See 130 Cong.
Rec. 31,675 (1984).
For an extensive discussion of each of these defenses, see David J. Goldstone 
L. Rev. 1, 43-65 (1998).
Where such defenses are raised, case law under the Lanham Act, 15 U.S.C. §§ 1051-1127, may prove instructive, although they can not be applied mechanically to a criminal case.
For example, an "unclean hands defense" may be used to deny relief to an "unclean" plaintiff mark holder in a civil case.
15 U.S.C. § 1115(b)(3).
However, the wrongful activity of a purportedly "unclean" mark holder may be less relevant to a criminal case, where the mark holder is not actually a party.
In a criminal case, prosecutors act in the interest of the public, not just the victim mark holder.
Permitting the defendant to automatically avail itself of this Lanham Act defense may not vindicate the public interest.
General defenses.
Many general defenses to 18 U.S.C. § 2320 arise outside the statute, such as the running of the statute of limitations, the absence of proper venue, or the absence of proper jurisdiction.
These defenses are available in every criminal case and their application needs no further elaboration here.
However, the statute of limitations defense for violations of 18 U.S.C. § 2320 merits additional discussion because of a law journal article suggesting that the statute of limitations for a 18 U.S.C. § 2320 violation should not be the usual five-year period as for almost all non-capital federal crimes under 18 U.S.C. § 3282, see, e.g., United States v. Milstein, No.
CR 96-899 (RJD), 2000 WL 516784, at *3 (E.D.N.Y.
March 3, 2000) (recognizing appropriateness of five-year statute of limitations), but should be based on the applicable period for civil trademark infringement in whichever state the federal court sits.
See Ronald J. Nessim, Criminal (and Civil) Trademark Infringement: What Statute of Limitations Applies?, 76 J. Pat.
&
Soc'y 933 (1994).
Nessim's theory would encourage forum shopping in trademark cases and make statute of limitations analysis much less predictable.
It has been raised by defense counsel in a number of litigated cases, but has not been adopted by any court of which we are aware.
Because no special limitations period is "expressly provided for by law" in 18 U.S.C. § 2320, the five-year limitations period set out in 18 U.S.C. § 3282 is the proper one to use.
See David J. Goldstone 
L. Rev. 1, 65-70 (1998) (arguing that federal courts should follow 18 U.S.C. § 3282 in cases arising under 18 U.S.C. § 2320).
__________________________________________________________________
II.D.
Statutory Penalty for Trafficking in Counterfeit Goods or Services
The maximum penalty for violating 18 U.S.C. § 2320 is imprisonment for 10 years and a fine of $2,000,000 for a first-time violator.
18 U.S.C. § 2320(a).
A subsequent conviction carries a prison term of up to 20 years, a $5,000,000 fine, or both.
Id.
For a first-time corporate defendant, the maximum fine is $5,000,000; recidivist corporations may be fined up to $15,000,000.
Id.
The defendant is sentenced under U.S. Sentencing Commission, Guidelines Manual § 2B5.3 (Nov. 1998 
For detailed discussion of consequences of a conviction under 18 U.S.C. § 2320, see Chapter VII. __________________________________________________________________
II.E.
Counterfeit Goods That Are Comparable To Legitimate Goods
Cases involving trafficking in marked goods that are comparable to legitimate goods can seem to raise slightly different issues than so-called "ordinary" counterfeit goods cases.
The majority of counterfeit goods cases involve counterfeit marks placed on goods that are substantially different from and usually of markedly lower quality than legitimate goods.
In a garden-variety counterfeiting case, a counterfeiter might place on low-quality watches a counterfeit mark that is legitimately placed on watches that sell for over $1,000.
By contrast, in a comparable goods case, the defendant might place the mark on similar-quality watches -- perhaps on watches made by the same third- party manufacturer as is ordinarily used by the mark holder.
These "comparable goods" cases are discussed below, with special attention given to computer chip ("CPU") remarking cases.
Because comparable goods cases can raise complex technical and legal issues, consultation with the Computer Crime and Intellectual Property Section is strongly encouraged when evaluating these cases.
II.E.1.
Background on comparable goods cases generally
A comparable goods case is one where the counterfeit mark is placed on goods where the goods themselves are arguably of equivalent quality to legitimate goods.
For example, a defendant who is charged with trademark counterfeiting for selling pirated computer software in counterfeit packaging may claim that the software he sold was an exact duplicate of the original software.
Therefore, he might claim, his use of the mark was justified, or at least should be excused.
These cases have arisen in many contexts, ranging from baby food to pharmaceuticals to physical goods to computer chips.
See, e.g., United States v. Milstein, No.
CR 96-899 (RJD), 2000 WL 516784, at *3 (E.D.N.Y.
March 3, 2000) (pharmaceuticals).
See also, e.g., United States Attorney's Office, Northern District of Texas, Federal Jury Convicts Four Individuals on Charges of Trademark Counterfeit, Conspiracy for Reselling Infant Formula, July 18, 2000 http://www.cybercrime.gov/babyfood.htm; United States Attorney's Office, Eastern District of New York, New York Electronic Crimes Task Force Arrests Two Individuals on Charges of Trafficking in Counterfeit Computer Chips and Software, June 22, 2000 http://www.cybercrime.gov/platinum.htm; Department of Justice, Violation of I.B.M.
Trademark Results in $3.3 Million Fine and Restitution for Chicago-area Company, November 19, 1998 http://www.cybercrime.gov/desktop.htm.
Defendants typically purchase loose goods at a low price -- either government surplus, goods that turn out to have been stolen, unmarked goods from an original equipment manufacturer ("OEM") or simply goods of only slightly lower quality -- and then mark them or box them for sale at full price.
Indeed, the practice by a mark holder of using OEMs to manufacture goods to be marked by the mark holder may permit a defendant to claim that his counterfeit goods were identical to the mark holder's because all goods made by a particular OEM are of the same quality, although this claim may not be based in fact and should be investigated.
Defendants in these cases may claim at the time of criminal litigation that because the goods are purportedly of equivalent quality to the legitimate goods (or better), they should not be held criminally responsible for their actions.
These claims should be considered, along with the following issues:
1.
Whether the defendant used a mark (or packaging) that was substantially similar to the legitimate mark (or packaging), and, if so, the basis of that use;
2.
Whether the defendant compensated the mark holder for (or notified the mark holder of) the defendant's use of its mark;
3.
Whether the defendant marked the goods to indicate to downstream consumers that the goods were not in fact subject to the actual oversight and supervision and would not properly be subject to customer support or warranty coverage as that provided by the mark holder;
4.
Whether the defendant invited any third party to investigate whether the quality control procedures, if any, used were equivalent to those used by the mark holder; and
5.
Whether the defendant provided for equivalent customer support or warranty coverage as that provided by the mark holder, and how downstream consumers were notified of any such support.
A defendant's claims that comparable goods are exempted from the statute would be well-founded for cases of overrun and "gray market" goods.
Overrun goods are goods "of which the manufacturer or producer was, at the time of the manufacture . . . in question authorized to use the mark . . . for the type of goods . . . so manufactured . . . by the holder of the right to use such mark or designation."
18 U.S.C. § 2320(e)(1).
Thus, if the defendant can show that the OEM was authorized at the time of manufacture to use the mark for the type of good at issue, then his trafficking in goods marked by the OEM may be excluded from criminal liability.
Similarly, the defendant may not be criminally liable for selling "gray market goods" -- trademarked goods legitimately manufactured and sold oversees and then imported into the United States outside of the trademark owner's distribution channels.
See supra Section II.C.
On the other hand, if the goods do not fall into these exceptions, it may be appropriate to charge trademark counterfeiting.
The defendant's claim at trial that the goods are comparable to (or even equivalent to) the legitimate goods would probably not be relevant unless he had identified himself, and not the mark holder, as the true source of and the quality control agent of the marked goods.
By using the counterfeit mark without authorization and without any reference to his own role as the actual judge of quality, the defendant has falsely identified the good as authorized by the mark holder and has reaped the profits that are properly due to the mark holder.
See United States v. Petrosian, 126 F.3d 1232, 1234 (9th Cir. 1997) ("When a genuine trademark is affixed to a counterfeit product, it becomes a spurious mark . . . .
The Coca-Cola mark became spurious when [defendant] affixed it to the counterfeit cola because the mark falsely indicated that Coca-Cola was the source of the beverage in the bottles and falsely identified the beverage in the bottles as Coca-Cola."), cert. denied, 522 U.S. 1138 (1998).
Moreover, if it can be shown that individual consumers are defrauded or deceived by the sale of counterfeit goods, a prosecutor may also charge wire fraud or mail fraud.
18 U.S.C. §§ 1341, 1343.
See infra Section VI.B.1 (discussing charging wire and mail fraud in infringement cases).
The issues of charging a comparable goods case will be exemplified below by a case study of remarked computer chips.
II.E.2.
A case of comparable goods: Remarked computer chips
Remarked computer chips are representative comparable goods.
Because remarking of computer chips can be done in high volume and can provide high margins, they provide an attractive source of revenue.
This section will provide market and technical background on computer chip remarking, and then provide a legal analysis of viability of a trademark counterfeiting charge.
Such charges have been filed in some districts.
See, e.g., United States Attorney's Office, Eastern District of New York, New York Electronic Crimes Task Force Arrests Two Individuals on Charges of Trafficking in Counterfeit Computer Chips and Software, June 22, 2000 http://www.cybercrime.gov/platinum.htm.
While the legal analysis provided here focuses on remarked computer chips, the legal analysis may also be helpful for other comparable goods cases.
II.E.2.a.
Market and technical background on computer chip remarking
It is widely recognized that a computer chip can be operated at a higher standard (e.g., higher speed) than that for which the manufacturer has rated it, just as an extension cord can carry more current than the level at which it has been rated, or an elevator can carry more weight than the amount for which it has been authorized.
Manufacturers often deliberately rate their products at a lower operating level to ensure quality control.
Some individuals have recognized this practice and taken advantage of it by using the computer chips, or by selling them for use, at the higher speed.
Usually, the marks on the chips indicating the manufacturer's suggested speed are removed; and the chips are remarked as capable of performing at the higher speed.
Prosecutors and investigators reviewing remarking cases are faced with the question of whether these practices constitute trademark counterfeiting.
This question seems difficult because the original manufacturer's trademark may not have been modified.
It is possible that the changes to the chip are to the speed designation and to the wiring without change to the mark.
Chip remarking most commonly takes place with regard to the computer chips known as central processing units ("CPUs").
Intel Corporation is the leading manufacturer of CPUs for use in personal computers, including the "Pentium" line of chips.
A CPU is the "brain" of the computer; it is the part of the computer that performs the calculations and operates on the data that is fed into the computer.
A chip's speed is measured in "megahertz" or "MHz."
For example, a 400 MHz chip is faster than a 300 MHz chip.
The speed of the chip, the manufacturer's trademark, and other identifying information are typically etched into the casing of each computer chip.
Faster CPUs command significantly higher prices in the market place than slower CPUs.
For example, in May 2000, a legitimate Intel Pentium III 550 MHz CPU could be purchased through legitimate channels for $326, a 650 MHz CPU for $507, and a 733 MHz CPU for $708.
Thus, a person could net a 55% profit by remarking a 550 MHz CPU to 650 MHz, or a 40% profit by remarking a 650 MHz CPU to 733 MHz, as long as the chips will perform at the increased speed.
Running a CPU faster than its rated speed can undermine its reliability.
A CPU pushed beyond its rating may appear to function properly in many circumstances, but nevertheless fail at some point where a CPU within its rating would not.
Typically, the remarking also involves physically altering or hot- wiring the chip so that it will actually function at the faster speed.
The process of modifying the CPU may also damage it, either through physical modification of the device or through electro-static discharges into the CPU.
Legitimate CPU manufacturers usually take significant quality control steps to safeguard their products from such damage.
II.E.2.b.
Charging trademark counterfeiting for trafficking in remarked computer chips
A prosecutor may consider charging trademark counterfeiting for trafficking in remarked computer chips (either manufacturing or reselling them).
In response, a defendant may claim that these sales of comparable goods do not constitute trademark counterfeiting, particularly for chips where the speed was remarked, and the trademark itself was unmodified.
The defendant may argue that the trademark on the chip was authorized by the mark holder prior to the remarking.
Under the case law discussed below, the argument is likely to fail because the use of the trademark in connection with a remarked chip would be considered "counterfeit" within the terms of the statute if there was a lack of quality control by the mark holder when the modifications were made to the chips.
(As noted above, if it can be shown that individual consumers are defrauded or deceived by the sale of counterfeit goods, a prosecutor may also charge wire fraud or mail fraud.
18 U.S.C. §§ 1341, 1343.
See infraSection VI.B.1 (discussing charging wire and mail fraud in infringement cases).
)
Few criminal cases have addressed how to determine when a mark placed under circumstances authorized by the mark holder can become a "counterfeit mark."
The question is likely to turn on whether the mark can be characterized as a "spurious mark," one that is "not genuine or authentic."
18 U.S.C. § 2320(e)(1)(A); 130 Cong.
Rec. 31,675 (1984).
A recent Ninth Circuit case mentioned previously, United States v. Petrosian, 126 F.3d 1232 (9th Cir. 1997), cert. denied, 522 U.S. 1138 (1998), provides the most guidance thus far on the scope of "spurious" in a criminal case.
The defendant purchased "genuine Coca-Cola bottles," filled them with a cola-like carbonated beverage that was not Coca-Cola, and told purchasers that the beverage was Coca-Cola.
On appeal, the defendant objected to a jury instruction that "counterfeit mark" could include a genuine trademark affixed to packaging containing products not made by, but sold as products of the owner of the registered trademark.
The Ninth Circuit rejected the defendant's contention that the use of the Coca-Cola mark could not be counterfeit because it was a "genuine" mark.
Instead, the court defined a spurious mark as "one that is false or inauthentic."
Id. at 1234.
The court noted that "[w]hen a genuine trademark is affixed to a counterfeit product, it becomes a spurious mark.
. .
The Coca-Cola mark became spurious when [defendant] affixed it to the counterfeit cola because the mark falsely indicated that Coca-Cola was the source of the beverage in the bottles and falsely identified the beverage in the bottles as Coca-Cola."
Id.
The Ninth Circuit's functional analysis thus revolved around the way the mark "falsely indicated" or "falsely identified" the source of a product, without articulating a specific definition for "spurious."
Similarly, by selling remarked computer chips with the registered trademark intact, defendants falsely indicate that the remarked chips will perform in accord with manufacturers' quality control standards for chips at that speed.
In interpreting the scope of "counterfeit mark" for purposes of criminal liability, it may be helpful to consider case law under the civil provisions of the Lanham Act.
See Section II.B (discussing applicability of Lanham Act case law to interpretation of trademark counterfeiting statute).
One civil case deserves special attention.
In Intel Corp. v. Terabyte Int'l, Inc., 6 F.3d 614 (9th Cir. 1993), the Ninth Circuit affirmed the district court's holding that a distributor of remarked chips was liable under the Lanham Act for trademark infringement.
The remarking process involved opening the packages and physically removing or covering the model number that was etched on the chip.
Id. at 616.
The defendants were distributors of chips remarked by another party.
Id.
The court rejected the defendant's argument that "confusion as to capability" is irrelevant when there is no confusion as to the source of the product, and recognized that the Lanham Act also protects the right to control the quality of one's goods.
Id. at 619.
Moreover, the court noted that the remarking activity might be "so basic that it would be a misnomer to call the article by its original name."
Id. (citation omitted).
Instead of comparing the remarked chips to the original ones (where the defendant could argue that only the label is different), the Ninth Circuit found that "the modified math coprocessors were counterfeit copies of the faster and more expensive models."
Id. at 620.
Therefore, the defendant's "conduct was blatant trademark infringement and was prohibited by the Lanham Act."
Id. at 623.
In its decision, the Ninth Circuit cites a "quality control" theory and focuses primarily upon the extent of consumer confusion.
According to the court, the remarker introduced a defect and took steps so that the customer would not discover the inferior nature of the product.
"Intel marked the chip with its name in connection only with the less demanding speed of six megahertz.
When the chip genuinely from Intel was marked with a speed designation Intel would not have given it, the chip became a counterfeit . . . ."
Id. at 620.
Many courts have recognized that a trademark holder is entitled to maintain at least some degree of control over the continued quality of its trademarked goods, and have been willing to hold defendants liable when the trademarked product is re-manufactured or re-packaged, even though the product might otherwise be considered "genuine."
See Champion Spark Plug Co. v. Sanders, 331 U.S. 125 (1947) (affirming injunction against the re- manufacturer of trademarked spark plugs, unless he made sufficient disclosure concerning the re-manufacture to allay customer confusion as to the nature of the mark owner's authorization); Westinghouse Electric Corp. v. General Circuit Breaker 
Supply, Inc., 106 F.3d 894, 899 (9th Cir. 1997) (upholding finding of trademark liability where defendant used Westinghouse mark in connection with reconditioned Westinghouse circuit breakers), cert. denied, 522 U.S. 857 (1997); Shell Oil Co. v. Commercial Petroleum, Inc., 928 F.2d 104, 107 (4th Cir. 1991) (affirming district court's finding that oil was not "genuine" without Shell's enforcement of its own quality controls); El Greco Leather Products Co. v. Shoe World, Inc., 806 F.2d 392, 395-96 (2d Cir. 1986) (holding that the sale of plaintiff's trademarked shoes without the requisite inspection was actionable, since the inspection was a form of quality control and the right to control quality is "[o]ne of the most valuable and important protections afforded by the Lanham Act"), cert. denied, 484 U.S. 817 (1987).
See generally Justin D. Swindells, Repackaging Original Trademarked Goods: Trademark Exhaustion or Consumer Confusion?, 7 Fed.
Circuit B.J. 391 (1997) (arguing that repackaged, unaltered products can deceive consumers and inflict non-trivial harm on the producer's goodwill).
Meaningful disclosure may mitigate trademark liability and defendants may rely upon disclaimers to negate their own culpability, although disclaimers can also be used by prosecutors to show a defendant's awareness of the law and willful violation of it.
See infra Section III.E.3 (discussing disclaimers).
Although the majority of circuits have found trademark infringement when there is a loss of quality control, "'quality control' is not a talisman the mere utterance of which entitles the trademark owner to judgment."
Iberia Food Corp. v. Romeo, 150 F.3d 298, 304 (3d Cir. 1998) (reversing finding of trademark infringement because goods were genuine despite absence of mark holder's quality controls).
For example, in some circuits, the court focuses its analysis on the degree of quality control a particular mark owner can expect.
This analysis focuses primarily on the mark holder's efforts in maintaining quality control.
Id. ("[T]he test is whether the quality control procedures established by the trademark owner are likely to result in differences between the products such that consumer confusion regarding the sponsorship of the products could injure the trademark owner's goodwill.").
See alsoWarner-Lambert Co. v. Northside Dev. Corp., 86 F.3d 3, 6-7 (2d Cir. 1996) (holding that, in order to prove that defendant infringed on plaintiff's trademark by selling trademarked cough drops past their "freshness date," plaintiff must first show that it had a quality control system in place that was not followed by defendant).
The government usually will be able to demonstrate that the trademark holder has extensive quality control procedures related to the speed markings on its chips.
The government will often be able to argue it was those quality control procedures that, inter alia, caused the chips to be marked at a lower speed in the first place.
Because the quality control procedures that the end user expects are not followed when chips are remarked without the permission of the mark holder, the government should be able to show that trafficking in remarked chips is wrongful conduct as well as a counterfeiting crime.
Go to . . .
CCIPS home page || Justice Department home page __________________________________________________________________
Updated page May 09, 2001 usdoj-crm/mis/jam __________________________________________________________________
