return to NASA Science News 2001 Headlines Archive subscription image Join our growing list of subscribers - sign up on our mailing list and you will receive a mail message every time we post a new story!! CAPTION: YEAR 2001 HEADLINES Subject December Articles Date 
Astrobiology December 20: speaker Sweet Meteorites - A NASA scientist has discovered sugar and several related organic compounds in two meteorites -- providing new evidence that the building blocks of life on Earth might have come from outer space.
Science Education December 18: speaker Starshine, Too - On Sunday, Dec. 16th, shuttle astronauts deployed the eye-catching Starshine 2 satellite.
Now there are two "disco balls in space" for students to track and study.
Asteroids December 14: speaker Bright Asteroid - A big and bright near-Earth asteroid will glide by our planet on Dec. 16th within easy range of powerful radars and backyard telescopes.
Astronomy December 12: speaker A Chip Off the Sun - Sky watchers can enjoy a solar eclipse on Friday, Dec. 14th, when the Moon's shadow sweeps across the Pacific Ocean and parts of the Americas.
Materials Science December 11: speaker Conjuring Crystals - Discovered in space, an amazing method for growing well-ordered crystals is working here on Earth, too.
NASA scientists are figuring out the physics behind the procedure.
Comets 
Perhaps chips off an exotic asteroid or dust from an extinct comet.
In either case, they'll soon be here.
Earth Science December 05: speaker Where Lightning Strikes - New maps from orbiting sensors that can detect flashes of lightning even during the daytime reveal where on Earth the powerful bolts will most likely strike.
Looking Up December 03: speaker Weekend Fireballs - This weekend a flurry of sensational fireballs startled onlookers in western Europe and parts of the United States.
What were the vivid lights? Read this story and find out.
CAPTION: YEAR 2001 HEADLINES
Subject November Articles Date 
Extra-solar Planets November 27: speaker Alien Atmospheres - Astronomers using the Hubble Space Telescope have detected the atmosphere of a planet circling a Sun-like star 150 light years away.
Meteors November 26: speaker Listening to Leonids - For centuries scientists have regarded reports of sounds from meteors with skepticism.
Yet earlier this month plenty of sky watchers heard strange hissing and sizzling noises during the Leonid meteor storm.
Living in Space November 21: speaker Floating Fertility - Researchers have found that gravity -- either too much or too little of it -- affects the behavior of sperm in puzzling ways.
Meteors November 15: speaker Leonids Around the Clock - A NASA-led team of astronomers will travel around the globe this weekend to monitor the 2001 Leonid meteor storm.
Catch their reports live on the web! International Space Station November 13: speaker Power to the ISS! - What's the most important resource on the International Space Station? Air? Water? No ... electrical power! Meteors November 08: speaker Jaw-dropping Leonids - On Sunday morning, Nov. 18, 2001, sky watchers somewhere will see a dazzling storm of Leonid meteors.
Read this story and find out how you can be one of them.
Space Weather November 07: speaker What Lies Beneath a Sunspot - Awesome plasma hurricanes were one of the surprises revealed when scientists recently peered beneath the stormy surface of our star.
Astronauts November 02: speaker Good Vibrations - A new and unorthodox treatment under study by NASA-funded doctors could reverse bone loss experienced by astronauts in space.
Astronomy November 01: speaker The Fading Milky Way - Light pollution is a growing environmental problem that threatens to erase the night sky before its time.
CAPTION: YEAR 2001 HEADLINES
Subject October Articles Date 
Aurorae October 26: speaker 'tis the Season for Auroras - Lately, sky watchers have been enjoying plenty of Northern Lights.
Indeed, say researchers, autumn is a good time to spot auroras.
But why? Read this story and find out.
Mars Exploration October 24: speaker The USA Returns to Mars - NASA's 2001 Mars Odyssey spacecraft reached Mars last night and was captured into orbit after a successful main engine burn.
Black Holes October 23: speaker Energy from a Black Hole - There are plenty of black holes that gobble energy.
Now astronomers have spotted one in a distant galaxy that's giving some of its energy back.
Mars 2001 October 18: speaker Mars, Ho! - NASA's 2001 Mars Odyssey probe is poised to enter orbit around the Red Planet.
The spacecraft is on a mission to seek out evidence of Martian water and to explore the planet's radiation environment.
Comets 
Sky watchers will see as many as 20 fast shooting stars each hour -- each one a tiny piece of Halley's Comet.
Moons of Jupiter October 15: speaker Dashing through the Snows of Io - Today, NASA's Galileo spacecraft is heading for its closest-ever flyby of Jupiter's moon Io -- an alien world where fiery volcanoes belch sulfurous snow.
Mars Exploration October 11: speaker The Perfect Dust Storm Strikes Mars - Three months after it began, an awesome global dust storm on Mars is waning.
Two NASA spacecraft have captured dazzling images of the planetary tempest.
Earth Science October 11: speaker Planetary Waves Break Ozone Holes - Most of the world's ozone-destroying pollutants come from the northern half of our planet.
Yet Earth's yawning ozone hole straddles the south pole -- not the north.
Why? Read this and find out! Planet Earth October 09: speaker A Disco Ball in Space - Students and scientists are teaming up for a far-out experiment to monitor the outer reaches of Earth's atmosphere.
Astronauts October 04: speaker A Day in the Life of a Space Walker - Astronaut and explorer Jim Reilly tells what it's like to do construction work in the far-out environment of space.
Astronauts October 01: speaker Space Bones - Weightlessness sure looks like a lot of fun, but prolonged exposure of astronauts to zero-G can have some negative side effects -- like the weakening of human bones!
CAPTION: YEAR 2001 HEADLINES
Subject September Articles Date 
Comets 
Living in Space September 21: speaker Suds in Space - Bubbly, frothing and ticklish -- soft drinks and beer promise a welcome taste of home to faraway space travelers.
Comets September 18: speaker The Continuing Adventures of Deep Space 1 - NASA's Deep Space 1 probe, a veteran of more than one spine-tingling space adventure, is about to begin its greatest adventure yet -- a daring plunge into a comet.
Earth Science September 17: speaker Dawn of a New Ozone Hole - Our planet's Antarctic ozone hole is opening once again as Spring approaches in the southern hemisphere -- and scientists say it's a big one.
Astronomy September 13: speaker What Lurks in the Outer Solar System? - It's just a matter of time, say researchers, before astronomers find something as big as Pluto in the chilly outer reaches of the solar system.
Physics September 07: speaker Bizarre Boiling - Watching liquids boil in low gravity is an out-of-this-world experience.
The strangely turbulent liquids have plenty of entertainment value, and they're teaching scientists some important physics lessons, too.
Earth Science September 07: speaker A Greener Planetary Greenhouse - In recent years Earth-orbiting satellites have seen plants growing more vigorously than usual over northern parts of our planet.
Black Holes September 05: speaker Black Hole Snacks - NASA's Chandra X-ray Observatory has spotted a curious outburst from our galaxy's core -- a sign that the Milky Way's central black hole may be snacking on its neighbors.
Astronauts September 04: speaker Wide Awake in Outer Space - Imagine the excitement of blasting off on a powerful rocket, the strange sensations of free-fall, the novelty of mornings that return every 90 minutes...
Who could sleep through all that?
CAPTION: YEAR 2001 HEADLINES
Subject August Articles Date 
Earth Science August 28: speaker Fighting Wildfires Before They Start - Using space-based satellite data and sophisticated computer programs, scientists are learning more about capricious wildfires -- including where they're likely to start and what we can do to prevent them.
Comets August 24: speaker A New Comet - Last weekend an amateur astronomer peered through his telescope and found a new comet the old-fashioned way -- by looking! Moons of Jupiter August 22: speaker The Strange Spires of Callisto - NASA's Galileo spacecraft has spotted curious icy spires jutting from the surface of Jupiter's moon Callisto.
The bizarre-looking natural features have researchers wondering if the surface of the frigid moon might be a more dynamic place than they once thought.
Earth Science August 21: speaker Smoke Sentry in Space - In the past firefighters looked toward the sky for relief from relentless wildfires, wishing for rain or perhaps a cool breeze.
Now there's a different kind of aid beaming down from the heavens.
Mars Exploration August 17: speaker Having a Ball on Mars - An amusing accident in the Mojave desert has inspired a new kind of Mars rover -- a two-story high beach ball that can descend to the Martian surface and explore vast expanses of the Red Planet.
Earth Science August 16: speaker Into the Storm - While most people are trying to avoid the perils of this year's hurricanes, scientists will soon be flying right into the mighty storms! Materials Science August 15: speaker Samples of the Future - The advanced space ships of tomorrow will be crafted from far-out materials with extraordinary resistance to the harsh environment of space.
An experiment strapped to the outside of the ISS aims to put such materials through their paces.
Comets 
Living in Space August 07: speaker Mixed Up in Space - Humans can become confused and disoriented (and even a little queasy) in an alien world where up and down have no meaning.
Moons of Jupiter August 03: speaker Another Daring Adventure for Galileo - NASA's durable Galileo space probe is heading for a close encounter with an alien volcano on Jupiter's moon Io. Galileo could fly right through a volcanic plume for the first time.
Living in Space August 02: speaker Gravity Hurts (So Good) - Strange things happen to the body when humans venture into space and the familiar pull of gravity vanishes.
Scientists say exercise is the key to adapting to life in orbit -- and returning to Earth.
CAPTION: YEAR 2001 HEADLINES
Subject July Articles Date 
Will it be an extraordinary sky show like last year -- or a moonlit disappointment? This story explains how to see for yourself.
Asteroids July 27: speaker Meteorites Don't Pop Corn - A fireball that dazzled Americans on July 23rd was a piece of a comet or an asteroid, scientists say.
Contrary to reports, however, it probably didn't scorch any cornfields.
Space Station July 25: speaker Space Seeds Return to Earth - Seed pods from a commercial gardening experiment aboard the International Space Station are back on Earth.
The far-out pods could hold the key to long-term habitation of space.
International Space Station July 23: speaker Building a 'Droid for the International Space Station - Inspired by science fiction classics, NASA scientists are building a talking, thinking and flying robot to help astronauts with their chores in space.
Mars Exploration July 20: speaker Happy Anniversary, Viking Lander - On July 20, 1976, NASA's Viking 1 lander descended safely to the surface of Mars, revealing an alien world that continues to puzzle scientists and tempt explorers.
Planetary Exploration July 19: speaker A Propitious Alignment of Planets - In ancient times many people thought heavenly alignments influenced daily life on Earth.
Nowadays they set the schedule for space exploration.
Mars Exploration July 16: speaker Planet Gobbling Dust Storms - An enormous dust storm has erupted on Mars, shrouding the planet in haze and raising the temperature of its atmosphere by a whopping 30 degrees.
Astronomy July 11: speaker Sizzling Comets Circle a Dying Star - Astronomers have detected a massive cloud of water vapor around an aging star.
It could be the telltale sign of innumerable dying comets and a glimpse of things to come in our own solar system.
Looking Up July 10: speaker Morning Coffee and Planets - Beginning Friday the 13th -- a lucky day for stargazers -- four planets, the Moon, and a giant red star will put on a dazzling show for early-rising sky watchers.
International Space Station July 06: speaker Even Homes in Space Need a Door - A new airlock soon to be installed on the International Space Station is critical for assembly and maintenance of the orbiting outpost.
Earth Science July 03: speaker Aphelion Away! - On the 4th of July, Earth will lie at its greatest distance from the Sun -- an annual event astronomers call "aphelion."
But don't expect any sudden relief from the heat.
CAPTION: YEAR 2001 HEADLINES
Subject June Articles Date 
Earth Science June 28: speaker El Niño Repellent? - New satellite images of the Pacific Ocean hint that El Niño will not return this winter.
Instead, La Niña-like weather patterns will persist thanks to a "Pacific Decadal Oscillation" that might also repel strong El Niños.
Earth Science June 26: speaker All the World's a Stage ... for Dust - Tune in to a NASA website and watch giant dust clouds as they ride global rivers of air, cross-pollinating continents with topsoil and microbes.
Looking Up June 21: speaker A Close Encounter with Mars - Today Earth and Mars will experience their closest encounter in a dozen years.
Stargazers won't want to miss the Red Planet blazing bright in the midnight sky.
Looking Up June 19: speaker Eclipse Safari - On Thursday, June 21st, the Moon's shadow will race across southern Africa for the only total solar eclipse of 2001.
The display will delight some creatures and put others to sleep.
Earth Science June 18: speaker Mobile Homes for Microbes - African dust that crosses the Atlantic Ocean and brings beautiful sunsets to Florida also carries potentially harmful bacteria and fungi, a new study shows.
Space Weather June 12: speaker The Biggest Explosions in the Solar System - Scientists hope NASA's HESSI spacecraft will unravel an explosive mystery: the origin of solar flares.
Astrophysics June 07: speaker Where No Telescope Has Gone Before - Astronomers at NASA's Marshall Space Flight Center have captured the first focused hard x-ray images of the cosmos, opening a new window of the electromagnetic spectrum for practical exploration.
Planetary Exploration June 06: speaker Bracing for an Interplanetary Traffic Jam - NASA is improving its already-extraordinary traffic control system for interplanetary spacecraft, the Deep Space Network, in preparation for a flurry of activity in deep space.
Living in Space June 01: speaker Jellyplants on Mars - Scientists are creating a new breed of glowing plants --part mustard and part jellyfish-- to help humans explore the Red Planet.
CAPTION: YEAR 2001 HEADLINES
Subject May Articles Date 
Robots May 29: speaker Brainy 'Bots - NASA's own 'Bionic Woman' is applying artificial intelligence to teach robots how to behave a little more like human explorers.
Mars Exploration May 24: speaker Unmasking the Face on Mars - New high-resolution images and 3D altimetry from NASA's Mars Global Surveyor spacecraft reveal the Face on Mars for what it really is: a mesa.
Earth Science May 23: speaker Water-Witching From Space - Farmers will soon have a new tool for getting the most out of their fields.
NASA's Aqua satellite will provide crucial information about the water in the ground and the weather on the horizon.
Earth Science May 22: speaker Dust Begets Dust - Everyone knows that dry weather leads to dusty soils, but new research suggests that dust might in turn lead to dry weather.
Comets May 18: speaker A Taste for Comet Water - When Comet LINEAR broke apart last year it revealed what many scientists thought all along: Water in Earth's oceans could have come from outer space.
Earth Science May 17: speaker The Pacific Dust Express - North America has been sprinkled with a dash of Asia! A dust cloud from China crossed the Pacific Ocean recently and rained Asian dust from Alaska to Florida.
Looking Up May 15: speaker The Great Mars Rush - Hurtling toward Mars at 22,000 mph, Earth is heading for its closest encounter with the Red Planet in a dozen years.
Mars is already a brilliant morning star and it will soon become a dazzling all-night spectacle.
Living in Space May 10: speaker Teaming Up on Space Plants - This week students, scientists, and astronauts will join forces to learn more about how plants grow on the International Space Station.
Mars Exploration May 08: speaker Roses for the Red Planet - What makes the Red Planet red? Right now the answer is iron oxide, but one day it could be roses say NASA scientists debating the prospects for plant life on Mars.
International Space Station May 04: speaker The Phantom Torso - An unusual space traveler named Fred is orbiting Earth on board the International Space Station.
His job? To keep astronauts safe from space radiation.
Pioneer 10 May 03: speaker Seven Billion Miles and Counting - Last week NASA received a weak signal from Pioneer 10, twice as far from the Sun as Pluto and speeding toward the constellation Taurus.
Mars Exploration May 01: speaker Space Weather on Mars - Future human explorers of Mars can leave their umbrellas back on Earth, but perhaps they shouldn't forget their Geiger counters! A NASA experiment en route to the Red Planet aims to find out.
CAPTION: YEAR 2001 HEADLINES
Subject April Articles Date 
Its unusual reappearance came as no surprise to scientists who tracked the behemoth by peering right through our star.
The Moon April 26: speaker The Mysterious Case of Crater Giordano Bruno - A band of 12th century sky watchers saw something big hit the Moon 800 years ago.
Or did they? A new study suggests the event was a meteoritic trick of the eye.
Astrobiology April 25: speaker 20,000 Leagues Under the Sea: The Webcast - Astrobiologists are visiting the Indian Ocean to explore a bizarre undersea ecosystem that doesn't need sunlight to flourish.
You can join them via a live webcast on April 26th! Materials Science April 23: speaker Look Ma -- No Hands! - Using a force field to float molten test samples precisely in mid-air, NASA's Electrostatic Levitator creates a unique environment for space-age materials processing.
Looking Up April 19: speaker Look, Listen, Lyrids! - The Lyrid meteor shower peaks on Sunday, April 22nd.
Looking at the Lyrids can be fun, but now you can listen to them, too, using NASA's online meteor radar.
International Space Station April 18: speaker The Amazing Canadarm2 - Crawling around the International Space Station like an agile worm, the newest Canadian robotic arm will be essential for building and maintaining the ISS. Astrobiology April 17: speaker Solving Charles Darwin's 'Abominable Mystery' - About 130 million years ago the first flowering plants suddenly appeared -- an event Charles Darwin described as an 'abominable mystery.'
Now, scientists using chemical fossils are unraveling this ancient puzzle.
Astrobiology April 13: speaker Life as We Didn't Know It - Biologists always thought life required the Sun's energy, until they found an ecosystem that thrives in complete darkness.
International Space Station April 09: speaker Leafy Green Astronauts - NASA scientists are learning how to grow plants in space.
Such far-out crops will eventually take their place alongside people, microbes and machines in self-contained habitats for astronauts.
Astrobiology April 05: speaker Was Johnny Appleseed a Comet? - A new experiment suggests that comet impacts could have sowed the seeds of life on Earth billions of years ago.
Science Education April 04: Tireless Science Communication Pays Off - Last night, the Science@NASA family of web sites received the 2000 Pirelli INTERNETional, a prestigious international award for science communications.
Space Station April 03: speaker Plumbing the Space Station - Nothing goes to waste on the International Space Station where nearly everything is recycled.
What makes this ecologist's dream world work? Some of the fanciest plumbing in the solar system! Cosmology April 03: speaker A Supernova Sheds Light on Dark Energy - A discovery by astronomers using the Hubble Space Telescope supports the notion that the Universe is filled with a mysterious form of energy pushing galaxies apart at an ever-increasing rate.
CAPTION: YEAR 2001 HEADLINES
Subject March Articles Date 
The Red Planet March 28: speaker The Lure of Hematite - On rusty-red Mars, a curious deposit of gray-colored hematite (a mineral cousin of common household rust) could hold the key to the mystery of elusive Martian water.
Space Weather March 27: speaker Cannibal Coronal Mass Ejections - Fast-moving solar eruptions that overtake and devour their slower-moving kin can trigger long-lasting geomagnetic storms when they strike Earth's magnetosphere.
Solar Power March 23: speaker Beam it Down, Scotty! - Solar power collected in space and beamed to Earth could be an environmentally friendly solution to our planet's growing energy problems.
Space Station March 21: speaker Staying Cool on the ISS - The International Space Station's thermal control systems maintain a delicate balance between the deep-freeze of space and the Sun's blazing heat.
Mars 2001 March 19: speaker 2001 Mars Odyssey - NASA's latest mission to Mars, an orbiter scheduled for launch on April 7th, will seek out underground water-ice and explore space weather around the Red Planet.
Astronomy March 15: speaker Welcome Interference - NASA scientists have combined starlight from two of the largest telescopes on Earth to form an extraordinary new tool in the search for planets outside the solar system.
International Space Station March 14: speaker Home, Space Home - On the ground, the International Space Station would be an odd looking building -- but space is an odd place to live! Find out how space weather, orbital free fall, and the Space Shuttle's payload bay shapes the architecture of the ISS.
Space Station March 10: speaker The End is Mir - On March 22, 2001, the Russian Space Agency will ignite the engines of a Progress rocket attached to Mir and send the 135-ton space station to a watery grave in the remote south Pacific.
The space station will join a surprising parade of Mir-sized objects that hit Earth every year.
Earth Science March 09: speaker Science Out of Africa - Not all NASA adventures happen in space.
In this story a scientist describes his down-to-Earth encounters with poisonous snakes, charging elephants and more! Climate Science March 06: speaker After Three Strikes, Is La Niña Out? - La Niña-like conditions that have persisted in the Pacific Ocean for three years might finally subside this Fall.
The Cutting Edge March 01: speaker Buck Rogers, Watch Out! - NASA researchers are studying insects and birds, and using smart materials with uncanny properties to develop mindboggling new aircraft designs.
CAPTION: YEAR 2001 HEADLINES
Subject February Articles Date 
Scientists say ancient martian microbes may have kept them in line.
Asteroid Eros February 27: speaker Gamma-rays from an Asteroid - Perched on the surface of asteroid 433 Eros, NASA's NEAR spacecraft is beaming back measurements of gamma-rays leaking from the space rock's dusty soil.
Optical Computing February 27: speaker Fire Photon Torpedoes! - A NASA alliance with minority colleges and universities is working to create futuristic computers that operate using particles of light.
Earth and Moon February 23: speaker The Great Moon Hoax - Yes, there really is a Moon hoax, but the prankster isn't NASA.
Moon rocks and common sense prove Apollo astronauts really did visit the Moon.
Asteroids February 23: speaker Apocalypse Then - A violent collision with a space rock, like the one that doomed the dinosaurs, may have also caused our planet's greatest mass extinction 250 million years ago.
Space Weather February 21: speaker Nature's Tiniest Space Junk - NASA scientists are using an experimental radar to monitor a swarm of tiny meteoroids surrounding our planet.
Listen to the echoes, live! Looking Up February 20: speaker Blazing Venus - This is a good time to keep an eye on the fiery second planet from the Sun as it approaches Earth and delivers a dazzling sky show.
Space Weather February 15: speaker The Sun Does a Flip - NASA scientists who monitor the Sun say that our star's awesome magnetic field is flipping -- a sure sign that solar maximum is here.
Asteroid Eros February 14: speaker It's Not Over Yet! - Following one of the softest planetary landings ever, ground controllers have decided to extend the NEAR mission and gather unique data from the very surface of asteroid Eros.
The Red Planet February 09: speaker Global Warming on Mars - Artificial greenhouse gases that are bad news on Earth could provide the means to make Mars a more comfortable place for humans to live.
Earth Science February 07: speaker What Next, Galapagos? - The worst of the recent fuel spill in the Galapagos has passed ... or has it? Researchers plan to use NASA satellite data to keep an eye on the islands' unique ecosystem.
The Red Planet February 05: speaker Carbonated Mars - Here on Earth the only way to make carbonate rocks is with the aid of liquid water.
Finding such rocks on Mars might prove, once and for all, that the barren Red Planet was once warm and wet.
CAPTION: YEAR 2001 HEADLINES
Subject January Articles Date 
But where did all that Martian air go? New evidence from NASA's Mars Global Surveyor spacecraft supports a long-held suspicion that much of the Red Planet's atmosphere was simply blown away -- by the solar wind.
International Space Station January 30: speaker Students make First Contact with the ISS - Last month a group of Chicago students talked to astronauts on the International Space Station via amateur radio.
Astrobiology January 26: speaker Greening of the Red Planet - A hardy microbe from Earth that thrives where others perish might one day transform the barren ground of Mars into arable soil.
Space Weather January 25: speaker Earth's Invisible Magnetic Tail - The first global views of our planet's magnetosphere, captured by NASA's IMAGE spacecraft, reveal a curious plasma tail that stretches toward the Sun.
Water on Mars January 23: speaker Layers of Mars - If layered regions on Mars are sedimentary deposits that formed underwater, as some scientists suspect, they could be the best places to hunt for elusive Martian fossils.
Planet Earth January 19: speaker Earth Songs - If humans had radio antennas instead of ears, we would hear a remarkable symphony of strange noises coming from our own planet.
Planet Earth January 18: speaker The Eastern U.S. Keeps Its Cool - While surface temperatures across most of the globe are on the rise, the eastern U.S. appears to be slowly cooling.
Astrobiology January 17: speaker Precocious Earth - Tiny zircon crystals found in ancient stream deposits suggest that Earth harbored continents and liquid water remarkably soon after our planet formed.
Black Holes January 12: speaker New Evidence for Black Holes - By seeing almost nothing, astronomers say they've discovered something extraordinary: the event horizons of black holes in space.
Cosmic Rays January 12: speaker Ballooning for Cosmic Rays - Astronomers have long thought that supernovas are the source of cosmic rays, but there's a troubling discrepancy between theory and data.
A balloon flight could shed new light on the mystery.
X-ray Astronomy January 11: speaker Chandra Links Pulsar to Historic Supernova - New evidence from NASA's Chandra X-ray Observatory suggests that a known pulsar is the present-day counterpart to a stellar explosion witnessed by Chinese astronomers in 386 AD. Looking Up January 08: speaker A Total Eclipse of the Sun -- on the Moon! - This Tuesday, January 9th, sky watchers across some parts of Earth will enjoy a total lunar eclipse.
But what would they see if they lived, instead, on the Moon? Water on Mars January 05: speaker The Case of the Missing Mars Water - Plenty of clues suggest that liquid water once flowed on Mars --raising hopes that life could have arisen there-- but the evidence remains inconclusive and sometimes contradictory.
Planet Earth January 04: speaker Earth at Perihelion - This morning at 5 o'clock Eastern Standard time Earth made its annual closest approach to the Sun -- an event astronomers call perihelion.
Science Education January 03: A New Look for the New Year - The Science@NASA home page has a new look and we're pleased to offer a host of new services as well, including Spanish-language science stories ... and more!
YEAR 2003 NEWS ARCHIVE
YEAR 2002 NEWS ARCHIVE
YEAR 2000 NEWS ARCHIVE
YEAR 1999 NEWS ARCHIVE
YEAR 1998 NEWS ARCHIVE
YEAR 1997 NEWS ARCHIVE
YEAR 1996 NEWS ARCHIVE __________________________________________________________________
return to top of page Curator: Bryan Walls NASA Official: Ron Koczor
