[USEMAP:whatsnew.jpg] [USEMAP:whatsnew_nav.jpg]
You can view some publications as text-only (HTML) and others as fully formatted documents with graphics in Adobe PDF. Download Acrobat Reader.
December 2002 * Solar Center Breaks Ground for AFV Garage The North Carolina Solar Center, based in the College of Engineering and the Industrial Extension Service of North Carolina State University, broke ground for its new AFV Garage.
Construction is expected to be complete by May 2003.
The garage, located adjacent to the demonstration Solar House, will serve as a research and education facility for a variety of alternative fuels.
Roof integrated photovoltaic panels will provide some of the electrical energy required to charge the batteries of electric vehicles.
In addition, educational materials and hands-on demonstration for ethanol, biodiesel, compressed natural gas, gas-electric hybrid, and hydrogen fuel cell technologies will be provided.
* UPS to Use Alternative Fuel Tractors to Reduce Emissions UPS, the world's No. 1.
package carrier, now uses alternative fuel vehicles in every part of its fleet.
The company will soon begin using 10 liquefied natural gas trailers to ship long distance packages.
The tractors will carry 31,000 packages a day along a 545-mile route between Ontario, California, and Las Vegas, Nevada.
The tractors, though expensive, significantly reduce emissions, maintenance, and operating costs.
* NESEA Launches Online Club for AFV Owners The Northeast Sustainable Energy Association launched the new Green Car Club Web site, which aims to provide a sense of community to owners and supporters of environmentally friendly cars.
The site is designed to allow green car owners to share their experiences and find answers to questions about green vehicles, and offers an independent source of information on green cars, the latest news in green car development and new car reviews, and information on AFV equipment and fuel.
The site also offers Web-based discussion groups, a forum for exchanging performance data, driving tips, and information on public outreach activities and club-sponsored events.
* American Automakers Roll Out Hybrid and Diesel Vehicles U.S. automakers, facing tougher government rules on fuel economy, tout diesel engines as a way to improve efficiency, reduce greenhouse gas emissions, and cut U.S. dependence on imported oil.
Additionally, hybrid electric vehicles have the attention of the public and of the U.S. Army, which sees combat versions of hybrid trucks helping to reduce its fuel demand.
DaimlerChrysler will roll out a gasoline-electric Dodge Ram Contractor's Special hybrid pickup in 2003 and a diesel-powered Jeep Liberty sport-utility vehicle in 2004.
It will build only about 5,000 diesel Liberty models to test consumer acceptance.
Ford plans to introduce a hybrid Escape SUV in late 2003 and GM plans to roll out a hybrid pickup in 2004.
* Columbia, Missouri Now Offers E85! The U.S. Postal Service in Columbia, Missouri, was looking for a place to fuel its flexible-fuel trucks with E85.
Tiger Conoco recently became the sixth public E85 pump in Missouri and the first in Columbia.
The store accepts the federal credit card and is just a short turn off the Interstate.
It prices its 100+ octane E85 the same as its 87 octane regular unleaded gasoline to keep the fuel competitive.
The 1,000-gallon E85 fueling tank was converted from a diesel tank in only two weeks.
November 2002 * DOE Opens Hydrogen Fueling Station in Nevada DOE recently opened a new hydrogen energy station in Las Vegas, Nevada, that will produce both electric power and hydrogen fuel.
The station is the result of a public-private partnership between DOE, the city of Las Vegas, Air Products and Chemicals, Inc. (which designed and constructed the facility) and Plug Power, Inc. (which manufactured and installed the site's proton exchange membrane fuel cell).
The facility can dispense hydrogen, hydrogen-enriched natural gas, and compressed natural gas.
The $10.8-million station features an on-site hydrogen generator and compressor, liquid and gaseous hydrogen storage tanks, dispensing systems, and a stationary fuel cell.
DOE plans to join with the City of Las Vegas and NRG Technologies, Inc., to convert and operate hydrogen-powered vehicles for use at the new facility.
* Toyota to Lease Fuel Cell Cars Toyota is marketing a limited number of fuel cell passenger cars.
It will lease 20 cars in Japan and the United States during the coming year, which will be available to government bodies, research institutions, and energy-related companies.
German-U.S. automaker DaimlerChrysler AG was the first to bring to market a limited series of fuel cell buses in 2000; Honda expects government approval to begin marketing its fuel cell vehicle in December, probably on the same day as Toyota.
The Japanese government has set a goal of having 50,000 fuel cell vehicles on the road in Japan by 2010.
* McChord Air Force Base Opens E85 Pump McChord Air Force Base in Washington has opened an Alternative Fuels Service Station that carries biodiesel and E85.
The cost to modify the station to dispense E85 and biodiesel was about $68,000.
McChord has 21 E85 compatible vehicles on base and expects to acquire 85 more.
It still faces the difficulty of trucking the fuel from Idaho.
This takes a couple of days, and makes small delivery quantities hard to negotiate.
* New York's First E85 Pump On November 1, NOCO Energy Corporation delivered a truckload of the winter blend of clean E85 fuel to the first E85 tank in New York.
The fuel will soon be pumped at the New York State Thruway Authority service depot in Cheektowaga.
This pump will also be open to state vehicles.
The Authority has more than 100 Ford Taurus flexible-fuel-vehicles that can use any combination of gasoline or ethanol to 85% ethanol.
The agency complies with the EPAct mandate of having the alternative fuel vehicles, but fueling the Tauruses with unleaded gasoline negates the goal of reducing pollution.
* City of Los Angeles Becomes Nation's First Customer for Fuel Cell Car Mayor Jim Hahn announced that City of Los Angeles will be the first U.S. retail customer for a fuel cell car.
Employees will immediately begin a familiarization program with prototype versions of the Honda FCX.
They will use the vehicles on the job as regular pool cars and for commuting.
The City and Honda are finalizing plans on refueling support systems to supply hydrogen fuel for the vehicles.
The City will take delivery of the first of five production vehicles before the end of 2002.
The Honda FCX has been certified by the California Air Resources Board and EPA as a zero emission vehicle.
It uses hydrogen supplied to a fuel cell stack to generate electricity and power its electric motor.
With a maximum output of 80 horsepower and 201 foot-pounds of torque, acceleration is similar to a Honda Civic.
The FCX has a possible range of 220 miles and seats four people.
Honda plans to lease about 30 fuel cell cars in California and Japan during the next two to three years, but has no plans for mass-market or individual sales.
* Clean Fueling Technologies Provides E85 Infrastructure Clean Fueling Technologies (CFT) of Georgetown, Texas, has joined the National Ethanol Vehicle Coalition to develop and provide turn-key E85 fueling systems based on aboveground storage tanks.
CFT will use state-of-the art Gilbarco dispensing systems, which can be customized to specific needs.
These very safe and affordable systems (which range from 2,000 gallons to 10,000 gallons) will use electronic card reading systems and dispense E85 with equipment familiar to drivers 24 hours per day.
They can be shipped anywhere in the nation, and will be available to the public and to fleets.
Detailed information is available from the National Ethanol Vehicle Coalition.
* DOE Completes Testing of Hydrogen Vehicles DOE announced that it has finished testing three hydrogen-fueled vehicles featuring internal combustion engines.
The primary testing objective was to evaluate thesafety and reliability of operating vehicles on hydrogen/CNG blends.
Secondary objectives included quantifying vehicle emissions, cost, and performance.
The test vehicles were a Ford F-150 pickup truck operating on as much as 50% hydrogen, an F-150 running on as much as 30% hydrogen, and a Mercedes Sprinter van fueled with 100% hydrogen.
The vehicles operated safely for 26,000 miles and released extremely low emissions.
Results also indicated that oil change intervals could be extended significantly.
October 2002 * DOE and EPA Release Fuel Economy Guide for Model Year 2003 DOE and EPA released the estimated fuel efficiencies for all U.S. passenger vehicles for Model Year 2003.
The Fuel Economy Guide 2003 ranks vehicles by fuel efficiency within each class, and the online version allows users to make side-by-side comparisons of vehicles.
For 2003, the Honda Insight, Honda Civic Hybrid, and Toyota Prius continue to lead the list of fuel-efficient vehicles.
Diesel-fueled Volkswagens follow closely.
The only gasoline-fueled vehicle on the top 10 list is the Toyota Echo.
The Fuel Economy Guide Web site also provides information about AFVs and all-electric vehicles, including the latest news on federal tax incentives for these vehicles.
* Ford, NCC to Provide Funds for Clean Cities National Clean Cities Inc.
(NCC) joined with Ford Motor Company to launch a new program that will provide incentives for NCC chapters and other Clean Cities coalitions.
The program, which will be administered by NCC and funded by Ford, will award incentives for grants and other funds and for sales of Ford alternative fuel vehicles (AFVs).
NCC is a nonprofit organization, unaffiliated with the federal government, that was established to assist local Clean Cities organizations.
The program will provide for graduated cash incentive awards based on the level of funding sought for vehicle purchases.
All Ford bi-fuel and dedicated AFVs using either propane or compressed natural gas will be eligible.
The aim of the program is to help Clean Cities coalitions and NCC chapters achieve a level of self-sustainability.
The initiative will foster closer relationships between Clean Cities groups and Ford, and help promote Ford's AFV offerings.
Contact: Carol Butler, NCC.
* Home Fueling Pump for Natural Gas Cars Unveiled Starting in October 2003, trips to the filling station could become obsolete for owners of natural gas vehicles.
Toronto-based FuelMaker Corporation said it will be the first company to mass market a system that connects a natural gas supply line to a pump that can be used to fuel natural gas vehicles at home.
American Honda Motor Company, which owns a 20% stake in FuelMaker, hopes the pump will help expand the retail market of the Civic GX natural gas car beyond government fleets.
The pump, called Phill, is about the size of a pay phone and can be installed in a garage or outdoors.
Drivers would leave the pump in the car for 5-10 hours and have a full tank that could take them as far as 220 miles.
The system will go on sale next October for about $2,000.
FuelMaker hopes to eventually mass produce 20,000-40,000 units, which would lower the cost to $1,000 each.
The fuel will cost $0.60-$0.80 per gasoline gallon equivalent.
See the American Honda press release on its announcement with FuelMaker and learn more about the Honda Civic GX (select Civic Sedan from sidebar menu).
* Alternative Fuel Vehicle (AFV) School Bus Incentive Program Grants The Michigan Energy Office, Office of Policy and Legislative Affairs is soliciting grant proposals for the AFV School Bus Incentive Program.
The purpose of the program is to help Michigan public and nonprofit schools and colleges promote the use and benefits of CNG- and LPG-fueled school buses by funding the incremental cost difference between such buses and comparable diesel buses.
To be eligible, school buses must have a gross vehicle weight of at least 14,000 pounds.
Questions concerning this RFP must be submitted in writing by Friday, January 10, 2003.
Proposals (one original signed copy and four additional copies) must arrive by 4:00 p.m. on Friday, January 24, 2003.
For more information, contact Tim Shireman of the Michigan Department of Consumer 
Send proposals to: Michigan Department of Consumer 
* New E85 Pump Opens in Pueblo A Phillips 66 station in Pueblo, Colorado, now offers E85.
This is the eighth E85 pump open to the public in Colorado and the third opened by Bold Petroleum.
The project was supported by the Colorado Corn Growers Association and Ford Motor Company.
The new station prices its 100+ octane E85 the same as its 87 octane regular unleaded gasoline.
See a complete list of E85 stations.
* California Goal: 600,000 Natural Gas Vehicles by 2012 California will gain 600,000 new natural gas vehicles in the next 10 years if the newly formed California Natural Gas Vehicle Partnership gets its way.
The public-private partnership includes government air quality, transportation, and energy agencies, together with vehicle and engine manufacturers, natural gas suppliers, vehicle fleet operators, and environmental organizations.
The partnership has set 3-, 5-, and 10-year goals for the growth of natural gas vehicles (NGVs) in the state.
Its 10-year goals aim to boost the number of California NGVs by a factor of 30 from the current 19,000 NGVs in use in the state.
Details.
* DaimlerChrysler to Launch Fuel-Cell Mercedes-Benzes in 2003 The luxury car market took a leap ahead in technology yesterday, as DaimlerChrysler announced plans to deploy 60 fuel cell-powered Mercedes-Benz A-Class models in the United States, Europe, Japan, and Singapore next year.
The cars will be tested in fleets through cooperative ventures with companies.
Ballard Power Systems will provide its latest-generation 85-kW fuel cell engines for the vehicles.
Ballard claims the new unit achieves a 60% improvement in power density over its previous model.
DaimlerChrysler will also supply 30 fuel cell-powered city buses to public transport companies in 10 major European cities in 2003.
For more information, refer to the October 8 "Daily News" section on the DaimlerChrysler Web site.
* GM Unveils Hywire Fuel-Cell Car, Carbon Fiber-Bodied Cars General Motors Corporation (GM) unveiled three concept vehicles this week at the Paris Auto Show.
The most anticipated debut was that of the Hywire, GM's fuel cell-powered concept vehicle.
It is fully functional and drivable, incorporates three hydrogen fuel tanks, a 94-kW fuel cell, an electric motor, and all-electric steering and braking components in an 11 inch-thick aluminum chassis.
A fiberglass body connects to the chassis using 10 mechanical linkages and one electrical "docking port" that conveys all the control signals from the driver to the chassis.
Weighing in at less than 4,200 pounds, the car sports a top speed of 99 mph.
GM's Ultralite concept car counts on low weight and a minimal drag coefficient to achieve high mileage using today's fuel technologies.
The carbon-fiber body allows the four-seat car to achieve a weight of only 1,400 pounds; a computer-controlled suspension gives it a drag coefficient of only 0.192.
Those factors combine to yield a fuel efficiency of 84 mpg.
The Ultralite features a modular drive train that can be switched between gasoline, natural gas, and electric drive systems.
GM's Opel brand brought a turbo diesel approach to fuel efficiency in an aggressive sports car called the Eco-Speedster, which again features a carbon-fiber body.
The 112-hp two-seater concept car achieves 94 mpg and can reach a top speed of 155 mph.
September 2002 * Electric Vehicles on the Rise in California Los Angeles is now home to the largest fleet of electric vehicles in the country.
The U.S. Postal Service rolled out its new 400-vehicle fleet of delivery vehicles last week.
The Los Angeles Department of Water and Power helped pay for the vehicles, which increase the Postal Service's total number of electric vehicles to nearly 600 nationwide.
Details.
Organizations located throughout California have new incentives to add electric vehicles to their fleets, provided they're located in "environmental justice" areas (typically communities with significant low-income or minority populations).
The California Zero Emissions Vehicle Program offers grants of as much as $11,000 per qualifying vehicle.
These grants are awarded using a competitive process.
* EPA Provides Certification Guidance for Alternative Fuel Converters Aftermarket parts suppliers and service providers that convert vehicles to run on gaseous alternative fuels such as CNG and LPG have received clarification of new emissions certification requirements from the EPA.
The changes stem from regulatory changes in early 2002, following the expiration of one part of EPA's Mobile Source Enforcement Memorandum 1A, widely known as Memo 1A.
Previously, aftermarket converters were allowed to comply with emission standards by modifying the vehicle or engine, conducting chassis or engine dynamometer exhaust test for emission compliance, and maintaining all records related to the conversion.
The new EPA policy allows such companies to be designated as Small Volume Manufacturers, and requires emissions test data to be submitted routinely.
The EPA has provided two draft documents, "Alternative Fuels Converters Workshop, February 13, 2002 "Potential Questions," and "Test Requirements for Alternative Fuels Converters," that provide a revised and expanded list of questions and answers and the testing requirements for aftermarket alternative fuel converters.
For more information, see "Certification Guidance for Alternative Fuel Converters" (PDF 646 KB) or contact Martin Reineman at 734-214-4430.
* Toyota to Install the Nation's Largest Commercial Solar Rooftop Electric System PowerLight Corporation will soon install the largest commercial solar rooftop electric system in North America at Toyota Motor Sales, U.S.A. headquarters in Torrance, Calif.
The 501 kW solar system can generate enough electricity in the daytime to power more than 500 homes.
By investing in onsite solar generation, Toyota will be able to integrate solar electricity into its energy mix, lower its operating costs, and reduce its purchase of peak electricity.
Over the 25-year lifetime of this system, the solar generated electricity will reduce emissions of nitrogen oxides by 10,250 lb and carbon dioxide by 12,300 tons, equivalent to planting 853,000 trees or eliminating 54,000,000 miles of driving.
* DOE Completes Testing of Neighborhood Electric Vehicles DOE's Field Operations Program has completed its baseline performance testing of 10 neighborhood electric vehicles (NEVs).
This testing focused on range, acceleration, top speed, braking, handling, gradeability, and charging efficiency.
The range test results for the NEVs varied from 31 to 53 miles per charge; the average range was 38 miles per charge.
The vehicles were produced by: + Frazer Nash: 2 models tested + Global Electric Motors (GEM): 4 models tested + ParCar: 2 models tested + Th!nk (Ford): 2 models tested For more information, visit the testing results/neighborhood EVs links on the Light-Duty Electric Vehicles Web page or contact Jim Francfort at 208-526-6787.
* Ford AFVs can make a world of difference Fleets may be able to take advantage of incentives from Ford and the federal government to expand their AFV fleets.
Fleets that order F-150 dedicated and bi-fuel CNG pickups; F-150 bi-fuel LPG pickups; E-Series vans and wagons; E-Series cutaways (for shuttle, parcel delivery, or school bus applications); and Crown Victoria sedans (for commercial and taxi applications) may have a solid business case for adding Ford AFVs.
The incentives are: + Federal government: As much as $1000 + Ford AFV incentive: As much as $1500 + Ford early order incentive: $1000 for ordering a 2003 Ford AFV by September 30, 2002 For more information, call 877-593-4716 or download the 2003 Ford AFV Incentives (PDF 590 KB).
* Fuel Cell Project Begins in Cleveland Area Earth Day Coalition's Northeast Ohio Clean Fuels Program will partner with AltFuel Solutions to place a demonstration hydrogen fuel station project in the Cleveland area.
Earth Day Coalition was named to DOE's top 10 performing Clean Cities Coalitions in 1999 and 2000.
AltFuel Solutions received a Smart Energy project designation and grant from the Ohio Department of Development for the recently launched Ohio fuel cell initiative.
The new facility will refuel natural gas, hydrogen, and hydrogen fuel cell vehicles, using on-site natural gas.
It will include a small stationary fuel cell fueled by excess station hydrogen and will supply power to the station and local power grid.
It also will include rooftop solar panels to supply additional power, and a minimum 72-seat learning center.
* Engineers Develop Process to Make Hydrogen from Glucose Chemical engineers at the University of Wisconsin-Madison have developed a new process to produce hydrogen from glucose, a sugar produced by many plants.
The process shows particular promise because it occurs at low temperatures in the liquid phase, so it doesn't require the energy needed to heat and vaporize the glucose solution.
The low temperature also yields very little carbon monoxide, which can damage fuel cells.
In fact, the process produces fuel-cell-grade hydrogen in a single step.
However, the researchers note that the hydrogen yields need to be improved and the catalyst cost reduced.
Glucose is manufactured in vast quantities from corn starch, but can also be derived from sugar beets or low-cost waste streams like paper mill sludge, cheese whey, corn stover, or wood waste.
There research was published in last week's edition of the journal Nature.
August 2002 * Biofuels Get Boost in Western New York The New York State Energy Research and Development Authority (NYSERDA) and NOCO Energy Corp. announced the first shipment (20,000 gallons) of biodiesel fuel entered into New York State.
NOCO will blend the biodiesel with conventional diesel and market it in the Buffalo-Niagara Region as B20.
NOCO is the first biodiesel retailer in the state and is trying to become the first certified B20 marketer in the country.
In addition, the two partners announced that NOCO will use support from NYSERDA and the U.S. Department of Energy to develop an ethanol fueling network for Western New York.
The demand for biofuels is rising rapidly because of their potential to reduce petroleum consumption and greenhouse gas emissions.
NYSERDA is partnering with NOCO on development and demonstration projects for biofuels to displace petroleum-based diesel and fuel oil products.
NOCO will also develop a network of three strategically located, public access E85 fueling sites at NOCO retail fueling stations in the Buffalo metropolitan area.
These sites will initially be used by the U.S. Postal Service to fuel 100 of its flexible fuel vehicles.
Additional participating fleets from the NYS Thruway Authority, major universities, and local federal government departments are expected to benefit from this project.
In related news, NYSERDA, Hannaford Markets, and Creative Energy Decisions have partnered to provide energy-efficiency improvements at 26 Hannaford Supermarkets in northern, central, and eastern New York.
NYSERDA Funding for this project comes from NYSERDA's New York Energy $martSM program, which is designed to lower electricity costs by encouraging energy efficiency as the State's electric utilities move to competition.
For more information visit the NYSERDA Web site or call toll-free 866-697-3732.
* ASTM Issues Biodiesel Fuel Standard ASTM has issued a fuel specification for biodiesel, an alternative fuel that can be made from any fat or oil, such as soybean oil.
Specification D 6751, Standard Specification for Biodiesel Fuel (B100) Blend Stock for Distillate Fuels, applies to all biodiesel fuel bought and sold in the United States.
It marks a major milestone for the biodiesel industry.
The ASTM Biodiesel Task Force began working on the standard in 1994.
Fuel producers, users, engine makers, and others all had an opportunity to provide input.
Biodiesel can be used in any diesel engine, usually with no modifications.
It performs comparably to diesel, with similar Btu content and higher cetane.
It offers excellent lubricity and lower emissions than petroleum diesel.
D 6751 covers the incorporation of pure biodiesel (B100) into conventional diesel fuel up to 20% by volume (B20).
Higher blend levels may be acceptable, depending on the experience of the engine company.
More than 100 major fleets, including the U.S. Postal Service, the City of Philadelphia, the U.S. Department of Agriculture, several public transit systems, national parks, school districts, private recycling and concrete companies, and the National Aeronautics 
Biodiesel is registered with the Environmental Protection Agency as a fuel and fuel additive.
It is the only alternative fuel to have completed the rigorous Health Effects testing requirements of the Clean Air Act.
Results show biodiesel reduces carcinogenic air toxics by 75%-90% compared to diesel.
Pure biodiesel (B100) is also nontoxic, biodegradable, and essentially sulfur free.
It reduces emissions of particulate matter, unburned hydrocarbons, carbon monoxide, sulfates, and carbon dioxide.
Those interested can buy a copy of the standard for $30 at ASTM, call customer service at (610) 832-9585, or e-mail service@astm.org.
Readers can learn more about biodiesel by visiting the National Biodiesel Board.
* GSA Automobile Auction to Be Held in Omaha Omaha Auto Auctions will hold a GSA automobile auction on August 22 at 3:00 p.m. Approximately 50 dedicated and bi-fuel CNG vehicles will be up for auction.
For more information, see the GSA Web site.
July 2002 * EPA Is Developing Dedicated E85 Vehicle The EPA has announced that a dedicated E85 vehicle is now in the works.
This new clean-burning vehicle is expected to produce low criteria emissions and have one-third higher fuel efficiency than a gasoline engine.
The EPA estimates that the dedicated vehicle will cost consumers less than an E85 flexible fuel vehicle.
Automakers are concerned about the limited volume potential of dedicated vehicles, given the availability of E85.
However, E85 is becoming increasingly available.
DOE recently granted funds to Clean Cities coalitions to install 20 new E85 pumps.
* New York's AFV Tax Credit Extended The New York State Legislature recently approved a Governor's program bill to extend New York's Alternative Fuel Vehicle Tax Credit for one year, until December 31, 2003.
The tax credit was to expire this year.
Furthermore, the exemption from sales tax of the incremental vehicle cost has been extended until February, 2004.
The legislation also clarifies the amount of credit ($2000) that will be available to purchasers of qualified HEVs.
The sales tax exemption can be applied to $3,000 of the cost of the qualified hybrids.
A qualified HEV is a motor vehicle, other than an electric vehicle, that draws propulsion energy from both an internal combustion engine (or heat engine that uses combustible fuel) and an energy storage device; and employs a regenerative vehicle braking system that recovers waste energy to charge such energy storage device.
Certain aspects of the legislation are retroactive, and purchasers should check with the New York State Department of Tax and Finance for details.
All other provisions of New York's AFV Tax Incentive remain the same.
* E85 Scores Big in DOE Grants Program! DOE recently issued a total of $807,403 in grants to help establish an additional 20 public and private E85 fueling stations across the nation.See the press releasefor the complete story.
Also, a complete list of 2002 Alternative Fuel Projects supported by the DOE-State Energy Program can be found at http://www.e85fuel.com/news/070202SEPall.htm.
* $4.6 Million Awarded for Alternative Fuel Vehicles and Infrastructure On June 28 Secretary Spencer Abraham announced the selection of awards totaling more than $4.6 million to 24 states and the District of Columbia for building local markets for alternative fuels and vehicles in 55 communities that participate in the department's Clean Cities Program.
The winners of the competitive grants will purchase alternative fuel vehicles, develop refueling stations and infrastructure, deploy alternative fuel school buses, and develop alternative fuel vehicle platforms.
* DaimlerChrylser FCV Completes Cross-Country Trip On May 20, 2002, in San Francisco, DaimlerChrysler's NECAR 5 began a historic cross-country trip.
It became the first fuel cell vehicle to complete the 3,000-mile trip, arriving in Washington, D.C., on June 4.
NECAR 5 is powered by methanol, an alcohol-based alternative fuel used to carry hydrogen to the vehicle's fuel cell.
A chemical reaction takes place when hydrogen combines with oxygen in the fuel cell "stack" to produce electricity used to power the motor and auxiliary systems.
Members of the NECAR 5 team provided methanol for the trip every 300 miles.
Ferdinand Panik, head of the DaimlerChrysler fuel cell project, said, "Our goal was to make it to Washington, D.C., to deliver the message that fuel cell technology is rapidly advancing."
June 2002 * New Paper Sets Stage for Alternative Fuels Use, Air Quality Improvement in NYC In April of 2002 over 200 participants from community groups, businesses, government agencies, and other non-governmental organizations gathered at the National Alternative Fuels Day and Environmental Summit in the Bronx to discuss policies for implementing alternative fuels use and improving air quality in New York City Communities.
Results of the April Summit are now available in a paper titled New York City Outcomes and Recommendations for Greater Alternative Fuel Vehicle Use (PDF KB).
For more information about this landmark conference including an agenda and other documents relating to alternative fuel use in New York City, please visit the National Alternative Fuels Day and Environmental Summit Web page.
May 2002 * New Web Site for Students and Teachers The Alternative Fuels Data Center now has a one-stop shop for students and teachers who are looking for resources about alternative fuels.
The Educational Tools for Students and Teachers K-12 Web site includes links to teaching materials, fun activities, helpful links, and competitions.
Teachers will find a wide array of curriculum ideas to help their students better understand the alternatives to fossil fuels and internal combustion engines.
* DaimlerChrysler Adds Three New Flex-Fuel Vehicles to 2003 Line-Up DaimlerChrysler recently announced that it's adding three new flexible-fuel vehicles (FFVs) to its 2003 product line.
FFVs can be fueled with E85 (a blend of 85% ethanol and 15% gasoline), gasoline, or any combination of the two fuels.
The new E85 models will include: + Dodge Stratus Sedans with 2.7-liter 16-valve V-6 DOHC engines + Chrysler Sebring Sedans and Convertibles with 2.7-liter 16-valve V-6 DOHC engines + Dodge Cargo Minivans with 3.3-liter 16-valve V-6 SOHC engines.
These new vehicles will complement DaimlerChrysler's flexible-fuel product line and give fleets covered by Energy Policy Act of 1992 (EPAct) alternative fuel vehicle acquisition requirements more choices when selecting vehicles.
Dodge Stratus was specifically targeted to these EPAct-mandated fleets, because buyers for this market are often interested in purchasing mid-sized vehicles.
DaimlerChrysler hopes that the Stratus, a mid-compact, will fill an existing void in the FFV market.
In 2002, DaimlerChrysler's popular line of FFV minivans were sold to customers without added incremental costs for the E85-compatible engines.
The 2003 additions to the DaimlerChrysler fleet of FFVs will also retail at the same price as their conventional gasoline counterparts, making them a cost effective solution for fleets that need to comply with EPAct.
For more information about the FFVs, visit the DaimlerChrysler Fleet Web site.
* EPA to Launch Clean Air Excellence Awards Program The Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) has launched its third annual Clean Air Excellence Awards Program.
The Awards Program was suggested to the EPA by the Clean Air Act Advisory Committee, which advises the EPA on issues related to implementing the Clean Air Act Amendments of 1990.
The Clean Air Excellence Awards Program honors outstanding, innovative efforts that support progress in achieving cleaner air.
Open to both public and private entities in the United States, the Program offers awards in the following categories: + Clean Air Technology, Community Development/Re-Development + Education/Outreach + Regulatory/Policy Innovations + Transportation Efficiency Innovations + Outstanding individual achievement With advice from the Clean Air Act Advisory Committee, EPA will judge award entries using both general criteria and criteria specific to each category.
The four general criteria are: 1.
Directly or indirectly reduces emissions of criteria pollutants or hazardous/toxic air pollutants 2.
Demonstrates innovation and uniqueness 3.
Provides a model for others to follow (i.e., is replicable) 4.
Produces outcomes that are continuing/sustainable EPA's Assistant Administrator for the Office of Air and Radiation will make final award determinations.
Entry forms will be available on the Clean Air Act Advisory Committee web site on June 28, 2002, and will be due September 18, 2002.
If you have any questions concerning the Clean Air Excellence Awards Program or would like to receive an entry form, please contact Paul Rasmussen rasmussen.paul@epa.gov of EPA's Office of Air and Radiation at 202-564-1306.
* DOE Announces 2002 Clean Cities Awards DOE recently announced its Clean Cities Program awards for 2002 at the 8th National Clean Cities Conference in Oklahoma City, Okla.
Tom Gross, representing DOE's Office of Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy, presented the National Partner and Local Coalition Awards.
The National Partner Awards honor companies, municipal agencies, and individuals who have made significant, long-term contributions to advance the use of alternative fuels in cars and trucks.
The Local Coalition Awards recognize coalitions for their efforts.
DOE's Clean Cities Program supports public-private partnerships that deploy alternative fuel vehicles (AFVs) and build supporting infrastructure.
By encouraging AFV use, the program supports President Bush's National Energy Policy call to ensure energy security and improve environmental quality at both the national and local levels.
* Farm Bill Boosts Bioenergy Production President Bush recently signed the Farm Security and Rural Investment Act of 2002, ushering in a variety of programs to encourage the production of energy products on farms, while providing incentives for farmers to increase their energy efficiency and use of renewable energy resources.
Title IX of the bill specifically addresses energy, providing $204 million in subsidies over the next four years for producers of fuel-grade ethanol and biodiesel.
It also provides $5 million to educate consumers about biodiesel and $6 million to establish a new program to encourage the purchase of biobased products by federal agencies.
In addition, the bill extends the Biomass Research and Development Initiative through 2006, providing $75 million to continue the initiative.
* Senate Approves New Energy Bill--Tax Breaks for Alternative Fuels Included On April 26, 2002, the Senate approved a new energy bill designed to promote conservation and the use of alternative fuels.
Included in the provisions of the new bill are a wide array of economic incentives and tax breaks designed to encourage conservation, the use of energy saving appliances, the purchase of fuel efficient hybrid electric cars, and the use of alternative transportation fuels like ethanol.
Touted largely by Senator Tom Daschle (D-S.D.) and other legislators from the Farm Belt states, an ethanol provision of the bill calls for tripling the amount of this corn-derived alternative fuel that must be mixed with gasoline over the next decade.
Besides addressing conservation and alternative fuels, the new bill also supports sources of renewable energy like solar, wind, and geothermal power.
Incentives for increased production of more traditional energy sources such as coal and nuclear power are also included.
According to Senate Majority Leader Daschle, the bill "recognizes that we can't be content to pursue an energy policy based on the old philosophy of dig, drill, and burn, and begins the process of moving towards more innovative approaches.
. . .
It doesn't get us all the way there, but it gets us moving in the right direction."
Overwhelmingly approved by members of the Senate by a vote of 88 to 11, the new bill will now move to the House of Representatives.
April 2002 * New Ethanol Station Celebrated in Provo, UT On April 11, 2002 members of the Salt Lake Clean Cities Coalition, the National Ethanol Vehicle Coalition, and Christensen Oil will gather to celebrate the addition of a new E85 (85% ethanol and 15% gasoline) fueling pump at the Christensen Oil station in Provo, Utah.
Over 800 gallons of free E85 fuel will be given away to flexible fuel vehicle (FFV) owners who attend the celebration.
Ethanol is a domestically produced renewable alternative transportation fuel typically made from corn.
For more information about this event, please visit the Salt Lake Clean Cities Coalition Web site.
* DOE Offers New Portals to Technical Information Through subject-specific Web sites or portals, the DOE Office of Scientific and Technical Information provides access to full-text DOE scientific and technical reports on energy efficiency and renewable energy technologies, as well as links to news releases and journal literature.
These subject portals focus on fuel cell technologies, hydrogen energy, heavy vehicle technology, biofuels, biopower, photovoltaics, geothermal energy, superconductivity, wind energy, concentrating solar power, hydropower, and solar buildings.
Each portal also features a distributed search capability, which allows the user to conduct parallel searches across other databases with similar information.
March 2002 * Wake Tech Recognized by NAFTC Wake Technical Community College in Raleigh, N.C., has been recognized by the National Alternative Fuels Training Consortium (NAFTC) as a national training center for alternative fuel vehicle (AFV) maintenance and repair education.
Wake Tech will add courses in AFV service to its transport technologies curriculum.
The college developed AFV classes in response to the need for automotive technicians with the ability to repair and perform maintenance on AFVs.
* Study Demonstrates Negative Effects of Air Pollution The American Heart Association (AHA) recently released a University of Toronto study that demonstrates that air pollution negatively affects the blood vessels of healthy individuals.
After study participants inhaled elevated concentrations of fine particles and ozone for two hours, researchers determined that the individuals' blood vessels constricted between two and four percent.
Participants exposed to ozone- and particle-free air did not experience constriction.
For more information, refer to the AHA Journal Report.
* Honda Purchases Equity Stake in Flexcar American Honda Motor Company, Inc. recently announced its purchase of an 18.4 percent equity stake in Mobility, Inc., a privately held company operating car-sharing programs under the brand name Flexcar.
The Seattle-based Flexcar program provides members with access to a fleet of vehicles located throughout a particular metropolitan area.
Members reserve the vehicles for hourly use, with Flexcar covering the cost of the car, gas, parking, insurance, and maintenance.
Members pay only for the time they use the car.
Honda will provide technology and support for Flexcar's vehicle tracking and management system, based on the knowledge acquired from its Intelligent Community Vehicle System operations.
(Honda press release, 3/12/02)
* PERC Approves Three Airport Projects The Propane Education 
The projects, which include converting airport vehicles to propane and building a refueling site for air- and ground-side vehicles, support PERC's Propane Airport Demonstration Initiative (DOC. 10396).
Each organizations received a PERC grant ranging from $135,000 to $300,000 to help pay for a portion of their projects.
For more information, contact Jill Hamilton, PERC program manager at (703) 322-4484 or hamilton@altfuelsconsulting.com.
* New LNG Facility to be Constructed in Bakersfield Pacific LNG reached an agreement with Coastal Petroleum, Inc., for the lease of property at the Paloma Refinery in Bakersfield, Calif., to construct and operate a 25,000-gallon/day gas-to-liquid (liquefied natural gas) facility.
The facility, which is expected to be operating by January 2003, will be owned and operated by Pacific.
The LNG processing facility, a first in Southern California, is designed and manufactured by Cosmodyne, Torrance, Calif.
Cosmodyne's state-of-the-art LNG fuel production system, with storage and dispensing, will cost $5 million.
The new plant can fuel over 400 heavy-duty vehicles per day with high quality LNG and CNG.
February 2002 * EPA Extends Deadline for Memo 1A Option 3 Memo 1A, the Environmental Protection Agency's (EPA) guidance for certifying aftermarket converted vehicles, consists of three options for certification.
Option 3, the most streamlined and cost-effective method, was set to expire at the end of 2001.
However, in January 2002 EPA agreed to extend Option 3 through March 31, 2002 in response to various stakeholder concerns about vehicle converters' readiness to certify vehicles using Memo 1A Options 1 or 2.
EPA is currently in the process of reviewing and streamlining some of these processes and procedures, and converters should take advantage of the extension of Option 3 to develop their own procedures for full certification.
* New Study Highlights Barriers Facing Fuel Cell Vehicles A new study released by the Environmental Defense Council highlights some of the barriers facing the automotive industry's commercialization of fuel cell vehicles.
Produced by senior fellow John DeCicco, Fuel Cell Vehicles: Technology, Market, and Policy Issues identifies these barriers and calls on the automotive industry to take a proactive approach in addressing them.
While several manufacturers have made the commitment to putting fuel cell vehicles on the road by 2005, the report identifies a gap of an additional 10 - 15 years before it is economically feasible to mass market them.
DeCicco points out that the absence of higher fuel economy requirements for the industry will inevitably slow the development of fuel cell technology and concludes that the quickest way to close this "deployability gap" is for the automotive industry to address the fuel economy issue.
Full Story.
* New Fact Sheets Shed Light on Advanced Vehicle Technologies How does a fuel cell work? How clean are hybrid electric vehicles? How is ethanol made? A collection of new fact sheets answers these and other questions about technologies being developed through the DOE Office of Transportation Technologies.
The fact sheets provide overviews on fuel cells, diesel engines, electric vehicles, biodiesel, ethanol, liquefied petroleum gas, and natural gas.
* GSA Offers Alternative Fuel Vehicles For Sale The General Services Administration (GSA), Region 9 (Pacific Rim), is offering 31 alternative fuel vehicles at its next public auction, which will be held at the Riverside Auto Auction at 6446 Fremont in Riverside, Calif.
The auction is scheduled for 9 a.m. on Feb. 16, 2002; the inspection will be 8 a.m. - 5 p.m. on Feb. 15 and 7:30 a.m. - 9 a.m. on Feb. 16.
For more information, contact the Riverside Auto Auction at (909) 689-6000 or refer to the GSA Web site at http://www.autoauctions.gsa.gov.
January 2002 * AVS Electric Buses to Begin Service in Lower Manhattan Advanced Vehicle Systems (AVS) of Chattanooga, Tenn., announced the sale of eight UltraPower electric buses to New York City.
These zero emission vehicles will provide shuttle service to routes in lower Manhattan, and improve access to businesses and restaurants in the area devastated by the Word Trade Center bombings.
The AVS UltraPower bus uses a new energy storage technology that combines traditional batteries with ultracapacitors.
This combination of batteries and ultracapacitors will help increase both the life and efficiency of the system by allowing the bus to go through more charging cycles.
Use of the new energy storage system will also increase the amount of "free" energy that can be recovered from regenerative braking in stop-and-go city traffic.
New buses are expected to begin service in the downtown area by next summer.
* Millenium Hydrogen Fuel Cell System Powers DaimlerChrysler Minivan DaimlerChrysler unveiled its new fuel cell Town and Country Natrium minivan at the Electric Transportation Industry Conference and Exposition in Sacramento, Calif.
This third-generation fuel cell-powered automobile is the first of its kind to integrate an on-demand hydrogen system that is contained on-board the vehicle.
It's also the first fuel cell vehicle capable of traveling as far as 300 miles without refueling.
The production of the fuel cell Natrium involved over 18 months of collaboration between DaimlerChrysler's Liberty and Technical Affairs Group and Millennium Cell Inc., developers of the on-board hydrogen fuel system.
Millennium Cell's on-demand fuel system uses a material derived from sodium borate (more commonly known as borax) to produce the hydrogen used to power the fuel cell.
Electricity generated from the chemical reaction that takes place inside the fuel cell is then used to run the vehicle's electric motors.
Borax is an environmentally friendly material that can be found in abundant quantities throughout the world.
Full Story.
* Bush Administration Backs Fuel Cells, Cuts Fuel Efficient Vehicle Program Energy Secretary Spencer Abraham announced that the Bush Administration plans to help American automakers develop fuel cell cars that run on hydrogen.
Abraham's announcement was made at the Detroit Auto Show where the big three U.S. automakers rolled out their futuristic fuel cell concept cars.
Bush's FreedomCAR program will help U.S. auto manufacturers produce less expensive, more efficient, and more reliable versions of their fuel cell concept vehicles.
If successful, the program could bring an end to the internal combustion engine that has dominated American roads for more than a century.
The shift to a hydrogen-based transportation economy would also mean an end to U.S. dependence on foreign oil, and the elimination of pollution caused by vehicle emissions.
Fuel cells produce energy from a chemical reaction that occurs when hydrogen is combined with oxygen.
When pure hydrogen is used, heat and water are the only byproducts of the reaction.
The FreedomCAR project supercedes the Partnership for a New Generation of Vehicles, which was established in 1993 as a joint venture between the government and the big three domestic automakers.
See the DOE press release.
* FuelMaker Corporation and Honda FuelMaker aned Honda have teamed up to make a special offer to Clean Cities Coordinators and stakeholders.
Details about the offer are on the FuelMaker Web site.
* New York Spending $4.2 Million on Clean-Fueled Buses On December 26, 2001, Governor George Pataki announced that the state will use $4.2 million in Clean Water/Clean Air Bond Act funds to purchase 128 compressed natural gas buses and 35 hybrid electric buses for use in New York City, Syracuse, and Long Island.
The Clean Water/Clean Air Bond Act funding is targeted at reducing pollution in urban areas and curtailing the state's greenhouse gas emissions.
Purchase of the buses also will provide significant economic benefits for a number of upstate manufacturers.
* CEC Funds Natural Gas and Propane Refueling Stations The California Energy Commission (CEC) announced that it would provide grants to help build natural gas and propane refueling stations for public vehicle fleets in the state.
CEC grant money will cover up to one-fifth the total cost of city, corporate, and other independent agency alternative fuel infrastructure projects estimated at approximately $13 million.
Projects covered by CEC grant money are part of the agency's Alternative Fuels Infrastructure Program, which is designed to help the state meet air quality standards and reduce the consumption of petroleum-based fuels.
For more information, contact Percy Della at (916) 654-4989 or pdella@energy.state.ca.us
* SCAQMD Funds CNG Taxi Purchases California's South Coast Air Quality Management District (SCAQMD) agreed to provide almost $3 million in funding to encourage the purchase of compressed natural gas (CNG) taxis.
These new alternative fuel vehicles will serve regional airports and allow cab operators to comply with the January 1, 2002 ruling that requires all new airport taxi purchases to be clean burning vehicles.
SCAQMD funding will enable taxicab operators to purchase more than 300 new Ford Crown Victoria CNG sedans.
2001 News 2000 News 1999 News 1998 News 1997 News
Skip footer navigation to end of page [DOE] [OWIP]
Clean Cities Vehicle Buyer's Guide
