The Mission and Spacecraft Library [blank.gif] Program Global Positioning System (GPS) Originally designated the NAVSTAR (Navigation System with Timing And Ranging) Global Positioning System, GPS was developed by the US Department of Defense to provide all-weather round-the-clock navigation capabilities for military ground, sea, and air forces.
Since its implementation, GPS has also become an integral asset in numerous civilian applications and industries around the globe, including recreational uses (e.g. boating, aircraft, hiking), corporate vehicle fleet tracking, and surveying.
GPS employs 24 spacecraft in 20,200 km circular orbits inclined at 55 degrees.
These spacecraft are placed in 6 orbit planes with four operational satellites in each plane.
All launches have been successful except for one launch failure in 1981.
The full 24-satellite constellation was completed on March 9, 1994.
GPS receivers use triangulation of the GPS satellites' navigational signals to determine their location.
The satellites provide two different signals that provide different accuracies.
Coarse-acquisition (C/A) code is intended for civilian use, and is deliberately degraded.
The accuracy using a typical civilian GPS receiver with C/A code is typically about 100 meters.
The military's Precision (P) code is not corrupted, and provides positional accuracy to within approximately 20 meters.
Numerous on-line tutorials on how GPS works and its applications are available, including those at the Univ. of Texas and Rentec International.
GPS satellites are controlled at the GPS Master Control Station (MCS) located at Falcon Air Force Base outside Colorado Springs, Colorado.
The ground segment also includes four active-tracking ground antennas and five passive-tracking monitor stations.
GPS Spacecraft
The first eleven spacecraft (GPS Block 1) were used to demonstrate the feasibility of the GPS system.
The orbit inclination used for these satellites was 63 degrees, differing from the 55 degrees used for the operational system.
The Block 2 spacecraft began the operational system.
The Block 2A spacecraft (A = Advanced) were a slight improvement over the Block 2.
Related QuickLook Pages: * GPS Block 1 * GPS Block 2 and 2A
Launch Facts [dot_navy.gif] [dot_navy3.gif]
Date Site Vehicle Orbit Mass(kg) Notes [dot_navy.gif] [dot_navy3.gif]
Update Listing
[MSL Home] [Feedback]
Information in The Mission and Spacecraft Library is provided without warranty or guarantee.
USE AT YOUR OWN RISK.
[blank.gif]
