California Employment Development Department 
If you are searching for a job, please go to
CalJobs (for jobs in California) OR America's Job Bank (for jobs nationwide)
More Occupational Guides
Power Plant Operators
California Occupational Guide Number 474 Interest Area 5-C 1995 THE JOB
This guide includes both POWER PLANT OPERATORS AND POWER REACTOR OPERATORS.
Power Plant Operators, sometimes called Senior Power Plant Operators, are key members of the crew that operates an electrical power generating plant.
They may be designated by the energy source which is converted into electrical energy such as: waste to Energy-Cogeneration (wood waste), Hydro- electric, Fossil Fuel (coal, oil, gas), Geothermal, Nuclear, and Solar Power Plant Operators.
They work under the direction of a shift supervisor, or other designated person in charge of the overall integration of the power plant into the electrical power distribution system.
The critical plant operation is the phasing in of electric power from the generator to the power distribution panel.
This is accomplished by controlling the generator output to exactly match the phase, frequency, and voltage of the electricity presently being supplied to the panel and then closing the switch to phase in the new power supply.
Operators control and direct the loading and phasing in of generators.
They also determine the operating status of their plant by inspection of records, log book entries, and discussion with other plant personnel.
They may also operate equipment for starting, stopping, or regulating steam generating boilers, auxiliary pumping systems, and turbine generator units.
Power Reactor Operators, also known as Nuclear Reactor Operators, must also understand the operation of nuclear reactors.
Operators direct Assistant Control Operators, Plant Equipment Operators, or Auxiliary Operators in their work, train the apprentices who work on the shift and conduct local inspection and operations outside of the control room as necessary.
They also observe various dials and gauges that indicate the output and the normal running conditions for the various systems and prepare records and reports.
They must be alert to detect potential trouble situations early, report these conditions to the Supervising Officer and take prompt corrective action.
WORKING CONDITIONS
In modern plants much of the Power Plant Operator's time is spent in the control room, which may be air-conditioned and relatively quiet.
However, when on inspection tours, or in older plants, operators may encounter hot, noisy conditions around the auxiliary machinery, much of which is steam driven.
Power Plant Operators must be able to walk and climb ladders to reach valve control wheels, be in good physical condition and strong enough to operate these devices.
They must be able to stoop and squat to reach under and see under large fixed machinery such as boilers and condensers.
They must be in good enough physical condition to lift and carry for considerable distances objects that may weigh up 50 pounds.
Good eyesight is needed to read water level gauges, tachometers, pressure gauges, and graphic condition charts.
The environment is generally safe, despite the presence of high pressure steam, water, and fuel lines and combustion taking place in the boiler or nuclear reaction in the reactor.
Power Plant Operators also come into contact with various oils and grease.
In some power generating plants Power Plant Operators must be willing to work rotating shifts, weekends, and holidays.
Power-Reactor Operators can be exposed to some toxic materials, such as iodine 131 and uranium dioxide.
Dosimeters to register exposure to nuclear radiation are worn when working in the nuclear reactor spaces.
Helmets, safety shoes, goggles, and gloves are worn.
Female operators have to be well aware of the dangers of exposure to radiation because of the danger to unborn children and the threat it represents to their own fertility.
Rigid safety procedures have been developed and published to insure the safe operation of all machinery.
The Occupational Safety and Health Agency (OSHA) reviews these for accuracy and completeness.
All operators are trained in the safe operating procedures for the individual plant at which they will work.
Nuclear Power-Reactor Operators must be licensed by the Nuclear Regulatory Commission (NRC).
Power Plant Operators may join the International Brotherhood of Electrical Workers (IBEW), the Utility Workers Union of America, International Union of Operating Engineers, or the Municipal Government Employees Union.
EMPLOYMENT OUTLOOK
The following information is from the California Projections of Employment published by the Labor Market Information Division.
Estimated number of workers in 1990 5,350 Estimated number of workers in 2005 6,350 Projected Growth 1990-2005 19% Estimated openings sue to separations by 2005 2,060
(These figures do not include self-employment nor openings due to turnover.)
Most Power Plant Operators work in the electric light and power utilities industry while some others are found in private and municipal water companies and federal electrical power facilities.
During the 1980's a number of alternative energy fuel plants, which are known as cogeneration plants, were built to help meet the electrical demands, which in turn provided job opportunities for Power Plant Operators.
However, some of these cogeneration facilities have indicated the possibility of plant closure as the cost of electricity drops, or more stringent governmental laws concerning the environment are introduced and passed.
WAGES, HOURS, AND FRINGE BENEFITS
Most Power Plant Operators are generally union members and their wages vary according to the contracts and the location and complexity of the plant being operated.
A recent salary survey indicates that the monthly income for new Power Plant Operators with no experience earn from $1,400 a month to $2,500 per month.
Experienced operators earn from $2,450 per month to $4,000 per month.
Shift differentials are paid for second and third shifts.
The standard work week is 40 hours, in a day, swing, or graveyard shift format, with some overtime available, paid at time and one-half of regular wage.
Fringe benefits usually include retirement plans, credit unions, life insurance, paid holidays, vacations, sick leave and medical, vision, and dental group health plans.
Some employers have plans to reimburse education costs, such as tuition and books to employees who are taking courses that are relevant to their daily duties.
ENTRANCE REQUIREMENTS AND TRAINING
Usually employers look for high school graduate applicants who have taken math, chemistry, and physics courses for their entry level positions.
Those with college level courses in the mechanical or technical areas may have an advantage.
Good verbal and writing skills are required by most employers.
Most employers start new hires in the helper or laborer jobs in the power plant.
They are usually assigned to other areas of the utility, such as maintenance, so as to familiarize them with the various facets of the company.
After a certain training period they may apply for the Power Plant Operator position which is a journey level occupation.
Promotion is generally from within the company.
Experienced Assistant Power Plant and auxiliary operators are selected and given on-the-job training along with technical study.
All prospective operators are trained in operating and emergency procedures.
They must become familiar with the entire plant and understand the interrelation of the various systems involved in steam generation, transportation, and return to the boilers and the function of the fuel and water systems of the boilers and the lubricating oil system.
They are also trained in turbine start and shut-down.
Power-Reactor Operators are trained in the rigid procedures required by the Nuclear Regulatory Commission (NRC) to insure safe plant operation and the prompt and exact handling of emergencies.
They are licensed by the NRC to operate the plant in which they are employed.
No interplant change is allowed without further training on the new plant.
Some nuclear power plants have a training simulator on which to train operators and maintenance personnel.
Those applicants with Navy nuclear propulsion plant experience will have an advantage.
Most power plants give their Power Plant Operators frequent refresher training.
Some power generating facilities are requiring that newly hired personnel agree to a drug screening test, and periodic testing, as a condition of their employment.
ADVANCEMENT
Power Plant Operators advancement may be in the form of increased wages or, through additional training and technical study, being promoted to Shift Supervisor, and then to System Dispatcher.
FINDING THE JOB
Those interested in civil service positions should apply at federal job information centers located in most major metropolitan areas.
Applicants should apply directly to private and municipal employers engaged in generating electricity.
ADDITIONAL SOURCES OF INFORMATION
The Nuclear Regulator Commission, Region V, 1450 Maria Lane, Walnut Creek, CA 94596, has information regarding nuclear power plant personnel licensing and operating procedures.
Most large public utility companies have public relations sections which can supply information about their plants.
Lassen College at Highway 139, Susanville, CA, 96130, offers courses in power generating.
They also provide free placement services at the completion of the program.
RELATED OCCUPATIONAL GUIDES
Stationary Engineers No. 234
OCCUPATIONAL CODE REFERENCES
DOT (Dictionary of Occupational Titles, 4th ed., Rev., 1) Power-Reactor Operator 952.362-022 Power Plant Operator 952.382-018
OES (Occupational Employment Statistics) System Power Generating Plant Operators 950210 Power Reactor Operators 950260
Source: State of California, Employment Development Department, Labor Market Information Division, Information Services Group, (916) 262-2162.
Note: This is NOT a job opening.
The purpose of this occupational guide is to provide you with useful information to help you make career decisions.
If you are searching for a job, go to: * CalJobs (for jobs in California) * America's Job Bank (for jobs nationwide)
California Occupational Guides ________________________________________________________
California Employment Development Department 
