[BannerA_109300.gif] [BannerB_109300.gif]
Outdoor concerts highlight the calendars of many towns in the state.
And no matter what type of music you're into, chances are there is a musical festival under the sun, or the stars if it's at night, for you to enjoy.
So get out that blanket or beach chair, grab a friend, get in the car and get out and enjoy the tunes.
Probably the most popular outdoor concert venue in the state is The Gorge Amphitheater in the small town of George near the Columbia River.
A magnificent view (often compared to the Grand Canyon) and outstanding acoustics have earned the facility recognition as a premier venue for major artists worldwide.
Carved in the high basalt cliffs overlooking the Columbia River gorge, the grass-covered area of the Gorge amphitheatre is a "Must do" destination for the concert enthusiasts in the Pacific Northwest.
Over 300 days of sunshine per year and temperatures in the 70-90 degree range make this venue pleasing in many ways.
It's a bit of a drive from most major cities so camping nearby is recommended - of course camping out here is always a recommended.
Not to be out done by sheer natural beauty, the Summernights on the Pier concert series offers the opportunity to hear amazing music while gazing across Elliott Bay and the Olympic Mountains.
Located down on the waterfront of Seattle, Piers 62 and 63, the concerts run on Friday, Saturday, or Sunday nights from June through the end of August.
Some people bring their boats and try to cruise up for a free show, but the acts on stage are always worth the price of admission.
At the Summernights on the Pier pyrotechnics are never a problem, first there's the setting sun, which paints a pink and purple evening sky, then there's the stars that twinkle in the night - what a show.
If you're a fan of Jazz, or just a fan of live music, then you need to make plans to come to the Port Townsend Jazz Festival, July 24-27, in Port Townsend (go figure).
This four-day event is one of the West Coast's finest summer jazz festivals.
The festival consumes the streets of Port Townsend as nearly 100 jazz musicians from all over the world perform in 11 downtown venues and Fort Worden State Park.
The festival is put on by Centrum, a group founded in 1973 by the Washington State Arts Commission, the State Parks and Recreation Commission and the Office of the Superintendent of Public Instruction and is a statewide center for arts and creativity.
Come hear world-renowned musicians, see historic homes and breathtaking scenery, and have a great time.
There are even workshops available during the festival for aspiring musicians or those wanting to just learn more about one of this country'âs greatest musical contributions.
For the location and dates of other outdoor concert venues in Washington State just click on a link below: Sunbanks Blues Festival - Banks Lake, May 16 - 18 Olympic Music Festival - Quilcene, June 21 - Sept 7 Darrington Bluegrass Festival - Darrington, July 18 - 20 Winthrop Rhythm and Blues Festival - Winthrop, July 18 - 20 Skamania County Bluegrass Festival - Stevenson, July 24 - 27 Mount Baker Blues Festival - Deming, August 2 - 3 Mountain Music Festival - Republic, August 2 - 3 Methow Music Festival - Winthrop, August 8 - 16 Solid Rock music Festival - Republic, August 9 - 10 Vancouver Wine and Jazz Festival - Vancouver, August 22 - 24 North Cascades Oldtime Fiddlers Contest - Winthrop, August 23 Tumbleweed Music Festival - Richland, August 30 - 31 Strait Bluegrass Festival - Port Angles, Sept 5 - 7 Outdoor Concert Venues - White River Amphitheatre, Auburn
_________________________ Search
2003 Washington State Tourism, Department of Community, Trade and Economic Development.
