[USEMAP:whatsnew.jpg] [USEMAP:whatsnew_nav.jpg]
Some of the following documents are available as Adobe Acrobat PDFs (download Acrobat Reader).
December 2001 * AFDC Adds Used AFV Page Are you interested in learning about the used alternative fuel vehicle (AFV) resale market? Have you considered buying or selling a used AFV but didn't know where to look or put them up for auction? Now there is a place where you can learn everything there is to know about buying and selling used AFVs.
The Alternative Fuels Data Center (AFDC) has just added a used AFV page that contains information on the current AFV resale market, including what kind of prices to expect for used vehicles, and links to sites that specialize in the resale of AFVs.
* Honda Releases New Civic Hybrid in Japan Honda Motor Corporation announced the release of a new five-passenger, gasoline-electric hybrid sedan that went on sale by select Japanese Honda Primo dealers in mid December.
Building on the hybrid technology developed for the Insight, the new sedan features an improved version of the Honda Integrated Motor Assist (IMA) System, which enables the vehicle to achieve an ultra-high fuel economy of 29.5km/L.
Environmentally friendly, this Civic hybrid sedan has been certified as an Ultra Low-Emissions Vehicle (ULEV) by the Japanese Ministry of Land, Infrastructure, and Transport.
Details on the release of the hybrid Civic sedan in the United States are still pending.
Full Story.
* Toyota Announces Sale of RAV4-EV to California Retail Customers Beginning in February 2002, California retail customers will be able to purchase Toyota's zero-emissions RAV4 electric vehicle (EV) at local car dealerships.
This zero-emission version of Toyota's popular compact sport utility vehicle is powered by a rechargeable nickel-metal hydride battery and permanent magnet motor that enables it to travel up to 78 mph with a maximum range of 80 to 100 miles per charge.
It will be the first original equipment manufacturer (OEM) electric vehicle to be sold to retail customers.
The decision to sell the RAV4-EV to the general public in California resulted from the California Air Resources Board's (CARB) 2001 passage of the Zero Emission Vehicles Mandate.
This legislation requires 10% of all new vehicle sold in the state to meet low emissions standards and 2% of the new vehicle purchases to be zero emission cars.
Toyota began leasing the RAV4-EV to select corporations and utilities in 1997.
Today, there are approximately 900 electric RAV4s in service nationwide, including 700 on California roads.
The RAV4-EV will have a manufacturer's suggested retail price (MSRP) of $42,000 but a $9,000 CARB incentive and $3,000 IRS credit should bring the price of the vehicle and in-home charging device down to about $31,000.
Full Story.
* DOE 2002 State Energy Program Special Projects Announcement The U.S. Department of Energy (DOE) is soliciting proposals for State Energy Program (SEP) Special Projects grants.
Estimated funds of $4.5 million are available under Section 6.1 Transportation Technologies: Clean Cities/Alternative Fuels.
Categories under this section for 2002 proposals include: + Niche Markets - Projects that promote acquisition of AFVs in "Niche Market" Fleets + Niche Markets - Platform development.
+ Projects that develop AFV refueling infrastructure + Projects that deploy alternative fuel school buses + Projects that promote awareness of AFVs by using prominent permanent vehicle signage + Clean Cities Coordinator positions Proposals are due at DOE regional offices on March 15, 2002.
Download the Clean Cities portion of the solicitation [(PDF 103 KB), (MS Word 10 KB)] or the Solicitation including Financial Guidance (95 pages) (PDF Format), or visit the 2002 SEP Web page.
Proposal Forms are available on the Golden Field Site.
* Ford and Toyota Engage in Talks to Produce Joint Hybrid Vehicle America's Ford Motor Company and Japan's Toyota Motor Corporation are discussing plans to develop a new hybrid electric gasoline vehicle that would be produced in North America.
Both companies would benefit from the increased economies of scale that joint production would bring, because developing hybrid technology is extremely expensive.
For example, Toyota began producing the hybrid-electric Prius subcompact in June of 2000, but continues to loose money on the sale of these vehicles despite record demand for them.
Both companies share a commitment to increasing vehicle fuel efficiency.
Ford is a key industry participant in the Partnership for a New Generation of Vehicles and has pledged to improve the fuel economy of its sport-utility vehicles up to 25% by 2005.
Toyota's experience developing fuel-efficient hybrid technology for the Prius could help Ford to achieve this goal.
Talks between Toyota and Ford started in July of 2000 when former chief executive, Jacques Nasser met with Toyota Chairman Hiroshi Okuda.
Dialog continues between the two companies with William Clay Ford Jr. now at the helm of the American automobile manufacturer.
Both companies hope to clinch a deal on the joint hybrid-electric venture by the end of the year.
November 2001 * Hyundai Fuel Cell Vehicle Wins Gold at Michelin Challenge Bibendum The Hyundai Santa Fe fuel cell-powered sport utility vehicle took home two gold medals and two silver medals at the 2001 Michelin Challenge Bibendum held at the California Speedway in Fontana, California on October 26th -29th.
This four-day event has traditionally been an excellent opportunity for motor vehicle manufacturers to showcase the performance of near-term and long-range environmentally innovative automobiles and demonstrate their compatibility with driving performance, comfort, and safety.
Competing automobiles were judged in nine individual categories including design, acceleration, braking, handling, slalom, fuel economy, range, noise level, and emissions.
Participating as a member of the California Fuel Cell Partnership, the Santa Fe fuel-cell electric vehicle (FCEV) faired extremely well in its first North American vehicle competition, earning gold medals in the emissions and noise tests and silver medals in the slalom and fuel efficiency trials.
A total of six hydrogen-powered fuel cell vehicles from various manufacturers were entered in the competition.
* GM Announces Production of Full-Size Ethanol Pickups To meet the increasing U.S. demand for alternative fuel vehicles (AFVs), General Motors (GM) announced it would begin production of a full-sized flex-fuel pickup truck that can run on E85 (a blend of 85% ethanol, 15% gasoline), regular gasoline, or any combination of the two fuels.
The flex-fuel option will now be available on 1,500 series Chevrolet Silverado and GMC Sierra pickup trucks that have 5,300 Vortec engines.
The new pickups will increase GM's existing line of ethanol vehicles, which includes sport-utility vehicles such as the Chevy Tahoe, GMC Yukon, GMC Yukon XL, and Chevy Suburban, as well as smaller pickups like the Chevy S-10 and GMC Sonoma.
For more information, visit GM's Alternative Fuels Web site.
* OTT Releases 2002 Quality Metrics Report Interested in how light- and heavy-duty alternative-fuel and advanced-technology vehicle programs will impact the future of our country? The U.S. Department of Energy's Office of Transportation Technology (OTT) has just released its 2002 Quality Metric Report (PDF 1.6 MB).
The report discusses the potential emissions benefits, petroleum reductions, and economic impacts that 41 OTT-funded programs will have on the United States from 2001 until 2030.
Light-duty vehicle technologies were evaluated for passenger automobiles and class 1 and 2 "light" trucks.
These technologies included flexible fuel (ethanol/gasoline blends), electric, hybrid electric, fuel cell, advanced diesel, natural gas, and stratified charge direct injection.
Hybrid, natural gas, and advanced diesel technologies were evaluated for heavy-duty vehicles.
Various analytical tools were used to develop the results.
Each separate technology was analyzed according to when and how quickly the new technology could potentially enter the marketplace.
* Maryland Opens First Ethanol Station Many were on hand November 14 to celebrate the opening of Maryland's first public access ethanol fueling station.
Located at 3240 Fort Meade Road (Rt. 198) in Laurel, Md., the Chevron station will dispense E85 (a blend of 85% ethanol and 15% gasoline).
Construction of the new station was made possible through a U.S. Department of Energy grant awarded to the Maryland Energy Administration.
An alternative fuel made from renewable resources, such as corn or biomass, ethanol has significant emissions benefits versus reformulated gasoline.
Its use in flexible fuel vehicles can help reduce U.S. dependence on foreign oil and increase our nation's energy security.
* QUANTUM and ProCon Begin Production of Dedicated Propane Vans QUANTUM Technologies WorldWide, Inc., and the Propane Promotion Consortium, Inc., (ProCon) announced that they will begin production on two models of dedicated propane vans.
The only dedicated liquefied petroleum gas (LPG) vans available on the market, the G2500 passenger van and the G3500 cargo van will be certified ULEV (California ultra low emission vehicle) and ILEV (federal inherently low emission vehicle) and have a maximum range of about 250 miles.
Production will begin immediately but there will be a two-month waiting period after orders are placed.
Vans will be available through selected General Motors dealers nationwide.
For more information, visit the QUANTUM Web site.
* DOE's Regional Biomass Energy Program recently completed eight new success story fact sheets that are available on the RBEP Web site.
October 2001 * Propane Truck Delivered to Bush Ranch The Propane Education and Research Council recently funded the purchase and delivery of a propane-powered pickup truck to President Bush's ranch in Crawford, Texas.
The four-door, Ford F-250 truck features a liquid propane electronic fuel injection system manufactured by Bi-Phase Technologies.
Sleegers Engineering donated the truck's propane storage tank.
The propane conversion was conducted by Northwest Propane.
Corken Pump, Manchester Tank, Marconi Commerce Systems, and Star Tex plan to install a propane storage facility and dispensing station on the Bush ranch.
Details.
* U.S. Government Increases Commitment to American-Made Fuel In a move designed to reduce America's dependence on imported petroleum, the Defense Energy Support Center recently awarded World Energy with the government's first-ever long-term contracts for biodiesel, a diesel fuel replacement derived from domestically produced vegetable oils.
World Energy's Envirodiesel will power vehicles and equipment in multiple fleets from different branches of the U.S. government, including the Postal Service, the Marines, the Air Force, the Department of the Interior, and the Department of Agriculture.
Many municipalities, school systems, transit systems, and construction companies nationwide already use the fuel.
* Announcing National Alternative Fuel Vehicle Day Odyssey April 11, 2002, is an exciting date for everyone in the clean air and alternative fuel vehicles (AFVs) arena.
On that one day, an event held in multiple locations nationwide will be conducted to showcase cleaner choices in transportation--the National AFV Day Odyssey.
Fleet managers, decision-makers, government officials, the automotive workforce, consumers, and others interested in AFVs will learn how AFVs are a positive choice in transportation.
For more information, go to the National Alternative Fuel Vehicle Day Odyssey Web site.
September 2001 * New EPRI Study Indicates Consumers Favor Plug-In Hybrid Electric Vehicles A recent study conducted by the Electric Power Research Institute (EPRI) in Palo Alto, California shows that consumers favor potential plug-in hybrid electric vehicle (HEV) technology because it offers savings on fuel and maintenance, use of an existing 120-volt infrastructure, and increased range over current gas electric hybrid vehicles.
Conventional HEVs such as the Honda Insight or Toyota Prius have fuel economies close to 42 mpg and rely on a gasoline engine to generate the electricity used to recharge the hybrid system's battery.
The gasoline engine of the plug-in hybrid would be used more as a "power-assist" for long trips or on steep hills, and give the vehicle a fuel economy of up to 80 mpg.
When fully charged, a plug-in HEV would act as a pure electric vehicle (EV) capable of traveling up to 60 miles daily in EV mode.
30 to 50 percent of the participants surveyed indicated that they would choose a plug-in HEV or non-plug HEV even if the car were priced 25 percent higher than a conventionally powered vehicle costing $19,000.
63 percent of those surveyed said they preferred plugging in an HEV at home because they could make use of a nearby 120-volt outlet.
Although there are no plug-in HEV models currently in production, the environmental and petroleum reduction benefits associated with these vehicles, along with the fact that they can be deployed with little to no change to the fueling infrastructure make them very attractive to both consumers and automakers.
Full Story.
* Electric Trolleys to Grace Connecticut Streets The city of New Haven recently unveiled its plan to create a new downtown shuttle service using four electric trolleys that will help shoppers get around the fragmented retail district.
According to Lee Grannis, a coordinator with the Greater New Haven Clean Cities Coalition, most of the $1 million price tag for the four trolleys will be offset by federal grants.
New Haven will pay about $200,000.
Manufactured by California-based Ebus, each air-conditioned trolley can carry 27 people and travel between 75 and 100 miles between charges.
August 2001 * Water Taxi Launches Hybrid "Water Bus" Water Taxi in southern Florida recently launched its first hybrid electric "water bus"--The Clay Shaw (named after the Florida congressman).
Water Taxi partnered with Broward County Transit to produce the innovative vehicle, which runs on biodiesel.
The project was designed to demonstrate the benefits of alternative fuels, improve air quality, and reduce traffic congestion.
Other project participants included Gold Coast Clean Cities and EV Ready.
* The Clean Air Excellence Awards Program This program honors outstanding, innovative efforts that support progress in achieving cleaner air.
Open to both public and private entities in the United States, the program offers awards in the following categories: Clean Air Technology, Community Development/Re-Development, Education/Outreach, Regulatory/Policy Innovations, and Transportation Efficiency Innovations.
An award for outstanding individual achievement will also be given.
Entries are due on September 28, 2001.
For more information, contact Paul Rasmussen of EPA's Office of Air and Radiation at 202-564-1306.
* Funding Information Targets Reducing Greenhouse Gas Emissions The Environmental Protection Agency's (EPA) State and Local Climate Change Program recently added information about funding opportunities to its Global Warming Web site.
The new pages describe assistance programs designed to help individuals, community groups, small businesses, nonprofits, state and local governments, and tribes overcome the financial and technical obstacles to initiating and developing projects or programs that reduce greenhouse gas emissions.
The section, which lists funding available from the EPA, the U.S. Departments of Energy, Agriculture, and Transportation, various state agencies, and private foundations, also includes references for additional sources of funding, information about the federal grant process, tips for writing applications, and other topics.
July 2001 * Honda Opens Hydrogen Refueling Station in L.A. American Honda Motors Corporation took a step into the future of alternative fuels and advanced technology vehicles by opening the first hydrogen refueling station in Los Angeles this week.
The state-of-the-art refueling station is completely self-sufficient and uses solar power to produce enough hydrogen to power a single fuel cell vehicle for a year.
Photovoltaic cells located at the station collect energy from the sun, which is then converted into electricity for extracting hydrogen from water.
Extracted hydrogen is then pumped into storage tanks for use by hydrogen-powered fuel cell vehicles.
Honda fuel cell vehicles have been on the road since 1999 as part of the California Fuel Cell Partnership (CAFCP).
* GTI to Hold Metropolitan Energy Design Competition Do you think you have a solution for meeting the future energy needs of our nation's expanding cities? The Gas Technology Institute (GTI) is looking for your unique ideas on how to solve future problems such as energy shortages, unreliable delivery of electricity, highway gridlock, air and water pollution, and urban sprawl.
Based on the theme Energizing America's Cities, the U.S. Competition on Metropolitan Energy Design (PDF 130 KB) is sponsored by GTI in cooperation with the U.S. Department of Energy and the energy industry.
The top eight designs will be presented at the Energizing America's Cities conference in Chicago on May 30-31, 2002.
The winning team will represent the United States at the International Competition for Sustainable Urban Systems Designs, in Tokyo, Japan in June of 2003.
* RFA Vice President Confirms Ethanol Supply During Senate Energy Hearing Renewable Fuels Association (RFA) Vice President Bob Dinneen met with members of the Senate Energy and Natural Resources Committee last week to assure committee members that the ethanol industry would be able to meet the oxygenate demand for reformulated gasoline in California.
Early this year the state of California petitioned the Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) to be waived from the gasoline oxygenate requirement mandated by the Clean Air Act of 1990.
The EPA later denied California's waiver request.
Methyl Tertiary Butyl Ether (MTBE), currently used as an oxygenate additive in reformulated gasoline, is contaminating ground water supplies in California, as well as several other states.
Using Ethanol instead of MTBE as an oxygenate blend in reformulated gasoline has many favorable benefits.
Like MTBE, ethanol will increase octane and improve the emissions quality of gasoline, however ethanol is not harmful to the environment and is a renewable fuel.
Blending ethanol with reformulated gasoline will also help reduce the nation's dependence on foreign oil.
During the meeting with the Senate Energy and Natural Resources Committee, Dinneen told members that 34 existing ethanol plants are undergoing expansion and eleven new plants are under construction.
As a result, the ethanol industry expects to have an additional 300 million gallons of production capacity on line by the end of this year.
June 2001 * Propane Education 
Recipients of the Propane "Exceptional Energy" Fleet Awards included Schwan's Home Delivery, Danone Waters of North America, Northside Independent School District, Sarasota County Sheriff's Office, Texas Department of Transportation, and Yellow Checker Star Cab Company.
"Exceptional Energy" awards were presented by Roy Willis, president of the Propane Education 
Each one is a contributor to their community and a positive example to the nation."
* DOT Requests Proposals for New Corridor Development and Border Region Infrastructure Grant Programs The U. S. Department of Transportation, Federal Highway Administration requested proposals for two new discretionary grant programs designed to aid in transportation corridor development and infrastructure improvement in border regions.
States and metropolitan planning organizations (MPOs) will be eligible to apply for projects that focus on corridor feasibility, corridor planning, multi-state coordination, environmental review, and construction through the National Corridor Planning and Development Program.
The Coordinated Border Infrastructure Program will allow border-states to apply for projects that focus on transportation and safety infrastructure improvements, operation, and regulatory improvements, and coordination and safety inspection improvements in areas that share borders with Mexico and Canada.
Notices of intent to apply are due by July 6th, 2001.
For more information, please contact Martin Weiss at (202) 366-5010.
* DOE Requests Proposals to Manage Solar Car Race Competitions The U.S. Department of Energy announced that it would request proposals to plan, manage, and conduct the 2003 and 2005 U.S. cross-country solar car race competitions.
The events focus on collegiate competitions for the advancement of solar technologies, specifically photovoltaics, educational and engineering excellence, environmental consciousness, and public awareness of the potential of emerging solar technologies.
DOE anticipates $1 million will be available over a 4-year period.
Responses are due by July 9th, 2001.
Once issued, the RFP will be posted on the U.S. DOE Golden Field Office Web site.
For more information, contact Ruth Adams at the U.S. Department of Energy (303) 275-4788.
Refer to DE-PS36-01GO90011.
* CARTA purchases 10 New Advanced Vehicle Systems 12-Year Heavy-Duty Buses Chattanooga Area Regional Transportation Authority (CARTA) purchased 10 diesel hybrid electric powered buses from Advanced Vehicle Systems this week.
Half of the new hybrid electric buses will be Series 1 AVS 40 low-floor models capable of accommodating 39 seated passengers and 22 standing riders.
The other five buses will be Series 1 AVS30 models that can seat 31 and hold a maximum of 50 passengers.
All new AVS hybrid buses purchased by CARTA will use the Capstone Micro Turbine(TM) heavy-duty engine as the diesel-hybrid power source.
Vehicles using the Capstone Micro Turbine(TM) can run on diesel, compress natural gas (CNG), liquefied natural gas (LNG), or liquefied petroleum gas (propane).
Both AVS40 and AVS 30 model buses have a top speed of 55+ mph and a maximum range of 250+ miles depending on the fuel type.
The new buses are expected to begin service in Chattanooga during the third quarter of this year.
* Congressional Briefing Summaries Focus on Renewable Energy, Energy Efficiency Four Congressional briefing summaries prepared by the Environmental and Energy Study Institute offer a variety of solutions for the nation's energy challenges.
The summaries focus on renewable energy and energy efficiency technologies, how such technologies can address the energy crisis, the role of federal tax incentives, and how Midwest businesses are reducing greenhouse gas emissions and boosting the economy.
Check out the summaries at www.eesi.org/publications/pubs.htm.
* Boehlert Introduces Alternative Fuel Vehicle Bill (Bill #HR2326) U.S. Representative Sherwood Boehlert (R-NY) recently introduced a bill intended to encourage the use of cars, buses and trucks that are powered by natural gas and other alternative fuels.
* New DECSE Third Program Summary Available The Diesel Emission Control Sulfur Effects (DECSE) Program recently released its third program summary report (PDF 57 KB), which is located on the OTT/DECSE Web site.
* DOE Seeks Applications for CARAT Program The Department of Energy announced its intent to invite applications from small businesses and institutions of higher education and development for the Cooperative Automotive Research for Advanced Technologies (CARAT) Program.
This annual solicitation seeks innovative research and development in the following seven seven topic areas: 1.
Alternative (non_lithium) insertion electrode battery technology 2.
Non-carbon anodes for lithium-ion batteries 3.
Fuel cells for auxiliary and portable power 4.
Homogeneous-charge compression-ignition (HCCI) enabling technology 5.
Cost-effective, high efficiency porous media heat transfer 6.
Cost-effective, high efficiency materials for thermoelectric devices 7.
Cost-effective, high efficiency integrated systems approach to auxiliary electric motors Completed proposals referencing solicitation number DE-SC02-01EE50657 must be submitted to the U. S. Department of Energy, Chicago Operations Office, Attn.: Earlette M. Robinson, Contract Specialist, Bldg. 201, Room 3N-20 (mail center), 9800 South Cass Avenue, Argonne, IL 60439-4899 no later than 3:00 p.m. local time, July 16, 2001.
* Alliance of Automobile Manufacturers Releases Advanced Technology Vehicle Web Page For information about some of the latest advanced technology vehicles and alternative fuel vehicles being developed by the world's leading automobile manufacturers, check out Advanced Technology Vehicles Take to the Road on the Alliance of Automobile Manufacturers Web site.
This web page provides descriptions about the latest advanced vehicle technologies being employed by automobile manufacturers, as well as examples of advanced technology and alternative fuel vehicles currently in development and production stages.
The Alliance of Automobile Manufacturers is a coalition of car and light truck manufacturers, including BMW Group, DaimlerChrysler, Fiat, Ford Motor Company, General Motors, Isuzu, Mazda, Mitsubishi Motors, Nissan, Porsche, Toyota, Volkswagen, and Volvo.
* Washington Metropolitan Area Transit Authority Orders 100 Cummins Westport Inc.
Natural Gas Engines to Outfit New Transit Buses Cummins Westport Inc, the joint venture between the world's largest manufacturer of commercial diesel engines above 50 horsepower, and the leading developer of natural gas fuel systems announced this week that they had received an order for 100 C8.3G natural gas engines from the Washington Metropolitan Area Transit Authority.
These new 8.3-litre, spark-ignition engines are rated at 280 horsepower and were designed specifically for heavy-duty vehicles such as refuse trucks, school buses, shuttles, and transit buses.
The new natural gas engines will be installed in buses manufactured by New Flyer of America with final delivery scheduled for January 2002.
The purchase of these new natural gas buses by the city of Washington D.C. can be seen as a significant step in converting its transit fleet to clean burning alternative fuels.
Full Story.
* Dynasty Motorcar's IT Van in Production Dynasty Motorcar Corporation the makers of electric, zero-emission low-speed vehicles announced that the IT Van is now in production.
The IT Van is a two-passenger, electric, 5-door cargo vehicle designed for commercial and light-duty applications.
Capable of traveling over 30 miles on a single charge, the IT Van is powered by a battery pack that consists of 6 72-volt, rechargeable, lead-acid batteries.
Classified as a Low-Speed Vehicle (LSV) by the U.S. National Highway Traffic Safety Administration and by Transport Canada Motor Vehicle Safety Regulations, the IT may operate on roads with posted speed limits of up to 35 mph.
With the addition of the Van, Dynasty now has two models in production.
The Sedan, a four-passenger, five-door model has been in production for over two months.
Two more models are expected to be in production by the end of July, the Sport and Convertible.
If you are interested in obtaining pricing or finding a certified IT dealer in your area, visit the Dynasty Motorcar Corporation Web site.
* EPA Launches Second Annual Clean Air Excellence Awards Program The Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) has launched its second annual Clean Air Excellence Awards Program.
The Clean Air Excellence Awards Program honors outstanding, innovative efforts that support progress in achieving cleaner air.
Open to both public and private entities in the United States, the Program offers awards in the following five categories: Clean Air Technology, Community Development/Re-Development, Education/Outreach, Regulatory/Policy Innovations, and Transportation Efficiency Innovations.
An award for outstanding individual achievement will also be given.
The EPA will judge award entries using both general criteria and criteria specific to each category.
The four general criteria are: 1.
Directly or indirectly reduces emissions of criteria pollutants or hazardous/toxic air pollutants 2.
Demonstrates innovation and uniqueness 3.
Provides a model for others to follow 4.
Produces outcomes that are continuing/sustainable If you have any questions concerning the Clean Air Excellence Awards Program, please contact Paul Rasmussen of EPA's Office of Air and Radiation at (202) 564-1306.
* Hearst Castle Becomes First 100 % CNG Powered State Park Fleet Hearst Castle will become the first California State Park to operate a fleet of 100% natural gas-powered vehicles when it unveils 16 new CNG buses on June 23.
These new alternative fuel vehicles will reduce the level of harmful air emissions produced by the park's transportation system by as much as 75%.
The quieter running CNG buses will also significantly reduce noise pollution in the park.
According to the chief of historic preservation Ed Redig, the switch to CNG was done to "preserve the pristine nature of the San Simeon area while improving the quality of the park's transportation services."
Park buses are estimated to transport nearly one million visitors annually from the visitor center to the hilltop Hearst Castle.
Full Story.
* 2001 Broad Base Solicitation, Office of Transportation Technologies, Clean Cities Awards * DOE Philadelphia Regional Office Releases New Refueling and Maintenance Directory Copies of the 2001-2002 Mid-Atlantic Regional Refueling 
This new publication contains information about CNG refueling stations and maintenance facilities for Delaware, the District of Columbia, Maryland, New Jersey, New York, Ohio, Pennsylvania, Virginia, and West Virginia.
If you are interested in obtaining a copy of this publication, contact the National Alternative Fuels Hotline by email at hotline@afdc.nrel.gov or by phone (800) 423-1363.
* DOE's Office of Advanced Automotive Technologies completed a fact sheet describing a major accomplishment.
Integrated High-Speed Induction Motor for Traction Drives - Achieved 30% reduction in motor weight for the same power output (PDF 125 KB).
* MSRP of 2002 Toyota Prius to Remain Unchanged Toyota Motor Sales U.S.A., Inc. released the manufacturers suggested retail price (MSRP) for the 2002 Prius this week, and announced the availability of four new factory options for their gas/electric hybrid sedan.
The 2002 Prius will remain unchanged from the current model year and retain the same MSRP of $19,995.
Several new factory options are available on the '02 model including: a navigation system, cruise control, SRS side impact airbags, and daytime running lights.
In addition to the new factory options, two new exterior colors, Brilliant Blue and Blue Moon Pearl, have been added to the four carryover colors.
Toyota will begin taking Internet orders for their 2002 hybrid electric Prius beginning June 1, 2001.
* Texas Legislature Passes Emission Reduction Plan Senate Bill 5 outlining the Texas Emissions Reduction Plan (TERP) passed with an overwhelming majority in the State Senate on May 26.
The plan aims to reduce air pollution in the "Lone Star State" by providing incentives for the purchase of cleaner light- and heavy-duty vehicles.
TERP will provide approximately $103.6 million dollars annually for heavy-duty diesel emission reduction and $23.3 million dollars for light-duty emission reduction.
The heavy-duty program will include funds for new engines, with the amount of funding dependant on the amount that Nitrogen Oxide (NOx) emissions are reduced by the cleaner burning engines.
Light-duty vehicle incentives will be performance based and eligible vehicles will need to meet the emissions standards of the top 4 bins of the EPA Tier 2 system.
The plan also calls for measures that will promote public outreach so that the people of Texas will be aware of the new "clean vehicle" incentives.
Visit the Texas State Legislature Web site for more information on Senate Bill 5 and the Texas Emissions Reduction Plan.
* Nation's First Biofueling Station Opens in Aiken, South Carolina The nation's first retail biofueling station will begin serving the general public in Aiken, South Carolina on June 20, 2001.
Built by United Energy Distributors, Inc. this station is unique because it will offer customers a complete selection of biofuels including E85 (85% ethanol and 15% gasoline), B20 (20% biodiesel and 80% conventional diesel), and B100.
Liquefied petroleum gas, the alternative fuel better known as propane, will also be dispensed at this new facility.
South Carolina Governor Jim Hodges praised United Energy Distributors initiative to promote biofuel usage in his state saying, "As Governor of the state of South Carolina and chairman of the Southern States Energy Board, I am proud that the first biofueling station in the United States is located in our state."
* The 2001 Joint ADVISOR/PSAT Vehicle Systems Modeling User Conference If you use ADVISOR or PSAT modeling tools, or are just interested in vehicle systems modeling, this is the conference for you.
The conference will take place at USCAR in Southfield, Michigan on August 28-29, 2001.
May 2001 * DOE Recognizes National Partner Award Winners at Clean Cities Conference The U.S. Department of Energy used the 7th National Clean Cities Conference and Exposition as a forum to recognize companies, individuals, organizations, cities, and states that have made outstanding progress promoting alternative fuels and putting alternative fuel vehicles on the road.
The 10 entities that received National Partner Awards were also inducted into the Clean Cities Hall of Fame.
If you are interested in learning more about the recipients of these awards and their achievements in the realm of alternative fuels, download the 2001 Clean Cities National Partner Awards Fact Sheet (PDF 625 KB).
* Connecticut Governor Honors DOE Employee Connecticut Governor John G. Rowland has officially proclaimed June 12, 2001 Michael Scarpino Day to honor the Department of Energy employee's contributions to the state's Clean Cities Programs and recognize his devoted public service.
In an official statement Rowland praised Scarpino saying "Through his efforts, our Clean Cities Coalitions have successfully fielded a number of alternative fuel vehicles, fueling stations, and conducted many outreach sessions that will help to improve our air quality and reduce our dependence on imported oil."
* Electric Fuel Corporation to Form Dedicated Electric Vehicle Company Electric Fuel Corporation announced that it would form a dedicated electric vehicle company to commercialize their zero-emission Zinc-Air all-electric hybrid transportation system.
The new wholly owned subsidiary will be called Electric Fuel Transportation Corporation and will work to obtain strategic industrial partners, transportation industry backing, and government support.
Electric Fuel's Zinc-Air all-electric hybrid technology has been demonstrated in several projects, including a full-sized transit bus, as being capable of providing fast refueling and a cost-competitive "clean drive range" of over 250 miles.
Rising gasoline and diesel prices along with the nation's increasing concern about the environment and global warming make Electric Fuel's new technology very attractive to fleets looking for cost-competitive zero-emission transportation.
* Denver Adds 39 Hybrid Electric Sedans to City Fleet The City of Denver purchased 39 new Toyota Prius hybrid electric sedans this week, adding to its growing fleet of alternative fuel vehicles.
Driving the Prius will help the city cut back on the amount of fuel it uses as well as cut air pollution produced from vehicle emissions.
The highly efficient hybrid electric design of the Prius helps it to achieve 52 mpg during city driving and 45 mpg on the highway.
Gas mileage is increased by regenerative breaking which charges the Prius' battery with the excess energy produced when slowing or idling the vehicle.
* NGV2000 Presentations Posted on IANGV Web Site NGV2000, a meeting between supporters of natural gas vehicles from around the globe, took place in Yokohama, Japan from October 17-October 19, 2000.
For a complete list of papers that were presented at NGV2000, visit the International Association of Natural Gas Vehicles Web site www.iangv.org.
Presentations cover topics including advanced natural gas technologies, new developments in refueling systems, and progress implementing NGVs in the international community.
* Fuel Cell Power for Vehicles Learn how the world's leading automakers, fuel cell developers, material and component suppliers, national laboratories, and universities are in a race to bring fuel cell vehicles to the marketplace.
Fuel Cell Power for Vehicles (PDF 1.3 MB), a publication produced by the United States Fuel Cell Council, describes how this new clean and efficient technology works, who the key players are in the development of fuel cell vehicles, and exactly how far away the nation is from seeing this alternative to the internal combustion engine on our roads.
* OTT Releases 2050 Study Phase I of the U.S. Department of Energy's 2050 Study is now available on the Office of Transportation Technology's (OTT) Web site.
Future U.S. Highway Energy Use: A Fifty Year Perspective (PDF 540 KB) analyzes the long-term energy future of highway transportation in the United States as well as future supply and demand of transportation fuels.
With oil demand projected to peak in the next few decades, the role of alternative fuels and alternative fuel supply sources are examined as potential substitutes during the nations transition away from petroleum.
Use of energy efficient technologies to reduce the demand for petroleum in the transportation sector is also discussed.
Phase II of the 2050 Study is currently being developed by OTT and will cover topics such as fuel and technology prices, worldwide demand for energy, regional issues, and policies.
* Nevada Biodiesel Station Begins Selling Fuel Produced from Recycled Cooking Oils A fueling station in Sparks Nevada, just south of Interstate 80, began offering biodiesel to the public this week.
Owned by Western Energetix Cardlock, a Reno-based division of Berry-Hinkley Industries, the station is selling biodiesel produced from recycled cooking oils collected from casino hotels and restaurants.
A Las Vegas-based company called Biodiesel Industries developed a process to make the biodiesel fuel from waste cooking oils with the help of grants from the Nevada Energy Office and the U.S. Department of Energy's Western Regional Biomass Energy Program.
Details.
* Nation's First Biodiesel Station Opens in the Bay Area On Wednesday May 23rd, the nation's first publicly accessible biodiesel fueling station opened in the San Francisco Bay area.
The new station was the result of a joint partnership between Olympian, Inc. and World Energy Alternatives, the largest provider of biodiesel in the United States.
San Francisco Supervisor Gavin Newsome, Peter Ward of the California Transportation Office, and Bluewater Network Executive Director Russell Long were all on hand during the dedication ceremony to speak about the benefits of biodiesel.
Produced from resources such as soybeans or recycled cooking oil from restaurants, the fuel can be used in any standard, unmodified diesel engine either in pure form (B100) or blended at any proportion with petroleum diesel.
Full Press Release.
* 2001 State Energy Program Special Project Award Winners The U.S. Department of Energy recently announced the winners of the 2001 State Energy Program Special Project Awards, which provide states with financial assistance for building local markets for alternative fuels and vehicles.
The money will help purchase alternative fuel vehicles, develop refueling stations and related infrastructure, deploy alternative fuel school buses, provide alternative fuel vehicle training, and more.
Details.
* Honzays Phillips 66 Cenex becomes Minnesotas 57th E85 Station Honzay's Phillips 66 in Olivia became the 57th Minnesota refueling station to offer E85 (a blend of 85% ethanol and 15% gasoline) to consumers.
The station is offering this alternative fuel for 14 cents per gallon less then unleaded gasoline.
Honzay's Phillips 66 has the support of the county government, the local Chrysler dealer, and the U.S. Postal Service - all of which plan to re-fuel their fleets of flexible fuel vehicles at the station.
* Bush Administration Unveils National Energy Policy On Thursday May 17th the Bush Administration released its National Energy Policy.
Produced by the National Energy Policy Development Group (NEPDG) headed by Vice President Dick Cheney, the report contains 105 recommendations that address both demand and supply of petroleum, natural gas, coal, and energy from nuclear power plants.
Recommendations made by the NEPDG include a package of tax incentives and other stimuli designed to promote conservation, energy efficiency, and the development and use of alternative and renewable fuels.
(PDF 2.7 MB).
* Pacific Northwest National Laboratory Develops New Clean Emissions Technology Researchers at the U.S. Department of Energy's Pacific Northwest National Laboratory have developed an emissions technology capable of reducing nitrogen oxide (NOx) emissions from diesel engines by 50%.
This new technology employs the use of an electrically charged gas called plasma, along with a class of zeolite catalyst to reduce harmful vehicle exhaust emissions.
NOx produced by cars running on gasoline and diesel fuel is a leading contributor to ground-level ozone and smog, which has been linked to lung damage, asthma, cancer, and premature death.
New hybrid electric diesel engines developed by the big three automakers are already capable of meeting the Partnership for a New Generation of Vehicles (PNGV) goal of 80 miles per gallon.
As researchers continue to refine this process, use of the plasma reactor concept with a catalyst could help achieve the other PNGV target of 90% reduction in NOx emissions.
Full Story.
* Regulatory review completed on Biodiesel Fuel Use Credit On May 2, 2001, DOE completed its regulatory review (PDF 33 KB) of Biodiesel Fuel Use Credits for Vehicle Fleets final rule.
To learn more, see the complete story on energy.gov, or see the Federal Register notice of completion of the regulatory review.
Effective April 13, 2001, the final rule (PDF 145 KB) was published in the January 2001 Federal Register and is available for viewing.
April 2001 * Transit Authority of Cedar Rapids Fuels Buses with Biodiesel In March, the transit authority of Cedar Rapids Iowa made the decision to begin using biodiesel to fuel their fleet of over 60 buses.
Officials said that the decision to begin using B20 (a blend of 20% biodiesel and 80% petroleum diesel) was made because the environmentally friendly soy-based fuel will produce less air pollution then conventional diesel fuel.
The use of biodiesel made from soybean oil (soy-diesel) will also help to promoted agriculture in the region.
Biodiesel is non-toxic, biodegradable, and produces significantly fewer EPA targeted emissions then conventional diesel.
No modifications are required to diesel engines when switching to B20, and there is no loss of vehicle performance.
* Propane Education 
Tentative approval was given for a major propane airport demonstration initiative that will put propane-powered vehicles to work in various airside roles.
* Air Surrey Delivers New CNG Fuel Systems to Refuse Hauler Manufacturer Air Surrey Natural Gas Vehicles, Inc. announced the recent delivery of 14 long-range HD Surax(TM) CNG fuel systems to Wittke of Medicine Hat, Alberta, Canada.
Wittke, a manufacturer of HD waste disposal vehicles, plans to install these HD Surax(TM) fuel systems in their dedicated CNG refuse haulers.
* Westport Innovations Gets Natural Gas Fuel System Certified by California Air Resources Board When Used with Cummins Engine Westport Innovations, Inc. of Vancouver, British Columbia announced that it has obtained California low-emissions certification for a Cummins truck engine with a Westport natural gas fuel system.
The certified engine is the world's highest capacity and most powerful natural gas truck engine.
The California Air Resources Board (CARB) provided the certification under executive order A-343-1.
It applies to Westport's natural gas fuel system installed in a 15-litre ISX truck engine manufactured by Cummins, the world's largest producer of diesel engines above 50 horsepower.
When this newly certified engine successfully completes an extensive field trial now underway, Cummins will have the broadest range of California low-emissions products.
Full Press Release.
* California Energy Commission Establishes Energy Innovations Small Grant Program The Energy Innovations Small Grant (EISG) Program provides up to $75,000 to small businesses, non-profits, individuals, and academic institutions to conduct research that establishes the feasibility of new, innovative energy concepts.
Research projects must target one of the six PIER program areas, address a California energy problem, and provide a potential benefit to California electric ratepayers.
Up to four solicitations per year are planned.
To encourage participation in the program the application and award process has been simplified and assistance is available in gaining access to technical experts and laboratory facilities.
The Grant Application Manual and supporting documents can be downloaded from the web page containing the current solicitation notice.
* Clean Cities Strategic Plan, Charting the Course for AFV Market Development and Sustainable Clean Cities Coalitions (PDF 127 KB) * New Advanced Petroleum-Based Fuels - Diesel Emission Control Quarterly Update (Spring 2001) (PDF 46 KB) has been added to the Office of Transportation Technologies Web Site.
March 2001 * Renewable Fuels Association Releases Ethanol Industry Outlook 2001 The Renewable Fuels Association (RFA) released their Ethanol Industry Outlook 2001 (PDF 2 MB) report last month.
This report explains the current status of the ethanol industry's production and the increasing role of ethanol as an oxygenate additive to gasoline.
The report also examines ethanol's continued importance as an alternative fuel (E85) in flexible fuel vehicles, as a blend with diesel fuel in heavy-duty vehicles, and as a possible hydrogen source for fuel cell vehicles.
For more information on ethanol and the ethanol industry, visit the Renewable Fuels Association Web site.
* American Airlines Fleet at El Paso Airport Goes Electric American Airlines became the first airline to convert an entire fleet of ground service equipment (GSE) at a local airport to electric vehicles.
This remarkable commitment to zero emission vehicles was done specifically at El Paso International Airport because the area had been labeled as a "Serious" non-attainment area by the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency.
American Airlines hopes to further their commitment to clean air and the environment by converting over 80% of their entire fossil fuel GSE fleet to electric vehicles over the next decade.
* Triangle Clean Cities Becomes 80th U.S. Coalition On March 19, 2001 the U.S. Department of Energy designated the Triangle Clean Cities Coalition as the 80th member of its Clean Cities Program.
As the newest member of the Clean Cities family, the Triangle Coalition will continue its commitment to promoting the use of alternative fuel vehicles and increasing refueling infrastructure in the Raleigh-Durham-Chapel Hill region of North Carolina.
Complete Press Release.
* California Natural Gas Vehicle Coalition Gets New Director In February 2000, the California Natural Gas Vehicle Coalition (CNGVC) elected Sean Turner as its new Executive Director.
Based in Sacramento California, the CNGVC is a non profit corporation dedicated to promoting the use of natural gas vehicles, expanding California's infrastructure of natural gas fueling stations, and increasing the availability of NGVs to the public.
* Toyota Adds Prius to Certified Used Vehicle Lineup Toyota Motor Sales U.S.A. Inc. has added the 2001 Prius gas/electric hybrid sedan to its current product line-up of certified used vehicles.
The Prius will receive the same rigorous 128-point mechanical inspection given to all Toyota certified used vehicles, plus an additional 15-point inspection of its hybrid components.
* February 28, 2001 - EPA Administrator, Christie Whitman has directed that EPA move forward on schedule with the 2007 rule requiring cleaner heavy duty engine standards and diesel fuel.
See the EPA press release at http://www.epa.gov/epahome/headline2_022801.htm.
February 2001 * On February 26, 2001 Senator Frank Murkowski,R- Alaska, introduced the National Energy Security Act of 2001.
See Senator Murkowski's Web site http://www.senate.gov/~murkowski/energy/energysecurity.html for complete text of the bill, a section by section summary and a press release.
Check out the Anti-Idling Devices Web site to learn how truck drivers can have the benefits they normally obtain from idling, without wasting a lot of fuel.
In February 2001, DOE released the following progress reports from the OATT programs: + Progress Report for the Vehicle Systems Programs--FY 2000 (PDF 3.45 MB) + Progress Report for Propulsion Materials--FY 2000 (PDF 11.88 MB) + Highlights Report for the Vehicle High-Power Energy Storage Program--FY 2000 (PDF 541 KB) + Progress Report for Fuel Cell Power Systems--FY 2000 (PDF 5.89 MB) + Progress Report for the Electric Vehicle Battery Research and Development Program--FY 2000 (PDF 566 KB) + Progress Report for Combustion and Emission Control for Advanced CIDI Engines--FY 2000 (PDF 6.27 MB) + Progress Report for the Advanced Technology Development Program--FY 2000 (PDF 5.56 MB) * On January 25th, 2001, the California's Environmental Protection Agency's Air Resources Board (ARB) voted to modify the 10 year old Zero Emission Vehicle Mandate.
See details.
* Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection Says $7 Million in Alternative Fuel Grants Still Available.
Pennsylvania Department of Environmental Protection (DEP) Secretary James M. Seif issued a reminder that there is still over $7 million in funding available for projects promoting the use of alternative fuels.
To date, $17 million has already been awarded by the DEP to fund 165 projects in 33 counties.
View the complete press release about the remaining DEP grant money for alternative fuel projects.
* U.S. Department of Energy Releases Biomass Research and Development: Innovative/Crosscutting Technologies for Conversion of Biomass to Fuels and Chemicals Supplemental Announcement No. 04 DOE is soliciting applications to support innovative technologies, as defined in the Biomass Research and Development Act of 2000, that will increase the efficiency and/or lower the cost of producing and converting biomass to transportation fuels and chemicals.
The Biomass Research and Development Act of 2000 supports the development of crosscutting technologies that will result in an increased production of biobased products and bioenergy.
The three specific crosscutting areas of interest for this solicitation include the following: pretreatment fundamentals; biomass sugars technologies; and microbial strain development.
University-led efforts with participation of industry and other non-federal research organizations are strongly encouraged.
Projects resulting from this Supplemental Announcement are considered research and development projects.
DOE is implementing the Office of Fuels Development Innovative Technologies Activity under provisions of the Energy Policy Act of 1992 (EPAct): Public Law 102-486.
The closing date for applications is March 27, 2001.
DOE/Golden Field Office point of contact is Andrea Lucero Andrea_Lucero@nrel.gov or fax (303) 275-4788.
* New Honda-Designed Fuel Cell Added To California Fuel Cell Vehicle Demonstration Program Honda Motor Company announced that a Honda FCX-V3 fuel cell vehicle has joined the fleet of vehicles participating in the California Fuel Cell Partnership's public highway demonstration program.
Equipped with a Honda designed fuel cell stack that utilizes gaseous hydrogen to create electricity, the FCX-V3 is the third generation of fuel cell vehicle produced by the Japanese auto manufacturer.
Learn more about the Honda FCX-V3.
* Feel Good Cars Launches New EV at Toronto Auto Show Canadian company Feel Good Cars used the occasion of the Toronto Auto Show to unveil their new state-of-the-art Dauphine Electric Vehicle.
Feel Good Cars' Dauphine Electric is a street legal, four passenger car with a range of 50 miles and a top speed of 62 mph.
The Dauphine Electric is a restored Renault Dauphine, a car first produced with an electric drive-train in the 1960s.
Get the full story on the Dauphine Electric by visiting: www.feelgoodcars.com, or call (416) 535-8395.
* Texas Railroad Commission Reminds Texas School Districts of Rebate Program to Purchase Propane-Powered Buses On February 16th, members of the Texas Railroad Commission issued a press release reminding school district officials that the rebate program to help offset the cost of purchasing school buses powered by propane gas, was still in effect.
The Railroad Commission rebate program helps school districts by covering half the incremental cost of low-emission propane school buses.
Funding for the program is made available through grants from the State Energy Conservation Office, the U.S. Department of Energy, and the National Propane Vehicle Council.
For more information call 1-800-642-5327 or visit: www.rrc.state.tx.us.
* Dallas/Fort Worth International Airport Announces Purchase of 100th Alternative Fuel Vehicle Dallas/Fort Worth International Airport chose the occasion of the Southwest Regional Airport AFV Conference to announce the purchase of its 100th alternative fuel vehicle.
Plans were also announced to increase the number of AFVs operating at the Texas airport by an additional 400 vehicles.
For the full story go to: http://www.fleet-central.com/af/newspick.cfm?rank=870.
* Georgia Power EV Leasing Program Reaches One Million Commuter Miles Since its inception in 1998, the Georgia Power EV Leasing program has logged over one million commuter miles.
The program, which has been very successful in reducing vehicle emissions and air pollution in the Atlanta Metro area, allows employees of Georgia Power and Southern Company to lease electric vehicles for their commute to and from the work place.
Learn more about this zero emission vehicle success story.
January 2001 * OTT adds new documents: + OTT's Office of Heavy Vehicle Technologies (PDF 175 KB) + OTT's Office of Advanced Automotive Technologies (PDF 172 KB) + Development of High Thermal Conductivity, Low Density Graphite Foam Success Story (PDF 351 KB) + Progress Report for Combustion and Emission Control for Advanced CIDI Engines--FY 2000 (PDF 6.6 MB) + Transportation Fuel Cell Power Systems--2000 Annual Progress Report (PDF 6.3 MB) * CarTrackers.com Provides Environmental Perspective of the Automotive Industry For an environmental perspective of the auto industry that features everything from alternative fuel car reviews, to simple tips that can help you fight air pollution, go to: www.cartrackers.com/environment/.
* Government-Industry Truck Partnership Releases 21st Century Roadmap to Cut Fuel Use, Emissions, and Improve Safety The 21st Century Truck Program, a major new multi-agency and industry partnership, released a "technology roadmap" for developing commercially viable technologies to increase energy efficiency, reduce pollution and improve safety in the nation's trucking industry.
The 21st Century Truck Technology Roadmap (PDF 4 MB) establishes technical targets and fuel efficiency goals for 2010, along with safety-relevant performance targets.
* DOE Launches Technology Snapshots of Advanced Technology Vehicles To help consumers understand just what is a hybrid anyway? DOE has released the first in a series of Technology Snapshots (PDF 465 KB).
The debut brochure, which features the Toyota Prius hybrid electric vehicle, describes hybrid vehicle technology and how it works, in plain English.
It also provides an overview of the vehicles performance, emissions, and fuel economy as compared to its conventional gasoline powered counterparts.
DOE hopes the Technology Snapshots will spark interest in consumers to become "early adopters" of hybrid vehicles.
Copies are now available on-line at http://www.ccities.doe.gov and http://www.fueleconomy.gov.
Printed copies will be available in limited numbers at Toyota dealerships that offer the Prius.
DOE will publish additional Snapshots featuring other hybrid electric and advanced vehicle models as they become commercially available.
* The U.S. Department of Energy's Office of Transportation Technologies (OTT) has released its 2000 Annual Progress Report on Fuels for Advanced CIDI Engines and Fuel Cells (PDF 4 MB).
Download a copy to learn more about the latest innovations in advanced fuels for compression-ignition, direct injection (CIDI) engines, and Fuel Cells.
* Biodiesel Final Rule Published 1/11/01 On January 11, 2001 the final rulemaking concerning the use of biodiesel to fulfill EPACT requirements was published in the Federal Register.
The final rulemaking amends Titles III and V of the Energy Policy Act of 1992 (EPACT), giving biodiesel fuel use credit to fleets that would otherwise be required to purchase an alternative fueled vehicle.
If you are interested in learning more about the final rulemaking, please download this copy of the Federal Register (PDF 145 KB) for January 11, 2001.
* GSA recently released the Fall 2000 Fleet Management Training Catalog, which is available from the GSA Federal Vehicle Policy Division's Training Web site.
* General Motors Environmental Science Club Web Site was recently released.
At earthtroop.com kids can find lots of environmental information on energy efficient and alternative fuel vehicles.
* Replacement Fuel and Alternative Fuel Vehicle Technical and Policy Analysis The technical and policy analysis required by Section 506 of EPAct is now available.
The report addresses the elements the statute called on DOE to evaluate (PDF 2.49 MB).
2000 News 1999 News 1998 News 1997 News
Skip footer navigation to end of page [DOE] [OWIP]
Clean Cities Vehicle Buyer's Guide
