dojseal.gif doj.gif __________________________________________________________________ STATEMENT OF WILLIAM E. MOSCHELLA
ASSISTANT ATTORNEY GENERAL
OFFICE OF LEGISLATIVE AFFAIRS
BEFORE THE
SUBCOMMITTEE ON CRIME AND TERRORISM
COMMITTEE ON THE JUDICIARY
UNITED STATES HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
CONCERNING
H.R. 2214, REDUCTION IN THE DISTRIBUTION OF SPAM
PRESENTED ON
JULY 8, 2003
Draft Testimony of William E. Moschella
Assistant Attorney General for Legislative Affairs
United States Department of Justice
before the
Subcommittee on Crime and Terrorism of the
House Committee on the Judiciary
July 8, 2003
Mr. Chairman and Members of the Subcommittee:
Thank you for inviting me to testify today.
My name is William Moschella and I am the Assistant Attorney General for Legislative Affairs at the Department of Justice.
I thank the Subcommittee for holding this hearing on H.R. 2214, the "Reduction in Distribution of Spam Act" or "RID SPAM Act".
I commend Chairman Sensenbrenner, Chairman Tauzin, Representative Burr, and all of the other co-sponsors of the legislation for taking steps to address this issue, and I am pleased to be able to discuss the Justice Department's views on that bill with you today.
I.
A Framework for Addressing the Spam Problem
Over the last few years, the Department has received an increasing number of letters and calls from citizens complaining about the amount of unsolicited electronic mail appearing in their mailboxes and the potentially fraudulent, dangerous, or obscene content of those electronic mails.
We have been in discussions with Internet service providers who tell us that the amount of spam they are handling continues to increase - often doubling or tripling in a matter of months.
We are hearing clearly that people simply do not want to wade through unwanted e-mail offering pornography, untested medications, and shady financial deals to hear news from their daughter in college, find out that their order has been shipped from an e-commerce site, or receive offers that they have sought from legitimate marketers.
This is a key element of the problem that we are discussing today - spam deters electronic commerce and communication because it makes consumers less likely and less able to use the Internet for legitimate business.
People stop signing up for offers and mailings from legitimate merchants because they fear that their e-mail address will be sold or stolen and instead of getting useful information that they want - like movie times in their community or last-minute airfare deals from an airline - they'll get unwanted pitches from spam marketers.
When consumers throw up their hands at their electronic mailbox and when providers are forced to pass increased costs of spam filtering on to their customers because they are taking in more unwanted spam than legitimate mail, the benefits of electronic commerce facilitated by the Internet will diminish.
This would be unacceptable.
At the same time, adopting too much regulation in this area or instituting an inflexible regime regulating all commercial electronic mail also threatens the openness and success of the Internet.
Our policy toward the Internet from its first significant commercialization in the early 1990s has been to favor solutions that do not restrict progress with overbroad regulation.
Thus far, we have encouraged electronic commerce to grow in accord with the Internet's open architecture and have preferred technology-based and market-driven solutions.
This policy has served us well to this point and we do not advocate changing that formula.
Instead, we support efforts that will target the problem of unsolicited commercial e-mail, particularly e-mail designed to facilitate consumer fraud or unwanted transmission of pornography, while not harming legitimate marketers sending electronic mail that their customers want to read.
We encourage the Subcommittee and Congress as a whole to pursue these goals when crafting legislation in this area.
II.
The Justice Department's Commitment to Helping Fight the Spam Problem
While we believe that the Department of Justice can play a supporting role in addressing the spam problem, we of course do not believe that the problem can be adequately addressed by any single approach or any single agency.
Indeed, it is not a problem that government can be expected to solve by itself.
We believe strongly that criminal prosecution will be a very small part of a larger cooperative initiative; it is a backstop for the civil, administrative, and market-based remedies that form a larger part of the regime.
The role of the criminal justice system in addressing this problem should be appropriately limited to those offenders who are affirmatively hiding their identities or who are sending out unsolicited e-mail with unmarked sexually explicit content.
Moreover, our prosecutions should focus on the most egregious violators who are involved in sending thousands of spam messages every day.
In keeping with the balanced framework that we recommend for addressing the overall issue, the powerful deterrence of criminal law neither should interfere with the dynamic growth of the Internet and electronic commerce nor should it chill legitimate speech.
Moreover, the Government's efforts to combat unlawful spam will require continued and increased cooperation with users and network providers.
It will also require approaching other countries for assistance, because even though we believe that a large percentage of spam begins in the United States and is targeted at the United States, spammers often route their spam through other countries in order to further hide their tracks.
Spam will not be stopped by law alone, but by a combination of solutions: Criminal prosecution for the very worst offenders; civil and administrative remedies against those who cause harm by failing to follow the rules of the road for e-mail marketing; continued technological development to assist network providers and users in filtering their mail; and continued consumer awareness and vigilance about how to protect themselves online.
The Justice Department believes that it can play an important part in a broad response to the problem of unsolicited electronic mail messages.
We believe that criminal sanctions are appropriate where a marketer has knowingly lied about his or her identity when sending out commercial electronic mail.
As frustrating as all unwanted commercial electronic mail can be, it is even more frustrating for recipients when they cannot find the individual or company responsible for the mail to tell them that it is unwanted, because that spammer has used a screen of deception to hide the true source of the electronic mail.
Why do some spammers do this? Why do they hide behind false e-mail addresses, relay their mail traffic through one or more misconfigured Internet hosts Footnote to hide the true source of the mail, and place other obstacles in the way of those who wish to contact them? Our discussions with industry indicate that one answer is that a number of these spammers are not proud about what they are doing.
At best, they do not want to put true identifying information on this commercial mail because they do not want to have their mail filtered, hear from recipients that they do not wish to receive such mail, or lose their connection to the Internet because they have violated their contract with their provider.
At worst, these marketers do not want to be contacted because they are actively engaging in fraud by advertising illegal items or schemes, and want to hide from investigators and victims.
In some cases, the lie itself creates additional victims, when unscrupulous spammers misappropriate the e-mail address of an innocent user to send out their spam - resulting in the innocent user receiving thousands of responses and complaints from recipients who have been deceived to believe that the innocent mailbox owner was responsible for this spam, often rendering the account of the innocent victim useless.
We believe that deterring the knowing use of fraudulent identifying information will assist both users and Internet service providers in fighting unsolicited commercial electronic mail.
With accurate identifying information, users can contact marketers to tell them that they no longer wish to receive electronic mail, and can tell whether those requests are being honored.
Similarly, with accurate identifying information, providers can better identify and, when appropriate, filter traffic from persons who are crippling their network or generating hundreds or thousands of complaints due to unsolicited electronic mail.
In fact, in testimony given on May 21^st of this year before the Senate Commerce Committee, Ronald Scelson, a self-proclaimed spammer who claimed responsibility for sending approximately 180 million spam e-mail messages per day, indicated that he intentionally forged headers precisely so that he would avoid being shut down by his service provider due to customer complaints.
Creating a criminal offense to address the worst behavior will allow law enforcement, in appropriate cases, to work with providers to identify persons responsible for this sort of activity and subject them to prosecution.
Similarly, we believe that we can assist in deterring one of the most common and significant complaints about spam - people receiving unsolicited messages containing sexually oriented content.
Requiring marking of that sexually explicit content in unsolicited mail and enforcing that requirement with a criminal deterrent can help individuals and parents to filter out electronic mail that they are likely to find particularly offensive.
III.
The Department's Comments on Title II of H.R. 2214
We note that H.R. 2214 attempts to addresses the spam problem with a balanced combination of administrative, civil, and criminal tools.
Title I of the bill sets out minimal requirements for commercial electronic mail messages to assist consumers and providers in locating marketers to tell them when their solicitations are unwanted and to require marketers to respect those requests when they receive them.
It also provides for civil enforcement of these "rules of the road" by the Federal Trade Commission, State attorneys general, and Internet service providers.
Title II of the bill, which is the focus of my testimony today, creates new criminal penalties for falsifying the sender's identity in commercial electronic mail, for sending unsolicited commercial electronic mail containing sexually-oriented material without identifying it as such, and for using automated processes to collect thousands of electronic mail addresses from web sites, chat rooms, and bulletin boards.
Finally, Title III supplements and supports the previous two titles, requiring Federal Trade Commission regulations to implement the administrative provisions and reports to Congress on the effectiveness of various techniques for stopping spam.
The Justice Department believes that legislation such as this will help to alleviate the burdens placed on network providers and consumers from the daily onslaught of pitches, fraudulent schemes, and pornography in electronic mail.
We believe that this, in turn, will make consumers more likely to use the Internet to purchase goods and services, and help further fulfill the Internet's potential.
In particular, we support the bill's approach to criminalizing the knowing falsification of the identity of the sender.
Our conversations with industry have indicated that senders of unsolicited commercial electronic mail are very good at evading filters and rules of all types.
Spammers can tell when their electronic mail is being blocked and they react quickly - often finding ways around the filters within hours or minutes.
By criminalizing the knowing falsification of the sender's identity and giving non-exhaustive examples of the means by which they currently do this, we believe that the statute would keep better pace with new and inventive ways spammers will undoubtedly develop to knowingly falsify their identities.
The Justice Department also supports making it criminal offense to send unsolicited commercial electronic mail containing sexually explicit content without marking it as such.
As I indicated before, this is a frequent complaint that the Department receives - both from individuals who discover that their electronic mail address is now the target of multiple unsolicited pornographic e-mail messages each day and from parents who discover that their child has received unsolicited e-mail that contains explicit content.
We believe that requiring appropriate marking for sexually explicit, unsolicited electronic mail will assist parents and individuals in filtering out sexually explicit e-mail that they do not wish to receive and assist parents in protecting their children from receiving such e-mail.
We support H.R. 2214's general approach to criminal penalties.
We believe that criminalizing particularly egregious conduct at the felony level is appropriate for several reasons.
First, it will help to ensure that these cases will be investigated and prosecuted in the field, as investigators and prosecutors simply lack resources or the incentive to spend weeks tracking down a spammer for a misdemeanor offense.
Second, it will provide prosecutors with the necessary tools to investigate these cases, as some Federal investigative tools are reserved solely for felony offenses.
Third, it places the United States in a position of being able to seek and receive international assistance in this area in the future, as international treaties, law, and practice often restrict certain types of assistance to cases in which both countries criminalize the conduct at the felony level.
At the same time, however, we are concerned about using a felony threshold that relies on the number of prohibited e-mail messages sent.
In order to establish a felony for a first-time offender under the bill, a prosecutor would have to prove beyond a reasonable doubt that the sender knew that he falsified his identity in each of 10,000 commercial electronic mail messages or that each of 10,000 messages containing unmarked sexually explicit conduct were truly unsolicited by all recipients.
The prosecutors in the Criminal Division tell me that these thresholds would make these felonies extremely difficult to prosecute because they would have to accumulate a massive documentary case just to meet the felony definition.
This, in turn, could require expenditures of resources that simply are not available, given the Department's other key priorities.
Even in the cases that the Department envisions prosecuting - people responsible for hundreds of thousands or millions of messages per day with falsified headers or unmarked pornography - the burden of collecting, authenticating, and proving beyond a reasonable doubt that each such message was sent with the necessary intent and falsification could essentially render the crime unprovable.
While the Department understands the desire to set thresholds to guide the exercise of prosecutorial discretion, we strongly suggest that the Subcommittee consider other triggers for felony treatment.
We note that S. 1293, recently introduced by Senators Hatch, Leahy, and Schumer, adopts other elements for felony treatment, including that the offense be committed in furtherance of another Federal or State felony, that the offense cause loss aggregating $5,000 or more within one year, or the individual committing the offense obtained things of value as a result of the offense aggregating $5,000 or more within a year.
These and other alternatives would permit felony punishment for appropriately egregious offenders without imposing an effectively insurmountable burden of proof upon the government.
We do have some more specific concerns about particular aspects of title II of the bill.
I discuss five of them below and offer additional technical suggestions as well.
First, in proposed section 622 of title 18, which is one of the criminal sections that would be added by section 201 of the bill, we suggest a wording change.
Section 622 would establish a crime for intentionally sending a commercial electronic mail message that the sender knows falsifies the identity of the sender.
In order to ensure that this section is fully able to withstand a First Amendment challenge that the section is over-broad, in that it could be read to cover messages that are accompanied by header information that is false or misleading in immaterial ways, this section should be clarified to apply to "materially" false or misleading information.
Second, proposed section 622 of title 18 would also prohibit registering for multiple e-mail accounts or domain names using information that falsifies the identity of the registrant, and then sending messages from those accounts without providing the identity and current contact information of the sender.
The Department recommends greater specificity in the definition of "current contact information" of the sender.
We are concerned that a defendant might contend that a website address contained within the electronic mail or another bogus electronic mail address in the body of the message is sufficient to meet this undefined term.
We suggest including a definition that specifies that "contact information" includes, at a minimum, a valid postal address and working telephone number for the sender.
Third, proposed section 623 of title 18 would prohibit sending unsolicited commercial electronic mail containing sexually oriented material without proper marking.
We would also suggest a wording change to this section to harmonize the first two subsections and to reduce the risk of a successful constitutional challenge to the section.
In subsection (a), the criminal prohibition covers "unsolicited commercial electronic mail that includes sexually oriented material," while in subsection (b), the FTC is required to prescribe marks and notices to be included in or associated with "unsolicited electronic mail that contains a sexually oriented advertisement."
The Justice Department believes that harmonizing both subsections by using the formulation in subsection (a) will help avoid confusion and challenges based upon the distinction in wording between the two sections.
Fourth, proposed section 625 of title 18 would prohibit a person from "harvesting" electronic mail addresses from an Internet website operated by another person and using those addresses in another violation of the chapter.
It appears to the Department that harvesting alone, without accompanying unlawful spamming activity, is insufficient to justify criminal punishment.
Accordingly, because a defendant must be proven to have committed a violation of section 622 or 623 to trigger this section at all, and since both section 622 and 623 are punishable at least as misdemeanors, it is difficult to conceive the circumstances under which this harvesting provision would be utilized by Federal prosecutors.
Accordingly, we do not support a separate criminal offense for "harvesting."
We believe that the heart of this bill and the narrow role for criminal prosecution should be focused on those who send messages that lack truthful identifying information or appropriate markings denoting sexually explicit content.
We believe that harvesting should be an aggravating factor at sentencing and we recommend that this separate harvesting offense be removed from the draft legislation.
The Department would be willing to work with Congress to craft an appropriate directive to the United States Sentencing Commission to address this issue.
Finally, title II creates separate civil actions for conduct related to unsolicited commercial electronic mail from those created in title I of this bill.
These civil causes of action created by proposed section 626 of title 18 of the United States Code are similar to those created in title I of the bill; accordingly, the civil provisions in the two titles overlap in significant ways.
The Department is concerned that the civil actions could be construed to nullify one another, as both titles include a provision stating that it provides the exclusive civil remedies for violations.
Accordingly, we recommend to the committee that it re-examine the relationship between title I and title II of the bill and consider centralizing the civil causes of action in title I, while leaving title II to focus exclusively upon criminal offenses and penalties.
IV.
Additional Technical Suggestions
We have some additional technical suggestions related to the definitions section of the bill that we would recommend to the committee.
First, paragraphs (2) ("commercial electronic mail message") and (4) ("consent") duplicate terms already defined in title II of the bill, except that they change the definition slightly from the definition in title II.
While it is understandable that the drafters would wish title II to be able to stand on its own, subtle changes in the definitions of identical terms within the same bill promote confusion and could lead to litigation over the meaning of these key terms.
We suggest that, if identical terms are used in different sections of the bill, they be defined identically, as is the case with paragraph (9) ("header information") and paragraph (16) ("unsolicited commercial electronic mail message").
Second, paragraph (5) defines "covered computer," used in title II of the bill, but only in the substantive provisions.
Title II's definitional section uses the term "protected computer," which then is not used in the substantive section.
These uses should be consistent.
We recommend using the single term "covered computer."
Third, to the extent that the definitions contained within title II should stand on their own, the definition of "electronic mail message" from section 304 should be similarly included in title II, since it is important in interpreting that title.
On the whole, however, I want to stress that the Department supports the general approach of the criminal provisions in title II of H.R. 2214 and we believe that the issues I have raised can be resolved through the legislative process.
We look forward to continuing to work with the Subcommittee on this important issue.
V. Conclusion
Mr. Chairman, that concludes my prepared statement.
I would like to thank you and the Subcommittee again for soliciting the Justice Department's views on this issue and for allowing me to express them through my testimony here today.
I would be pleased to answer any questions you may have.
