[Press Release] [Masthead]
-- The Committee on Commerce, Science, and Transportation today passed by voice vote a bill to establish oversight of the Airline Customer Service Commitment, announced by the Air Transport Association (ATA) on June 17.
The bill was offered by Senator John McCain (R-AZ), Chairman of the Commerce Committee, as a substitute to S.383, the Airline Passenger Fairness Act.
The original S.383 was introduced by Senators McCain and Ron Wyden (D-OR) on February 6, and was cosponsored by Senators Fritz Hollings (D-SC) and John D. Rockefeller (D-WV).
I commend the Members of this Committee that have worked very hard on improving service for airline passengers, McCain said.
I am pleased that the Committee approved additional legislation to complement the industrys plan and introduce some oversight.
But I caution, if the airlines voluntary effort falls short, I am committed to moving forward on comprehensive passenger fairness legislation.
We will be vigilant.
The Inspector General will be vigilant.
And you can be sure that the travel agents and the consumer representatives, who have been instrumental in our legislative efforts, plan to stay on top of this issue, as well.
S.383 would direct the Inspector General (IG) of the Department of Transportation (DOT) to monitor the activities of ATA carriers and evaluate the extent to which they have met their commitments.
Specifically, the IG would evaluate whether the airlines individual plans are consistent with the overall Airline Customer Service Commitment, and whether each airline lived up to its individual plan.
The IG would submit an interim report to congressional authorization committees by June 15, 2000.
A final report would be due by December 31, 2000, and would include any recommendations the IG may have with respect to improving the consumer protections already in law.
Other provisions include the following:
* Increased Financial Responsibility for Lost Baggage: The DOT would be required to initiate a rulemaking within 30 days of enactment of the bill to increase the domestic baggage liability limit above $1,250.
* Increased Penalty for Violation of Consumer Protection Laws: The maximum penalty that could be imposed on an air carrier for violation of laws, rules, or regulations that are intended to afford protection to airline consumers would be increased from $1,100 to $2,500.
* General Accounting Office (GAO) Investigation: The GAO would study the consequences of preventing the airlines from penalizing passengers who engage in the practices of back-to-back ticketing or hidden city ticketing.
The study would be submitted to the congressional authorizing committees by June 15, 2000.
* Separate pending legislation (S.82) would increase the civil penalties that DOT can assess against airlines that violate the rights of disabled passengers.
In addition, it would require DOT to investigate every complaint it receives regarding disabled passengers.
In response to the introduction of S.383 and similar pieces of legislation, the major airlines began to develop an industry-wide response in an attempt to address consumer dissatisfaction and forestall a legislative mandate in this area.
On June 17, the Air Transport Association (ATA), which represents the major domestic airlines, unveiled a voluntary plan to improve customer service throughout the airline industry.
Provisions of ATAs plan include the following: offer lowest fare available; inform passengers who ask if a flight is overbooked; notify customers of known delays, cancellations and diversions; on-time baggage delivery; support an increase in the baggage liability limit; allow reservations to be held or canceled; provide prompt ticket refunds; properly accommodate disabled and special needs passengers; meet customers essential needs during long on-aircraft delays; handle bumped passengers with fairness and consistency; disclose travel itinerary, cancellation policies, frequent flyer rules, and aircraft configuration; ensure good customer service from code-share partners; and be more responsive to customer complaints.
# # #
