[spacer.gif] [spacer.gif]
Bluegrass music, always closely associated with Kentucky, will be featured at the festival on Thursday.
Join with local group, No Tools Loaned, at the festivals new Jamming Area on the Old State Capitol lawn.
Learn about how this informal style of performance remains an important cultural tradition throughout many parts of the commonwealth.
Beginning at 4 p.m. the jamming moves to the main stage where bands from across the state will perform many old standards.
Included will be Frankforts own No Tools Loaned and from the festivals featured Highway 31W area The Hays Brothers and Arthur Hatfield and Buck Creek.
Festival favorite Homer Ledford and his group Cabin Creek will also be on hand to get your feet tapping.
Friday Night Concert Music of Highway 31W, the Dixie Highway September 28, 2001 7 p.m.
On this night musicians from along Highway 31W will energize the crowd with an eclectic mix of bluegrass, country, jazz, and the blues.
This evenings program centers around the legendary Bowling Green nightspot, the Quonset, which was home to a variety of talented performers.
Throughout the 1940s to the 1970s, the Quonset acted as the venue site for country and blues performances by some of the touring greats as well as local talent of the area.
This evening will begin at 7:00 p.m. by spotlighting some of the performers who took the stage at the Quonset, including former house band Joe Marshall and the Rovin Ramblers, the Robert Phillips Band (featuring Mary Ann Fisher) and gospel singer John Edmonds and his group The Gospel Truth.
Headlining this tribute to music along 31W beginning at 9:00 p.m. will be Louisvilles own contemporary blues singer Tanita Gaines and her band The Accused.
Saturday Night Concert An Evening of Kentuckys Musical Heritage September 29, 2001 5 p.m.
For the past five years, the stages at the Kentucky Folklife Festival have become known for presenting some of the best traditional music found anywhere in the commonwealth.
On Saturday, we pay a deserving tribute to these musicians who carry on this heritage.
Throughout the day and into the evening the Old Capitol Stage will host many folk musicians who have been festival mainstays since 1997.
The evening of Kentucky Music begins at 5 p.m., so come early for a great seat to enjoy some of the best music found anywhere.
Starting off the concert is a festival favorite Zoe Speaks.
This contemporary Appalachian group, led by Mitch Barrett and Carla Gover, has recently won several songwriting awards throughout the U.S. and is being embraced by a growing national audience.
At 5:30, Covingtons own Northern Kentucky Brotherhood takes the stage.
Recently back from a tour to Portugal and Spain this a capella group is continuing to spread their gospel music both near and far.
The Sarah Gertrude Knott award ceremony begins at 6:00 and will honor a special traditional artist whose talents celebrate the living culture of the commonwealth.
Following the award ceremony, at 6:30 celebrated old-time fiddler Clyde Davenport will take the stage.
The festival is happy to have this national treasure back with us.
Mountain ballad legend Jean Ritchie returns to the festival stage at 7 p.m.
Over the years Ritchie has graced the festival with her special Appalachian music, and as all fans know, her time with us in Frankfort is always a treat.
At 8 p.m. this years National Heritage award-winner Eddie Pennington takes the stage.
Along with his bandmates, Pennington will showcase his impressive collection of guitar music done in the Muhlenberg County Thumbpicking style.
Closing the show at 9 p.m. is fiddle and mandolin great Sam Bush.
For over twenty-five years Bush has been one of bluegrass musics most innovative and exciting performers.
This is a night not to be missed!
Bad Weather
The festival will not close down unless severe weather threatens the safety of participants and visitors.
In the event that it closes, the festival will reopen as soon as the weather allows.
Services for Visitors with Disabilities
Volunteers are available to assist wheelchair users and anyone else who requests their services.
Sign language interpreters will be available upon request, and service animals are welcome.
To request an oral interpreter, please call 502-564-1792 at least one week before your visit.
[1_2.gif] [table_foot.gif]
Site Meter
