[spacer.gif] [spacer.gif]
She now keeps her traditions alive through an apprenticeship with Zambia Nkrumah-White.
This year at the festival, Nana Yaa is joined by renowned storyteller Lillian Cole-Singleton.
Bangladeshi Dance Group of Central Kentucky: Bangladeshi immigrants and their descendents formed this Frankfort-based group to preserve and perform their traditional dance repertoire.
John Edmonds and the Gospel Truth: This gospel group, led by Edmonds, began in 1964 in Bowling Green, Kentucky.
Since that time they have played all over the globe bringing their inspirational high-energy gospel sounds to thousands.
Tanita Gaines: Louisville's own blues diva of song began her career, like many accomplished stage performers, by singing in church.
Gaines will headline Friday night's special concert, along with her long-time band, The Accused.
The Hays Brothers: This year, the Warren County band is celebrating its twenty-sixth year as a bluegrass band.
The Hays Brothers play bluegrass and older country music with a traditional feel but with their own sense of direction.
Arthur Hatfield and Buck Creek: Originally formed in 1994, each member of Buck Creek brings to the group a strong personal connection to regional bluegrass music.
Multi-instrumentalist Arthur Hatfield is the leader of the band.
Most recently Buck Creek has been concentrating on a newly refined repertoire of bluegrass gospel but still credit much of their musical style to Kentucky greats like J.D. Crowe and the Osborne Brothers.
Fred Murphy and the 10th Street Blues Band: Whether performing with guitarist Pen Bogert or with his full band, Fred Murphy electrifies his audience with his powerful blues presence.
Murphy and Bogert will be performing as a duo during the day on Thursday.
The 10^th Street Blues Band will join them for an evening blues party on the Plaza Stage at 6 p.m.
Northern Kentucky Brotherhood: Most of the members of this a capella quartet are members of Covingtons Ninth Street Baptist Church, an institution well known for its gospel traditions.
Odissi Dancers from East India: Odissi is the classical dance style of eastern India.
The flowing movements and graceful poses of the dance, as demonstrated by Neeti Nautiyal, bring to mind the breathtaking beauty of temple sculptures.
Steve Rector: Rector grew up in the area of Muhlenberg and Ohio Counties where he was strongly influenced by the legendary Mose Rager, the man who helped develop the thumbpicking style popularized by Merle Travis.
Rector is winner of numerous awards, including the National Thumbpicking Championship and National Fingerstyle contest.
Reynolds Family Band: This band plays traditional bluegrass music, deriving their sound from local church services and from listening to influential groups like the Chuckwagon Gang, Bill Monroe, the Stanley Brothers, and others.
Lee Sexton Band: A native of eastern Kentucky, Sexton is one of the states best known proponents of the drop thumb banjo style and recently received a Governors Award in the Arts for his lifelong contribution to traditional folk music.
At the festival, Sexton will be performing both his extensive old-time banjo repertoire in addition to taking the stage and playing for festival square dance sessions, along with Ray Slone on fiddle and Sam Linkous on guitar.
Ray Slone 
He is a talented musician in his own right and often plays fiddle as part of Lee Sextons band.
St. Michaels Orthodox Church Dancers: These dancers, consisting of Slavic, Greek, and Arabic groups, bring to the festival an array of colorful movements representative of their parishs multiethnic origins.
Zoe Speaks: Carla Gover 
Gover is also a talented clogger, while Barrett is a gifted storyteller.
Zoe Speaks will be featured on stages throughout the festival and will be part of our finale Heritage Concert on the Old Capitol lawn on Saturday, beginning at 5 p.m.
Joe Marshall and the Roving Ramblers: Joe Marshall and his Rovin Ramblers were the house band at the Quonset Auditorium in Bowling Green.
During the Quonset Auditoriums thirteen years of operation, the Ramblers played every Friday and Saturday night.
The Ramblers started out playing square dances and switched to swing and boogie woogie as music styles changed in the 1940s and 1950s.
[1_2.gif] [table_foot.gif]
Site Meter
