Regional CQI Team Notes January 2, 2 0 0 3 Attending: Kathy K., Gary S., Don W., Malinda B.
Agenda
I. Board Report--ACSI Issue II.
Leadership Report III.
Mystery Shopper Results IV.
Comment Card Results Display V. Change in date of next CQI meeting.
[j0199995.gif] 1.
Board Report:
Noted that Don changed the weights in our data to allow comparisons to ASCI.
Agreed that we would present the comparisons, the report given to DAIT, the Business Comment Card data, and a summary of the Mystery Shopper report.
Noted that our annual report will be featured in a "What's New" Column on the staff web site.
2.
Leadership Report
Reviewed Leadership Draft Report.
Revisited the discussion around prospective request for business and job seeker customer surveys.
We have around 5 0 business customer comment cards and 4 0 0 cards from 1 0 , 0 0 0 job-seeking customers.
The number of cards from businesses is insufficient to enable us to analyze the data and draw valid conclusions.
It was noted that at the last DAIT, the team stated it felt our job seeker results were valid through multiple sources of data indicating similar results.
Also, noted that our charge is to evaluate the existing data.
The team informally consulted a member of leadership regarding this issue.
It was suggested that we ask ourselves: * What information do we want and what do we plan to do with this, * Are we truly obtaining all available partnership data and evaluating it, * What is the data that drives workforce development decisions from all partner agencies?
The team decided to request from leadership access to the following from within their agencies:
1.
What their data is.
2.
When does this occur (timelines).
3.
To whom are the results reported.
4.
How does their data relate to the WIA system
5.
How can the CQI team receive this data?
Comments and changes were captured on the draft form of the Leadership Team's Report and forwarded to Kathy K. for revision.
It was decided that we would drop the customer survey and ASCI fees for consideration, that we would request the above, and summarize our completed actions.
3.
Mystery Shopper Results
The full report was not available to CQI at this meeting.
Don agreed to summarize the material and e-mail this to team members.
The goal is to make the information available to staff, summarizing both the key points and types of questions so that staff can better serve all customers.
4.
Comment Card Results Display
The team agreed to display the results of the following to customers in resource areas:
1.
Staff provides consistent information.
2.
I got my questions answered.
3.
Overall Satisfaction.
4.
The services met my expectation.
The team also noted that the following needs to be addressed: That the information needs to be presented in a consistent format and that we need to develop protocols for displaying the information.
We would like to see each question in bar graph form with an eye-catching, "punchy" heading.
Also, the comment card boxes should be located next to the results display thus encouraging customers to continue providing feedback.
Note: Change in date of next CQI meeting.
Due to scheduling conflicts of the Board Retreat, the date of the next CQI has been changed to 1/23/ 0 3 .
Mt. Vernon from 9-12: 0 0 .
Next Agenda:
1.
Report out from Board Retreat and Leadership meeting.
2.
Discussion on how to proceed with our business satisfaction measures.
3.
Focus group(s) discussion regarding evaluating the effectiveness of the Tour of Services/Membership System.
