Regional CQI Team Notes July 17, 2003 Present: Kathy K., Malinda , Don, Gary, Kathy H., Jim 
The Team reviewed job seeker and business comment card, ASCI and Mystery Shopper data available at this time.
The following observations were observed:
· E-card ratings continue to have lower scores than hard copy cards.
The number of E-cards submitted is up and even though they generally generate lower scores, our total (overall) scores are up.
· Data for 2^nd quarter 2003 for the "How are we doing?" questions is even or increased from the four quarter average for all questions.
· On business comment cards questions "Need Met" and "Services Meet Ideal" continue to get the lowest scores for all questions.
Seven out of ten questions showed a better or equal score compared to the four quarter average.
Mystery Shopper data continues to be a struggle for us to know what to do with.
A meeting is in the planning with Mystery Shopper administrative staff to talk about how the Mystery Shopper data compares to local CQI data.
That meeting was originally scheduled locally (our WDA) and we were to attend, but the meeting has been elevated to the Regional level so we will not all likely be attending.
Business Customer Data
The Team spent some time talking about business customer data and the WDA's current emphasis toward our business customer (strategic goal #4).
Gary reviewed some of the long standing information we know about our business customers (prefer single point of contact, need well screened applicants, our programs 
At our last meeting in finishing up on the Problem Resolution Grid we identified several potential key process related to business customer which could be addressed.
The Team also talked about needing more business data from our partners and placing at least as much emphasis on business data as job seeker data.
Leadership Report
The Team spent time discussing the Leadership (and QAC) report and outlining the points of the report which Don will draft.
The narrative of the report will include the information that the CQI Team is focusing on business customer satisfaction.
We've looked at several data sets and have historical data (local business card data, ACSI, Whidbey survey and national info Gary referred to and mentioned above) and have a fairly solid understanding of the general areas business customers find our system lacking.
In comparing business, job seeker and training customers the ASCI data tells us that business customers rate us lowest of the three customer groups.
The CQI Team understands that the current emphasis on focusing on business customers not only is valid from a data standpoint, but connects to our WDA strategic goals.
The CQI Team feels a need to connect to more business customer information, possibly from local partners and obtain a more detailed focus.
The Team will be looking at ASCI business data in more detail to try and obtain a more detailed focus, but needs help connecting to more data (we don't know what we don't have).
The CQI Team is headed toward recommending a key process analysis to help achieve this strategic goal.
A key process analysis is a large undertaking and we recommend that a new work team be established to undertake the analysis and make recommendations with the assistance of the CQI Team .
The key process the CQI is considering recommending is the level of screening and evaluation on job orders.
The CQI Team is interested in feedback from the Leadership Team on our potential recommendations.
Other
The Whidbey exit interview is scheduled for August 14^th.
Kathy K. is working with the Whidbey Center Use team already to develop a customer survey for that center.
She will ask the Whidbey Center Use Team if we can add our exit survey to their questions.
We crafted 2 questions that will also be added.
Kathy H. will forward a draft of the entire survey when it is ready.
We will also conduct the same survey at WorkSource Whatcom sometime in September.
Kathy H. will staff both exit survey days.
Review of both the job seeker and business comment card is scheduled for the next meeting, but we couldn't keep from talking about this subject to some degree.
Brief discussions took place on adding a question related to "Are you disabled?" on the job seeker card and that lead to a discussion about adding other demographic questions to the card.
With respect to the business card it was suggested that the card be changed to have the same rating scale as the job seeker card for uniformity.
Next Agenda's ( Malinda is facilitator and Mike is scribe, but Mike will be on vacation).
August 7^th Meeting - Bellingham · Review Job Seeker 
· Exit survey preview.
· Review Whidbey business customer data · Review of ASCI business customer detail data (next one or data meeting?)
