Arizona Game 
Elk Poaching Near Flagstaff Prompts $750 Reward FLAGSTAFF, Ariz. - The Arizona Game and Fish Department is offering up to a $750 reward for information about the poaching of two cow elk and the wounding of a third elk on the evening of April 10 in Hunt Unit 7 East, north of Flagstaff.
The poaching occurred north of the San Francisco Peaks and Saddle Mountain, about one-half mile east of Highway 180 near Forest Road 523.
Wildlife officers said it is unknown how many people were involved, but it is apparent that the poacher or poachers shot into an elk herd, killing two cow elk and wounding another.
Evidence found at the scene indicates that a .30-30-caliber rifle was used and nine shots were fired.
The two killed elk were left in the field and the wounded elk has not been recovered.
The Game and Fish Department is offering a reward up to $750 for information leading to the arrest of the person or persons involved in the poaching case.
Anyone with information about this incident is encouraged to call the department's Operation Game Thief Hotline at 1-800-352-0700.
back to top $10,000 Reward Offered in Wolf Killing Case The U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service is offering up to a $10,000 reward for information leading to the apprehension of the individual or individuals responsible for the shooting death of a Mexican gray wolf on or about March 8.
Wolf recovery team members picked up a mortality signal emitted from the animal's radio collar along Forest Road 117 in the Green Peaks area of the Apache-Sitgreaves National Forest, south of Highway 60, northwest of Springerville.
The killing of a Mexican gray wolf is a violation of both federal and state laws.
Violations of the federal Endangered Species Act can invoke criminal penalties of up to $25,000 and/or six months in jail, or a civil penalty of up to $25,000.
Anyone with information they believe may be helpful in solving this crime, or the killing of any Mexican gray wolf that has occurred since 1998, should contact the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service at (480) 967-7900 or the Arizona Game and Fish Department Operation Game Thief Hotline at 1-800-352-0700.
back to top Bobcat Tractor Donated to Help Mule Deer Habitat FLAGSTAFF, Ariz. - The Flagstaff chapter of the Mule Deer Foundation recently donated a Bobcat tractor to the Arizona Game and Fish Department.
This Bobcat is the second piece of equipment donated by the Mule Deer Foundation in the past two years to assist the department in its efforts to improve habitat for mule deer and other wildlife on public and private land in northern Arizona.
Obtaining the Bobcat was a three-year process involving extensive fund-raising efforts by the Flagstaff chapter, which was able to raise almost $18,000 to purchase the versatile little tractor.
The Mule Deer Foundation's mission is to help improve mule deer habitat throughout the Western United States and to increase mule deer populations.
In 2002, the Mule Deer Foundation donated a Brushcat, which is an attachment for the Bobcat that assists with vegetation removal and modification.
"Habitat improvements can be made with the Bobcat and Brushcat, and these improvements will enhance habitat for mule deer," says Bob Jacobs, president of the Flagstaff chapter of the Mule Deer Foundation.
The Arizona Game and Fish Department has several projects planned for the new equipment in Game Management Units 9 and 10.
Media Note: Photos available; contact Shelly Shepherd at (928) 774-5045.
back to top Game and Fish Seeking Public Records Policy Comments The Arizona Game and Fish Department is seeking public comments on a proposed public records policy for the agency that would restrict the release of private personal identifying information of its customers for commercial purposes.
Many of the Game and Fish Department's public records contain personal identifying information on customers.
Department officials say its customers have an expectation of privacy as it relates to the information they provide the agency.
The courts have said that although there is an expectation that public record information will be released to the public, an agency may withhold such information to the extent that privacy concerns outweigh the stated public purpose for releasing the information.
The Game and Fish Department is hosting four public meetings to gather public input on this proposed policy change.
The following meetings have been scheduled starting at 6 p.m.: - May 5, Arizona Game and Fish Department Region V office, 555 N. Greasewood, Tucson.
- May 6, Arizona Game and Fish Department Region I office, 2878 White Mountain Blvd., Pinetop. - May 7, Arizona Game and Fish Department Region II office, 3500 S. Lake Mary Road, Flagstaff.
- May 8, Arizona State Fairgrounds Wildlife Building, 1826 W. McDowell Road, Phoenix.
You can also provide comments by mail to: Arizona Game and Fish Department, Attn: Dana Yost, DOHQ, 2221 W. Greenway Road, Phoenix, AZ 85023, or by e-mail to: DirectorsOffice@gf.state.az.us.
back to top Plenty of Events Set for Migratory Bird Day There are lots of events set for International Migratory Bird Day May 10, such as bird walks, bird talks and even a treasure hunt.
The following locations are conducting activities: - Boyce-Thompson Arboretum - Located near Globe, this is a great place to view spring wildflowers and birds.
There is a guided bird walk at 8 a.m.
From 9 to 11 a.m. there will be live birds on display courtesy of the Wild at Heart wildlife rehabilitation facility.
At 10 a.m. there is a bird photography workshop.
From 9 a.m. to noon there is a bird treasure hunt where you can safari through the arboretum in search of answers to bird-related questions.
Completed answer forms will be entered in a drawing for prizes.
- The Phoenix Zoo - At 9 a.m. you can enjoy the guided bird observations, and then at 11 a.m. listen to a program with live birds.
There is also a bird treasure hunt from 9 a.m. to noon where you can safari through the zoo searching for answers to bird-related questions.
Completed answer forms will be entered in a drawing for prizes.
- The Arizona-Sonora Desert Museum - Take docent-led bird walks from 7:30 a.m. until 1 p.m.
There will be bird talks with live birds in hand during the morning and demonstrations about the benefits of shade-grown coffee and songbirds.
Be sure to visit the mixed aviary and the hummingbird aviary. - Payson Wildlife Fair at Green Valley Lake - There is a bird treasure hunt from 9 a.m. to noon.
Collect answers to bird-related questions and enter a drawing for prizes.
- Flagstaff Arboretum - There is a guided bird walk from 7:30 to 9 a.m.
back to top Lake Powell Boating Safety Effort Gets International Awards A cooperative boating safety effort at Lake Powell received many accolades last week during the annual International Boating and Water Safety Summit in Las Vegas, advise Arizona Game and Fish Department officials.
The Lake Powell Water Safety Council, which is composed of public and private partners including the Arizona Game and Fish Department, Utah Parks and the National Park Service, received several awards for water safety outreach.
The council received first, second and third place for a compact disc of 30- and 60-second public service announcements on topics ranging from carbon monoxide poisoning prevention to the importance of lifejackets to the hazards of cliff jumping.
Another award went to the new interagency regulatory brochure that combines the laws of Arizona, Utah and the National Park Service.
The brochure was funded in part by a BOAT US grant and will be available to Lake Powell boaters this summer.
The mission of the Lake Powell Water Safety Council is to prevent accident-related injury and death through combined efforts of education and enforcement.
Media Note: Brochures available; contact Marijke "M.J." Van Fleet at mvanfleet@gf.state.az.us or at (602) 789-3377.
back to top Watchable Wildlife Tip: Try Aravaipa Canyon Spring is an excellent time for visiting a wide range of wildlife habitats in Arizona from the deserts and foothills to our vast array of canyons and valleys, say Arizona Game and Fish Department biologists.
Those looking for a remarkable wildlife watching expedition should consider Aravaipa Canyon northwest of Safford.
More than 230 bird species have been documented there.
Visitors routinely see bighorn sheep, desert mule deer, white-tailed deer and javelina.
Viewing must be done along the roadway because no access is permitted into the private property.
Fifty people per day are allowed to hike the eleven miles through the canyon and fee permits are required well in advance.
Call the Bureau of Land Management.
It's worth the extra effort.
For more information, contact the East Aravaipa Canyon Wilderness Klondyke Ranger Station at (928) 828-3380.
back to top Did You Know? Wildlife Anecdotes from the Arizona Game and Fish Department 1.
The ringtail was named Arizona's state mammal in 1986 by the school children of the state.
It is also know as a miner's cat, civet cat and cacomistle, which is an Aztec Nahuatl word that means half-mountain lion.
However, it is not a cat.
Ringtails are related to raccoons and coatimundi.
2.
The name javelina is Spanish for spear, referring to the animal's tusks.
It is also known as musk hog or collared peccary.
Arizona has approximately 60,000 javelinas.
3.
Male desert bighorn sheep can reach speeds of up to 20 mph each when ramming heads during mating rituals.
They continue banging heads until one of them steps down.
Unlike the guy on the Mountain Dew commercial, the skull of the bighorn has a special skeletal structure that serves to absorb impact during the head-on collisions.
4.
Skunks can squirt their foul-smelling spray up to 15 feet.
Even a 3-week old kit skunk can spray! Arizona is home to all four species of skunks found in the United States: spotted, striped, hooded and hognose.
5.
A white-throated wood rat, also known as a "packrat," when building its large, dome-shaped middens will use some cactus spines if available to help protect against predators.
Those large mounds you often see in the desert composed of sticks and other pieces of vegetation are often woodrat middens.
6.
Male and female red-winged blackbirds do not migrate together.
The males return to the breeding area several weeks before the females.
The male establishes and defends a nesting site to attract one or more females.
back to top
Note: The Arizona Game and Fish Department prohibits discrimination on the basis of race, color, sex, national origin, age, disability in its programs and activities.
If anyone believes they have been discriminated against in any Game and Fish program or activity, including its employment practices, the individual may file a complaint alleging discrimination directly with the Game and Fish Deputy Director, 2221 W. Greenway Rd., Phx., AZ 85023, (602) 942-3000 or U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, 4040 N. Fairfax Dr., Ste. 130, Arlington, VA 22203.
If you require this document in an alternative format, please contact the Game and Fish Deputy Director as listed above or by calling TTY at 1-800 367-8939.
back to top
