Highlights LONGFELLO W N A TION AL HI ST ORI C SITE 30 th Anni v e r s ar y 
This isn`t a plastic facsimile or a skillful rendition of a house that is thought to have stood here in times past.
This, ladies and gentlemen, is the real thing."
David McCullough Author 
"My concer n, my interest today, are those people from our founding time who did not just cross the threshold of this great house, but who did things here: made decisions, understood problems, demonstrated courage in both what they said and what they did, that affected the whole course of our history -- from this house."
David McCullough
This, ladies and gentlemen, is the real thing.
"In one of his poems, Longfellow said that `all houses are haunted,' and this house, in particular, is haunted by a cast of characters that is almost unr ivaled by any structure in the countr y with the possible exception of the White House and Independence Hall.
If the ghosts that are in this house could come out r ight now, you would see, among others, Benjamin Franklin, George Washington, Abigail Adams, John Adams, Benedict Ar nold, General John Glover, General Henr y Knox, General Nathaniel Green -- Knox and Green being the two greatest of Washington's generals, both New Englanders."
David McCullough
"In so many ways, this magnificent and treasured place that we call Longfellow House is a window into the earliest days of our own American history.
It's really true! George Washington slept here, during the American Revolution.
And just steps from where we are now, Longfellow wrote his magnificent verses about life and our young nation, about family, about idealism, and optimism.
Music, too, came alive in these rooms.
And the sense of history all around us here is palpable.
It reaches out to all those who come here, who walk through the gardens and the elegant and gracious halls."
Edward M. Kennedy United States Senator (MA)
"Especially in these challeng ing times, we must rededicate ourselves to (Longfellow's) ideals, think beyond our own exper ience."
Edward M. Kennedy
"-- we're here today to celebrate and remember the poetic genius of a man who captured the spirit of a people whose collective minds yearned for liberty.
For me, the great and infinite march of human evolution is today represented in the existence of the human spirit.
And more than any other artist, I believe it is the poet who communicates and speaks to the human spirit."
Don Murphy NPS Deputy Director/External Affairs
"It is true that, in the wake of this past year, it is so important for us to become more fir mly grounded in our own histor y.
To recognize what it took to get us to this point.
And imperative that, as challenges that we have that we follow in some through many per ilous we move forward, meeting the in front of us, we do so knowing ver y big footsteps that have gone times before us."
Hillary Rodham Clinton United States Senator (NY)
"-- a few lines from (Longfellow`s) `Psalm of Life' that I've actually gone back to several times since joining the Senate.
It is a reminder of some of the ways that others have thought about and, more artfully than I, put into words what we face: `Not enjoyment and not sorrow is our destined end or way, but to act that each tomorrow finds us farther than today.'"
Hillary Rodham Clinton
-- it is the poet who ... speaks to the human spirit.
"Henry Wadsworth Longfellow was the `poet laureate' of this country before there was an official Poet Laureate.
He sang the emerging, evolving American myth and the American dream, as it was known in the middle of the 19th century, and that singing resounded throughout the world."
Keith Lockhart Conductor of the Boston Pops
"Renovation, the idea of making something new, is an idea that would be familiar, beloved, and of crucial importance to the genius and sweet natured, generous man who once lived here.
He was quite aware that Amer ican culture was new, in the making....
Longfellow, ver y consciously and deliberately, set out to create Amer ican mythology.
He understood that we were making it up as we go along.
The Midnight Ride of Paul Revere, The Courtship of Myles Standish, The Song of Hiawatha -- these were deliberate attempts to help hold us together, to help give us the kinds of story or commonality that we need if we are to be a people."
Robert Pinsky 39th Poet Laureate of the United States
"This is a great moment in the life of this great house ....
This house has seen many anniversaries -- and there will be many more.
The National Park Service intends to be here for all of them . . . and for all the days in between."
Myra F. Harrison Superintendent/Longfellow NHS Photos: Rady Mom
-- a great moment in the life of this great house.
