About IdahoPTV BANNER IMAGE For Teachers For Students Something Special for Families Something Special for Teachers Something Special for Teachers Something Special for Teachers Early Childhood Resources Idaho Resources you can use Our program schedule Give us your feedback.
Return to Learning Homepage
November 2001: Native American Heritage
native american Check out these interdisciplinary activity ideas, TV programs and online resources for your classroom.
Return in December for ideas related to Music, Dance, and Theater!
Teaching Ideas
Native American Homes, Past And Present Have you and your students ever wondered why the tipis, igloos, and pueblos have come to represent the sum of stereotypical Native American homes? What is the significance of these dwelling types, and what other types of housing exist?
You now have the chance to understand the cultural and spiritual meanings of native tribal homes.
Your students' task is the following: * Explore several Web sites and determine what type of homes you might have seen crossing this country as a non-native individual.
Why did the native people live in this type of home? Why was it constructed of the chosen material? Was it transported and how? Did the Native Americans have different dwellings at different times of the year? Are their spiritual beliefs connected to the dwelling, materials, or even how the dwelling is entered? Presently, are there occasions in which tribal members still use these types of homes? What are the present housing conditions on many of the reservations today? * After you have explored these Web sites, pick a dwelling type and prepare a short report that answers the questions above.
Finally, draw an illustration, build a model, or include a photo that depicts that dwelling type.
Try to be as accurate as possible.
If you build a representation of a home, try to use similar materials if possible.
If you can't, explain what materials would have been used.
Display both visual representation and report together.
Here are some links to help your students get started: * Paula Giese: Pre-Contact Housing Types http://www.kstrom.net/isk/maps/houses/housingmap.html * Minnesota State University: Native American Shelters, Northwest Coast http://emuseum.mnsu.edu/prehistory/settlements/regions/northwest_co ast.html * Native American Information: Architecture, Past and Present http://www.geocities.com/~desert-oasis/NativeAmArch.htm * Gregory Bondar: Prehistoric Cultures of the Southwest http://www.personal.psu.edu/faculty/g/h/ghb1/southwest/cultures.htm l * PBS: Homeland [current housing, Lakota Sioux] http://www.pbs.org/homeland/today3.html * University of Arizona: Gila River Reservation Housing [current housing]
Buffalo Ranchers, Native Americans, and Environmentalists in Yellowstone Ask students if they have ever been to Yellowstone National Park.
If they have, ask them if they have seen the buffalo.
If they have not, refer to the Web sites below for information to build a historical background and learn about the cultural significance of the buffalo.
The buffalo in the Yellowstone herd are the last remaining descendants of wild herds that used to roam North America.
Today, buffalo are safe to roam within the boundaries of Yellowstone National Park.
Here they are protected.
If they roam outside the park and into the state of Montana, they are killed.
Here is the problem: buffalo have been known to carry a disease that causes their calves to be stillborn.
It is called Brucellosis.
Brucellosis is a bacterial disease that causes miscarriages in cattle.
Though scientists have never documented a case in which the bison have transmitted Brucellosis to cattle on ranches adjoining the park, ranchers are allowed to kill any bison that leave the park each winter in search of food.
In the winter of 1996, the practice became the subject of international protests when stockmen killed more than 1,000 bison -- over a quarter of the total herd at that time.
Environmentalists and Native American tribes oppose the killing, saying alternatives exist.
Ranchers in Montana maintain that the buffalo could transmit that disease to their cattle, regardless of the fact that there is no scientific proof of this.
The state of Montana has been certified as a Brucellosis-free state, making their cattle more desirable economically than states that are not certified.
Tell students that the upcoming winter forecasts predict harsh conditions.
Remind them it is during harsh winters that the buffalo will leave the confines of the park to seek food.
Using the Web sites below, research the different attitudes and positions that these groups take with regard to the buffalo.
Ask or assign students to take the position of a Montana cattle rancher, Yellowstone Park Ranger, Native American, or take a personal position on the issue.
Ask each student to make a poster representing the unique concerns of that group.
If students want to represent themselves have them design a poster that shows what plan of action they think should be taken this winter.
How do they think the buffalo should be kept in the park? What type of barriers will be built to keep the animals safe, secure, and away from leaving the park? Should park rangers feed the buffalo or should nature just take its course?
Each student should draw his plan and present this plan to the class.
Students should answer the questions raised above, and add any other facts they found interesting while researching their position.
Use the following sites to help begin the research: * PBS: Buffalo War http://www.pbs.org/buffalowar/ * Nature: American Buffalo: Spirit of a Nation http://www.pbs.org/wnet/nature/buffalo/ * National Institute for Literacy: Buffalo Wars News Story 
IdahoPTV 
Who Owns The Past? http://www.pbs.org/wotp/ See how the chance discovery of a human skeleton on the banks of the Columbia River in Central Washington in 1996 led to a federal court case between the Umatilla Indians and scientists.
Homeland http://www.pbs.org/homeland/ Among poverty, homelessness, poor health and alcoholism - the harsh conditions of reservation life - families strive to create a better future for their children and the generations to come.
Four Lakota families open their hearts and homes in HOMELAND, an inspirational portrait of reservation life.
In Search of the Oregon Trail http://www.pbs.org/opb/oregontrail/teacher/index.html/ IN SEARCH OF THE OREGON TRAIL is more than the remarkable story of several hundred thousand emigrants crossing the American West looking for a new life.
It's also the story of the native peoples they found there and the terrible consequences of diseases brought by the pioneers and the settlers' pursuit for land.
Lewis and Clark http://www.pbs.org/lewisandclark/ While Lewis and Clark were the first Americans to see much of what would become the western United States, those same lands had long been occupied by native peoples.
Over the course of the expedition, the Corps of Discovery came into contact with nearly 50 Native American tribes.
NOVA: Mystery of the First Americans http://www.pbs.org/wgbh/nova/first/ This site documents the discovery and ensuing controversy over the Kennewick Man, a well-preserved, 9,000-year-old human skeleton found in Washington State in 1996.
Warrior in Two Worlds http://www.pbs.org/warrior/noflash/index.html Ely Parker was a Seneca chief, a legal scholar, an engineer, a Civil War hero, and a Cabinet-level commissioner -- all by the age of 40.
The West http://www.pbs.org/weta/thewest/ The story of the American West is at once the story of a unique part of the country and a metaphor for the country as a whole.
With all its heroism and inequity, exploitation and adventure, sober realities and bright myths, it is the story of all of us, no matter where on the continent we happen to live, no matter how recently our ancestors arrived on its shores.
American Masters: Edward Curtis http://www.pbs.org/wnet/americanmasters/database/curtis_e.html Edward Sheriff Curtis, or the "Shadow Catcher" as he was later called by some of the tribes, took over 40,000 images and recorded rare ethnographic information from over eighty American Indian tribal groups, ranging from the Eskimo or Inuit people of the far north to the Hopi people of the Southwest.
IdahoPTV 
AMERICA's GREAT INDIAN NATIONS Airs Thursday, November 29 1:00 a.m./midnight - 3:00/2:00 a.m.
This six part series looks insides several tribes - the Iroqois, Seminoles, Shawnee, Navajo, Cheyenne, and Lakota Sioux - which are among the most honored in American history.
Perfect for classroom use - each episode is only 15 minutes long.
AMERICAN ROOTS MUSIC Airs Monday November 19 at 9:00 pm This series concludes with an episode titled "All My Children of the Sun."
The final episode explores how the influences of different ethnic groups came to make up "American roots music."
It looks at Cajun culture, Tejano music and Native American music.
BUFFALO WARS Airs Thursday, November 15 at 9:00 pm THE BUFFALO WAR is the moving story of the Native Americans, ranchers and radical environmentalists clashing over the killing of America's last wild buffalo herd.
Each winter, Montana livestock officials who claim to be protecting cattle from the disease brucellosis kill bison that migrate out of Yellowstone National Park.
The program examines the controversial killing by weaving the stories of a 500-mile Native American march for the buffalo, the travails of a family trying to keep their cattle ranch and the daring tactics of a band of environmental activists.
HAND GAME: THE NATIVE AMERICAN GAME OF POWER 
This program explores the historic and mystic roots of this type of gambling in contemporary Northwest Native society.
The film traverses the Flathead indian Reservation in Arlee, Montana, plus the Crow, Blackfeet, Makah, Spokane, Coeur d' Alene, and Walker River Northern Paiute Reservations.
LOST BIRD OF WOUNDED KNEE Airs Sunday, November 5 at 12:00 midnight/11:00 p.m.
Lost Bird of Wounded Knee tells the story of a survivor of the Wounded Knee massacre of 1891.
Zintkala Nuni was only six months old when she was found alive underneath her dead mother, four days after the massacre.
She was adopted by General Leonard Colby, the leader of the Nebraska National Guard, and his wife Clara, a prominent suffragist.
The story follows Zintkala Nuni's life as an Indian child living among whites, and her life-long search for her roots and the struggles she endures.
THE MYSTERY OF CHACO CANYON Airs Tuesday, November 13, at 10:00 p.m. Chaco Canyon, located in northwest New Mexico, is perhaps the only site in the world constructed in an elaborate pattern that mirrors the yearly cycle of the sun and the 19-year cycle of the moon.
How did an ancient civilization, with no known written language, arrange its buildings into a virtual celestial calendar, spanning an area roughly the size of Ireland? Why did this society, ancestors of today's Pueblo Indians, choose to establish the center of their world in the middle of such an arid, barren land? And why, after constructing buildings the size of the Roman Coliseum, did these same people deliberately seal them and abruptly leave?
SACRED JOURNEY OF THE NEZ PERCE Airs Tuesday, November 20 at 10:00 p.m. MT/PT The Nez Perce War of 1877 forever changed the lives of the Nez Perce people.
This documentary tells of their struggle for survival and determination to maintain their culture.
A story about a physical trek over 1,600 difficult miles and of a spiritual journey of healing, patience and pride that has led many Nez Perce back to their cultural roots.
Produced by Idaho Public Television, Sacred Journey has extended copyright for Idaho teachers for life of the tape!
