P INEY NARROWS Y ACHT HAVEN AND F AIRVIEW M ARINA ARE C ERTIFIED ! DON'T JUST TAKE OUR WORD FOR IT ...
Piney Narrows Yacht Haven in Chester and Fairview Marina with vacuum sanders, and tarps are placed under each vessel in Pasadena are the two most recently certified Clean Marinas. being worked on.
Solvents are stored in their original containers Piney Narrows Yacht Haven is a condominium marina on indoors, inside a cabinet.
All do-it-yourself customers are asked Kent Narrows.
General Manager Joe Pomerantz asks staff at the to abide by marina rules and regulations that specify strict busy fuel dock to hand each customer an oil environmental controls.
The working areas of the absorbent pad to capture incidental spills.
He also yard are offset by large grassy areas that serve the educates slipholders about clean boating practices dual purpose of enhancing Fairview 's aesthetics and through his newsletter.
For example, the fall/winter filtering stormwater runoff.
2001 issue contained this advice, "Please be mindful There are now a total of 38 certified Clean not to overfill or top off tanks as this practice, most Marinas in Maryland and 8 Clean Marina Partners times, results in the spilling of fuel into the waterway. (e.g ., public boat ramps that promote clean boating Also, if gas tanks are absolutely full, the expansion of habits).
These figures represent 8 percent of vapors tends to purge out of vents and into the basin."
Maryland's boating facilities.
The goal of the Clean Other examples of best management practices at Marina Initiative is to certify 25 percent of boating Piney Narrows include a portable pumpout for Joe Po merantz of P iney facilities as Clean Marinas or Clean Marina Partners liveaboards; oil, antifreeze and battery recycling; and Narrows Yacht Haven with by 2004.
In other words, an additional 104 facilities his Award Certificate.
the relocation of shop buildings away from the need to become certified over the next two years water 's edge. to satisfy EPA and NOAA.
Failure to meet this goal Fairview Marina is an attractive mid-size marina with a full- may result in additional regulatory requirements for marinas.
service yard.
To control runoff from the washdown pad, owner To avoid this unwelcome prospect, become active with the Marc Kahan requires that all boats be washed on a pad.
Residues Clean Marina Initiative and enjoy the benefits of being are then collected in filter cloths or traps.
All sanding is done recognized as one of the preeminent marinas in Maryland.
Mar yland Clean Marinas Under way is a quarterly newsletter published by the Waterway and Greenways Division of the Chesapeake and Coastal Watershed Service, Maryland Department of Natural Resources (DNR).
The Maryland Clean Marina Initiative promotes and celebrates voluntary adoption of measures to reduce pollution from marinas and recreational boats.
The Initiative is coordinated by DNR in partnership with the marine industry.
For additional information, contact: Maryland Clean Marina Initiative 580 Taylor Avenue, E-2 Annapolis, MD 21401 Toll Free in MD: 877-620-8DNR, x8770 Direct: 410-260-8770 Fax: 410-260-8779 E-mail: bvalentine@dnr.state.md.us Web Site: www.dnr.state.md.us/boating Parris N. Glendening , Governor Kathleen Kennedy Townsend, Lt. Governor J. Charles Fox, Secretary Karen M. White, Deputy Secretary Elizabeth Fuller Valentine, Editor Donna Morrow, Layout The facilities and services of the Department of Natural Resources are available to all without regard to race, color, religion, sex, age, national origin, physical or mental ability.
This document is available in alternative format upon request from a qualified individual with a disability.
Graphics from Broderbund ClickArt Deluxe Image Pack `97.
Printed on recycled paper with low VOC ink.
Copyright MD DNR
"Most people are becoming more aware of the environment and their surroundings.
They recycle at home, they conserve energy and tend to look for products safe for the environment.
The Maryland Clean Marina Initiative shows a proactive movement of the marine industry.
I feel people notice when industry controls and maintains the environment."
-Scott Tinkler, Port Annapolis Marina "By reducing our overall trash collection through recycling, we have saved 20%.
We now use all waste oil as fuel to heat our shops...If you want to attract higher-end customers and be competitive in this market you need to have a "clean facility."
This is not just an "edge" anymore, it is the way you need to operate in order to stay in business."
-Jonathan Jones, Haven Harbour Marina
UNDERW Clean Marina Certification Workshops S PRING
Maryland Clean Marinas
AY
2002
6
C
ERTIFIED C LEAN
M
ANCHOR BAY EAST MARINA, DUNDALK BALTIMORE YACHT CLUB, ESSEX BAY RIDGE CIVIC ASSN.
MARINA, ANNAPOLIS BERT JABIN'S BOAT YARD, ANNAPOLIS CHESAPEAKE HARBOUR MARINA, ANNAPOLIS COLTONS POINT MARINA, COLTONS POINT CROCKETT BROS.
BOATYARD, INC., OXFORD FAIRVIEW MARINA, PASADENA FERRY POINT MARINA 
BEACH FORT WASHINGTON MARINA, FORT WASHINGTON HAVEN HARBOUR MARINA, ROCK HALL HERRINGTON HARBOUR NORTH, TRACYS LANDING HERRINGTON HARBOUR SOUTH, FRIENDSHIP LIPPINCOTT MARINE, GRASONVILLE LOCUST POINT MARINA, ELKTON MAGOTHY MARINA, SEVERNA PARK MEARS MARINA, ANNAPOLIS
MEARS POINT MARINA, GRASONVILLE MEARS YACHT HAVEN, OXFORD OCEAN CITY FISHING CENTER, OCEAN CITY OSPREY POINT MARINA, ROCK HALL PARKSIDE MARINA, MIDDLE RIVER PINEY NARROWS YACHT HAVEN, CHESTER POINT LOOKOUT MARINA, RIDGE POINT PATIENCE MARINA, SOLOMONS PORT ANNAPOLIS MARINA, ANNAPOLIS ROCKHOLD CREEK MARINA, DEALE THE SAILING EMPORIUM, ROCK HALL SHIPWRIGHT HARBOR, DEALE SOMERS COVE MARINA, CRISFIELD SPRING COVE MARINA, SOLOMONS SPRING COVE MARINA, ROCK HALL ST. MICHAELS MARINA, ST. MICHAELS SWEDEN POINT MARINA, MARBURY
ARINAS ~BOATYARDS
AND YACHT CLUBS TOO!
TIDEWATER MARINA, HAVRE DE GRACE YOUNG'S BOAT YARD, EDGEMERE ZAHNISER'S YACHTING CENTER, SOLOMONS
Maryland Clean Marina Initiative 580 Taylor Avenue, E-2 Annapolis, MD 21401
C
LEAN
M
ARINA P ARTNERS
CHESAPEAKE BAY MARITIME MUSEUM, ST. MICHAELS GREEN RIDGE STATE FOREST, CUMBERLAND HERRINGTON MANOR STATE PARK, OAKLAND JENNINGS-RANDOLPH LAKE BOAT RAMP, OAKLAND NEW GERMANY STATE PARK, GRANTSVILLE QUEENSTOWN HARBOR COMM.
PIER, QUEENSTOWN ROCKY GAP STATE PARK, FLINTSTONE SUSQUEHANNA STATE PARK, HAVRE DE GRACE
A series of four workshops was held over the winter months to help marina, boatyard and yacht club operators to understand and address the Clean Marina award criteria.
The workshops focused on elements of the Clean Marina award checklist that facility operators typically find Participants at the workshop in troublesome.
Specifically, workshop Solomons draf t SPCC plans.
participants were led through a discussion of regulatory requirements and related paperwork.
The workshops were held in Solomons, Annapolis, Baltimore and Easton.
Each began with an overview of the Clean Marina Initiative followed by a presentation from the operator of a certified Clean Marina.
The marina operators described how they addressed the clean marina criteria, any changes they made to their operations, and the benefits and reactions they have seen as a result of certification.
The remainder of each workshop was dedicated to emergency planning , employee training , Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plans, and Spill Prevention, Control and Countermeasure Plans.
It is wise to be prepared to react quickly and appropriately in response to a crisis.
Clean Marina staff encourage all marina operators to have a fuel spill response plan and spill containment materials.
Even facility operators that do not sell fuel should be prepared to capture spills from accidental releases, such as when a pump discharges oily bilge water.
An outline of a typical emergency response plan is available on the Clean Marina website.
Workshop participants were also introduced to the Panic Preventer File for Marinas developed by Florida Sea Grant.
The 3-ring binder contains "recipes" for how to respond in the event of a variety of emergency situations.
For instance, in the event of a dock fire: · Call 911.
Report the address of the marina and the exact location of the fire within the marina.
· Alert people to evacuate the dock immediately.
· Assign somebody to direct emergency vehicles in from the main road.
· Notify boaters to stand off on Channel 16 VHF or CB 9.
· Consider stepped up security in the remainder of the complex.
· Know the location of the electrical and fuel cutoff switches and fire extinguishers for each dock as well as what hazardous materials, if any, are stored on each dock.
· Also, know which fire hydrants/stand pipes serve each dock. continued page 2
BMP Spotlight: Underground Storage Tanks
The "BMP Spotlight" is intended to help marina operators understand what Clean Marina staff are looking for when evaluating a marina.
Items for this column are drawn directly from the Clean Marina Award Checklist and the Mar yland Clean Marina Guidebook.
The question for this issue is, "Are you in compliance with petroleum storage requirements?" This article will specifically address the requirements for underground storage tanks (UST).
Underground storage tanks are strictly regulated by the Maryland Department of the Environment (MDE).
A summary of UST requirements follows.
Specific questions should be directed to MDE's Oil Control Program at 410-631-3442 or hmeade@mde.state.md.us.
Requirements for underground storage tanks: · All USTs must be registered with MDE.
· Certified technicians must be used for installation and/or repairs.
· Tanks must be monitored on a monthly basis for releases.
The following is a partial list of permitted release detection methods: Statistical Inventory Reconciliation (SIR) by an approved third-party vendor.
Automatic T ank Gauging equipment approved by a thirdparty and able to detect leaks of 0.2 gallons per hour.
Vapor Monitoring only if the product being stored is volatile enough to be detected and groundwater will not interfere with the monitoring .
Interstitial Monitoring for fluids, vapors, etc. on UST systems that have secondary containment (i.e., doublewalled tanks).
· Piping must have release detection as well: Pressurized piping must be equipped with an automatic line leak detector and be tested annually by precision testing or by an approved monthly monitoring method Continued on page 3
INSIDE T
HIS ISSUE
... 1 1 2 3 4 5
Clean Marina Certification Workshops Wrap-up BMP Spotlight: Underground Storage Tanks Two No Discharge Zones in Maryland Shrink Wrap Recycling Announcements Two New Clean Marinas
5
1
Workshops, from page 1
Copies of the Panic Preventer File for Marinas can be ordered from the University of Florida by visiting www.ifasbooks.ufl.edu or calling 352-392-1764.
Another aspect of emergency planning is submission of " Tier II" forms to emergency planning agencies.
Any facility that stores more than 1,250 gallons of gasoline, diesel or any other hazardous or toxic chemical must submit a Tier II form to the Maryland Department of the Environment (MDE), the Local Emergency Planning Commission, and the local fire department by March 1 of each year.
Copies of forms and addresses for local contacts are available from MDE at Participants at the workshop in Easton learn about preparing or 410-631-3800.
Emergency response plans are emer gency response plans and employee training.
only useful if employees know they exist and what to do with them.
Plans should be reviewed annually by facility operators to insure that the information is still accurate (e.g ., phone numbers are current).
Following the annual review for accuracy, the plan should be discussed with ALL employees to familiarize them with (1) the fact that the plan exists and where it is located, (2) the type of information the plan contains, and (3) what actions to take under given circumstances.
Facilities that conduct vessel maintenance and/or pressure washing are required to have a THESE RESOURCES ARE General Permit for Discharges AVAILABLE TO HELP YOU. from Marinas issued by MDE.
The · Emergency Response permit requires that facility Plan Outline operators prepare a Stormwater · Training Guide · Stormwater Pollution Pollution Prevention Plan and Prevention Plan Outline provide employee training twice · Spill Control (SPCC) a year.
To help marina managers Plan template and plan and track their employee information about free training , Clean Marina staff engineer certification.
Visit www.dnr.state.md.us/ developed an outline of common boating/cleanmarina, or call training topics, including those required by the General Discharge 410-260-8770.
Permit.
During the workshops, participants were introduced to the elements of Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plans (SWPPP) and given templates to help them complete their own plans.
They were also given templates of Spill Prevention, Control and Countermeasure (SPCC) Plans and information about how to complete them.
SPCC plans are required of any facility that has the capacity to store greater than 660 gallons of petroleum in a single above-ground container, an aggregate greater than or equal to 1,320 gallons above ground, or greater than 42,000 under ground.
The SPCC plan must be certified by a professional engineer.
The Clean Marina Initiative has hired an engineering firm to certify plans for qualifying facilities at no cost to marinas.
In response to questions raised at the workshops, we learned from Patricia Williams at MDE that fuel in private vessels Continued in column 2
does not need to be included in Tier II reports.
Additionally, neither MDE nor the Maryland Department of Agriculture restrict the dispensing rate of fuel at fuel docks.
BMP Spotlight continued from page 1
Improved water quality and further protection of two sensitive waterways will be among the benefits of Maryland designating its first No Discharge Zones (NDZs) in the Chesapeake Bay and the Maryland Coastal Bays.
NDZs are areas of water were boaters are prohibited from discharging treated or untreated sewage.
Under the federal Clean Water Act, states may apply to the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) for this special designation.
Through a joint effort between the Department of Natural Resources and the Maryland Department of the Environment, state officials were able to successfully petition for two NDZs.
One is in Herring Bay (AA county) and one is in the Northern Coastal Bays (WO county).
Boats operating within NDZs will be required to take special care when disposing of vessel sewage.
Boats with holding tanks or portable toilets must use dockside pumpouts and/or disposal facilities.
Boats equipped with a Type I or II marine sanitation device, a treat and release system, will be required to either lock the door to the head or secure the seacock in a closed position.
Violation of NDZ regulations could result in a fine not to exceed $1,000.
The two initial areas were chosen for designation because both met established criteria, exhibited strong local support, and had additional efforts underway to improve water quality.
The management plan for the Coastal Bays included an NDZ designation as a goal and the Lower Western Shore Tributary Team called for the Herring Bay designation several years ago.
Steuart Chaney, President of Herrington Harbour Marinas and a member of the tributary team explained, " The boaters and maritime community of Herring Bay are taking the lead in helping the environment by their support of the NDZ in Herring Bay.
We believe this initiative will focus regulatory attention on the other, more significant sources of pollution.
Ultimately, the NDZ will lead to a cleaner environment for all of Herring Bay."
The new NDZs are expected to bring added benefits in the two designated areas and to reinforce the importance of handling sewage responsibly in all Maryland waters.
Senator Paul G. Pinsky (D - Prince George's County) was instrumental in laying the groundwork leading up to the NDZ designations.
In 1999, he sponsored a bill that required DNR to complete an assessment of waterways that are sensitive to boat sewage and to determine which of these areas are adequately served by pumpout facilities.
According to Pinsky, "The no discharge zone designations will increase boater awareness that certain areas of water are particularly sensitive to all sources of pollution, including boat waste.
The vast majority of boaters are environmentally conscious and will be more than happy to comply."
For further information about NDZs or about the Pumpout Program, contact DNR at 410-260-8770 or visit www.dnr.state.md.us/boating .
HERRING BAY AND NORTHERN COASTAL B NO DISCHARGE ZONES
AYS ARE ·
·
·
such as those listed above with the exception of SIR which does not detect leaks from pressurized piping .
If a suction piping system has only one check valve located directly below the pump, then no other release detection is required.
Other types of suction piping systems must be precision tested every two years or monitored monthly with an approved release detection method.
USTs must have spill and overfill protection.
That is, tanks should have automatic alarms that sound when the tank is 90 percent full.
Also, tanks should have ball float valves to stop the flow from delivery trucks at 95 percent of the storage tank's capacity.
Catch basins around fill pipes are also required.
They capture spills that may occur when delivery hoses are disconnected.
Steel tanks and lines must have corrosion protection: the tank either needs to have a sacrificial anode attached to it (as part of the manufacturing process) or an impressed current system must be installed.
Either type of system must be tested annually.
Fiberglass and fiberglass-sealed tanks do not need cathodic protection or testing .
"Metered storage" such as commercial fuel docks, must maintain daily inventory records and monthly reconciliation of product delivered versus product sold.
Tanks must be "stuck " twice per day.
Using Statistical Inventory
· · · ·
·
Reconciliation for release detection from tanks ensures compliance with the daily inventory requirement.
Fill pipes must be marked in accordance with American Petroleum Institute standards.
Any tanks installed after March 1985 must have two monitoring pipes in opposing corners of the tank field.
Owners of USTs must meet "financial responsibility " requirements by carrying $1 million of liability insurance per tank.
Drop tubes are required on all USTs containing gasoline or diesel.
A drop tube is a PVC pipe that runs from the surface fill to within 6" of the bottom of the tank and is intended to prevent static build up.
New or replacement systems installed after July 1998 which utilize vapor recovery must have a catchment basin on the stage one fitting .
A
NNOUNCEMENTS Dredged Materials Management Issue Forum A coastal issues forum focusing on dredged materials management will be held Wednesday, April 17, 2002 at the Maritime Institute and Conference Center in Linthicum Heights, Maryland.
This is an informational forum designed to improve understanding of beneficial and innovative use of dredged material as a viable choice for the disposal of dredged material.
Program highlights include: (1) an overview of dredged materials management in Maryland and (2) large and small scale case studies from across the country.
Interested parties, including marina operators, local governments, marine trades organizations, and watershed groups, are invited to attend.
The forum is being sponsored by the Coastal and Watershed Resources Advisory Committee in association with the Citizens Advisory Committee of the Maryland Port Administration.
For additional information, or to be added to an interest list, please contact Mary Conley at 410-260-8730 or via email at mconley@dnr.state.md.us.
Clean Marina staff are not able to determine whether or not USTs meet all regulatory requirements.
During a confirmation visit, however, Clean Marina staff will ask to see daily inventory and monthly reconciliation records , evidence of liability insurance, and Certificates of Registration for each tank.
We will also ask to see any Routine Site Inspection forms prepared by MDE inspectors.
SHRINK WRAP RECYCLING CONTINUES! The Anne Arundel Marine Trades Association along with the Anne Arundel County Department of Public Works Waste Management Services, the Chesapeake Bay Trust, Giant Foods Inc., and Manner Resins have renewed their annual partnership to recycling shrink wrap.
Shrink wrap is a low density polyethylene used to protect boats during winter storage.
This program is made possible with a grant from the Chesapeake Bay Trust.
"Shrink wrap takes up valuable space in landfills," said Dave Minges, Executive Director of the Chesapeake Bay Trust.
"It is difficult for individual marinas to collect enough shrink wrap for them to recycle on their own.
This collective effort will put this high volume waste to good use."
"Last year we collected more than 12 tons of material," said Ted Ruegg , President of Anne Arundel Marine Trades Association.
"This year we have lengthened the amount of time the dumpsters are available hoping to substantially increase the amount collected."
Shrink wrap recycling in Anne Arundel County will begin the week of March 11 and continue until May 23.
The locations are: Rhode River Marina Herrington Harbour North Pasadena Boatel Port Annapolis Marina 2010 Knollview Drive 3932 Germantown Road 389 Deale Road 7074 Bembe Beach Road Pasadena Edgewater Tracy 's Landing Annapolis 410-437-6926 410-798-1658 410-867-4343 410-269-1990 M-F 9 a.m. to 5 p.m. 8 a.m. to 5 p.m. M-F 9 a.m. to 5 p.m. M-F 9 a.m. to 5 p.m.
There will be two collection sites in Baltimore County provided by Baltimore County Solid Waste Management.
The set up is being coordinated by the Baltimore County Marine Trades Association.
Shrink wrap may be dropped off between March and June at either of these locations: State Highway Administration Peninsula Expressway Dundalk Eastern Landfill Days Cove Road Whitemarsh
New Technology Runs Counter to Clean Marina Goals There is a new product being marketed in Maryland as a "car wash" for boats.
The BOATscrubber consists of circular rotating brushes on mechanical arms attached to a frame on the seabed.
The arms move in and down along the contour of the hull, the boat is moved forward, and the arms repeat their motion until the entire hull is cleaned.
It is an ingenious product.
The trouble is that it is impossible to contain cuprous oxide and other toxic elements of bottom paint released by the cleaning action.
The Clean Marina Committee and staff are particularly concerned about the impact of cleaning ablative paints in the water.
Until it can be demonstrated that this equipment does not have a negative environmental impact, any marina with an installed mechanical in-water hull cleaner will not be eligible for Clean Marina certification.
New Marina Association Proposed A new organization designed to address the specific concerns of marina operators has been proposed by an Annapolis marina manager.
The organization would serve the needs of marina management and related issues at little cost to marinas.
A primary goal of the organization would be to share information and ideas and to get to know others in the field.
For those interested in exploring the possibilities for this proposed association, please contact Nancy Bray, Assistant Manager at Mears Marina, 519 Chester Avenue, Annapolis, MD 21403, 410-268-8282 (phone), 410-268-7161 (fax), or nancy@mearsannapolis.com (e-mail).
Also, the Kent County landfill will be collecting shrink wrap again this year.
Contact Marty Holden at 410-778-7448 for details.
For information about this year's shrink wrap recycling efforts in Talbot and Queen Anne's counties, call James Wood at 410-758-6605.
2
3
4
