RRC Railroad Commission of Texas News Meetings Jobs Rules FAQ's Links Search Contact [white_dot_01a.gif] [pict_bar3c.jpg]
[BUTTON]
State of the Oil and Gas Industry
Submitted Remarks of: Jim Henry July 19, 2000
Thank you Chairman Williams.
Good morning Commissioner Matthews and Commissioner Garza and ladies and gentlemen of the oil and gas industry.
I am Jim Henry, President of the Permian Basin Petroleum Association.
I have been in the oil industry for over 40 years.
In 1958, I graduated from Oklahoma University with a petroleum engineering degree and went to work for Humble Oil and Refining Corporation in McCamey, Texas.
I would like to mention some trends that have been happening in the oil industry.
The first trend has to do with the rise and fall of the major oil companies.
In the 1920s and 1930s, the oil industry spread out like a huge tidal wave over our great State of Texas, covering a large portion of our state and settling in many of the small towns, such as the town I started in, McCamey.
Most of the production was owned by the major oil companies.
Then in the 1980s and 1990s, this wave retreated, first from the small towns such as McCamey, then the medium sized cities such as Midland, and finally coming to rest in the large cities, such as Houston.
As this wave of major oil companies retreated, a second wave began.
This is a wave of independent oil companies.
This wave is now cresting and the independents are in their heyday.
The independents now have the responsibility of representing the domestic oil and gas industry, both in Austin and Washington.
I hope we are up to this responsibility.
Just like the majors, the independents will not stay forever--we also will leave.
The reason is the oil and gas production in Texas is drying up.
Twenty-five years ago oil production peaked at 3,5000,000 barrels of oil per day, now it is a little over 1,000,000 barrels of oil per day, and it is still declining at about 5% per year.
All of our technical innovations; 3-D seismic, horizontal drilling, Co2 flooding, etc., have not been able to halt this 5% decline.
As the wave of independents subsides, a third and final wave will build up and spread over Texas.
This wave will be the depletionists.
They already operate a few of the wells, but in ten years, they may operate as many as half of the wells.
A depletionist is a company that operates oil and gas wells with very few, if any, technical people.
Their overhead costs for items, such as salaries and office space, is a fraction of the overhead costs of independents.
Their emphasis is on keeping costs down and they will be very good at it.
They will be able to keep wells pumping much longer than independents could have.
Another trend is oil prices.
For the last hundred years the average posted oil price, adjusted for inflation, has averaged about $18 per barrel for West Texas Intermediate.
But in the next 10 to 20 years, this will start to change.
For the first time in history, the world will run out of excess capacity to produce oil and the average price of oil will increase until supply and demand again come in equilibrium.
Oil prices will still fluctuate, but the average price will be much higher.
Then there is the trend involving the landowners who own the oil and gas minerals.
As the oil industry spread out over Texas in the 1920s and 1930s, it created immense wealth for landowners.
Ranchers and farmers, who were trying to eke out a living, suddenly became very wealthy.
But now, 70 years later, their income has declined along with the declining oil production and the landowners are starting to feel pinched; they are accustomed to getting a large monthly royalty check.
In the past, they received income from primary, secondary and sometimes tertiary.
Now they are looking for a fourth way to replace their lost income.
A couple of years ago, they came up with it--they would sue the oil companies for more money--take them to court.
So, if they get their way, they will have received money four ways; primary, secondary, tertiary and now courtnary.
A couple of years ago, the landowners with the help of the plaintiff attorneys, tried to get a bill passed by the Texas Legislature that would have done away with the statue of limitations for oil and gas leases: Right now, it is four years.
This would make it much easier for them to sue the oil and gas companies because they could go back as far as they want to; 10, 20 or 30 years, and dig up whatever they could find.
Please note, their suit would be against the oil and gas operators and the working interest owners--not just the operators.
Thankfully, the bill didn't pass, but they are going to bring it up again next session.
If it passes, the oil and gas industry may have to spend much of their time and money in court.
This means there will be less money for drilling and working over wells, so service companies will suffer, employees will be l aid off and taxes for school districts will decrease.
It is a real threat to everyone in our industry so well all need to get into the fight.
Another trend in the number of Hispanics working in the oil field.
Ten years ago, there were only a few Hispanics working in the oil field, but now 70-80% of the oil field workers are Hispanic.
The Hispanics are politically powerful, especially LULAC (League of Latin American Citizens).
The Independent Producers Association of America and the Permian Basin Petroleum Association have been working with Ruben Ramirez and John Bell to get LULAC's support of the oil industry and they are succeeding.
A couple of weeks ago, LULAC had a national convention in Washington D.C.
There they passed a resolution supporting the oil industry.
In closing, let me mention just one more subject: shut-in wells.
I think the solution the Railroad Commission has come up with is a good one, but I am sure there will be a few changes.
In making these changes, I urge you to recognize that shut-in wells are a very important asset to our industry and the more shut-in wells we have, the more oil and gas we can produce.
Shut-in wells can be used in waterfloods and they can be deepened or plugged back to other producing horizons; they can be used for a number of things.
But once a well is plugged, it is gone forever--it is generally too expensive to re-enter.
Please develop rules that encourage wells to be left unplugged as long as they are not polluting fresh water zones.
Thank you for this opportunity to express my views.
[bluedot_000099.gif] | Site Map | Home | Webmaster |
