Department of Homeland Security Information Analysis and Infrastructure Protection Daily Open Source Infrastructure Report for 20 May 2003 Daily Overview Current Nationwide Threat Level is For info click here www.whitehouse.gov/homeland · The Yale Global reports the recent capture of a North Korean freighter attempting to smuggle heroin into Australia has exposed yet again a fatally weak link in the regulation of global shipping: ships sailing under the flag of a nation other than the home state.
(See item 6) · IDG News Service reports a mass-mailing e-mail worm known both as W32/Palyh and W32.HLLW.Mankx@mm is spreading on the Internet, masking itself as a message from support@microsoft.com.
(See item 20) · internetnews.com reports security experts Thursday warned of a vulnerability in the Linux Kernel 2.4 branch, which can be exploited to cause denial-of-service attacks.
(See item 22) DHS/IAIP Update Fast Jump Production Industries: Energy; Chemical; Defense Industrial Base Service Industries: Banking and Finance; Transportation; Postal and Shipping Sustenance and Health: Agriculture; Food; Water; Public Health Federal and State: Government; Emergency Services IT and Cyber: Information and Telecommunications; Internet Alert Dashboard Other: General; DHS/IAIP Web Information
Energy Sector Current Electricity Sector Threat Alert Levels: Physical: Elevated, Cyber: Elevated Scale: LOW, GUARDED, ELEVATED, HIGH, SEVERE [Source: ISAC for the Electricity Sector (ES-ISAC) - http://esisac.com]
1.
May 18, Middle East News -- Solar power brightens villagers' lives in northern Syria.
Four rural villages in the Aleppo region in northern Syria not connected to the national electric grid are generating power locally with solar panels, a model that holds promise for other remote rural communities around the country.
The Japan International Cooperation Agency installed solar panels to supply electricity in all the villages, including individual systems for homes in three villages -- Fedre, Katoura and Kaliff -- and a central system in Zarzita.
The agency also installed solar power for pumping water in Kalif and Zarzita and for water desalination in Kalif, which is in an arid area with brackish water.
Most households in the villages use the electricity for lighting and for televisions and radios.
The centralized solar 1
system provides enough power for some families to use refrigerators, fans and washing machines.
"These projects contribute to improving living standards in the four villages by providing a sustainable and environmentally friendly source of energy," said Taoufik Ben Amara, UNDP Resident Representative.
Surveys have found that the villagers are happy with the solar systems.
Although they produce less power than would be available from the national grid, solar panels provide a workable alternative to the long waiting list for extensions of the grid.
Source: http://www.energycentral.com/sections/news/nw_article.cfm?id =3852304 2.
May 16, Reuters -- Xcel nuclear waste plan defeated in Minnsota House.
The Minnesota House turned down a bill to allow Xcel Energy Inc. to store more nuclear waste at its Prairie Island power plant but the energy company said it could be reconsidered.
The House voted 99 to 33 against the measure on Thursday evening.
"We're talking with legislators now.
The legislation can be reconsidered, but right now we're waiting to see what happens next," Xcel spokeswoman Mary Sandok said on Friday.
The Legislature is scheduled to adjourn after Monday's session.
Earlier this week, the state Senate voted to permit extra radioactive waste fuel to be added at the twin-reactor plant in Red Wing, Minnesota.
Minneapolis-based Xcel has said it may have to shut the 1,076 megawatt power station in 2007 if it cannot store more used fuel in steel and concrete casks.
The plant generates enough electricity for more than 1 million homes.
An Indian tribe living near Prairie Island this week approved an agreement with Xcel to accept more storage outside the plant if it is authorized by the Legislature.
Sandok said the company needs to add 12 more waste storage casks to the 17 already permitted at Prairie Island.
Xcel will also face a storage problem at its Monticello plant in 2010.
Source: http://www.energycentral.com/sections/news/nw_article.cfm?id =3851679 3.
May 16, Reuters -- Connecticut extends delay on Sound power cables.
The Connecticut Legislature is close to approving a bill that would likely prevent Canadian power transmission company TransEnergie from turning on its Cross-Sound cable for another year.
But industry experts believe the U.S. Department of Energy (DOE) will impose an emergency order, similar to last year's order, requiring TransEnergie to energize the cable for the peak summer months if Long Island or Connecticut power supplies run dangerously low.
The Cross-Sound cable is a high voltage line capable of moving 330 megawatts (MW) of power -- enough for some 330,000 homes -- that runs under the Long Island Sound between New Haven, Connecticut and Shoreham, New York.
Connecticut's Department of Environmental Protection has blocked Cross-Sound's efforts to energize the line because it was not buried deep enough below the seabed.
The state environmental regulators in turn have not allowed Cross-Sound to rebury the cable because of the moratorium on new projects.
Source: http://hsweb01.screamingmedia.com/PMA/pma_newsarticle1_natio nal.htm?SMDOCID=reuters_pma_2003_05_16_eng-reuters_pma_CONN- EXTEND-DELAY-ON-SOUND-POWER-CABLESa
]
Chemical Sector 2
Nothing to report.
[Return to top]
Defense Industrial Base Sector Nothing to report.
[Return to top]
Banking and Finance Sector 4.
May 15, U.S. Department of the Treasury -- Presentation of Terrorism Risk Insurance Program (TRIA) Executive Director Jeffrey Bragg To the National Council on Compensation Insurance's Annual Symposium Orlando, Florida.
The market for terrorism coverage was severely disrupted after 9/11.
In addition to wanting to address insurance industry disruptions, the Congress and the President recognized that such widespread dislocations in insurance markets also had a negative impact on businesses' ability to finance economic activity and recovery.
TRIA effectively places the federal government temporarily in the terrorism risk reinsurance business: Providing coverage for commercial lines P
Coverage is triggered when the Secretary of the Treasury, in consultation with the Secretary of State and the Attorney General, certifies that an act of foreign terrorism has occurred: Which loss is greater than $5 million dollars in the United States and the other areas shown.
Slides: http://www.treasury.gov/press/releases/reports/terrrisk.pdf Source: http://www.treasury.gov/press/releases/js383.htm [ Return to top
]
Transportation Sector 5.
May 19, USATODAY.com -- Ship security rules concern operators.
New anti-terror rules could bring unreasonable costs and cause delays for family-owned ferries, sightseeing cruise lines, and riverboat casinos, thus perhaps driving smaller companies out of business, maritime industry officials say.
As proposed, the rules would require ships that carry at least 150 passengers to pay for extra security and maybe to screen all passengers, cargo and baggage.
The Coast Guard has left open the possibility of extending the rules to smaller vessels as well.
Under a law enacted last year, many U.S. coastal facilities, ports and ships must develop security plans by July 2004 and pay for guards, alarms, cameras and metal detectors.
The Coast Guard will release interim rules next month; after more public review, they will become final in the fall.
"We understand that the costs of security can be seen as overwhelming," Coast Guard spokeswoman Jolie Shifflet said.
"However, we do believe we'll be able to develop flexible measures to ensure that our maritime system is secure."
Government officials say the maritime industry must assume it is a target for terrorists.
Source: http://www.usatoday.com/news/nation/2003-05-18-ship-terror_x .htm [ Return to top
]
3
Postal and Shipping Sector 6.
May 19, Yale Global -- Crimes under flags of convenience.
The recent capture of a North Korean freighter attempting to smuggle heroin worth $50 million into Australia has exposed yet again a fatally weak link in the regulation of global shipping.
At a time when North Korea's nuclear ambition is causing world-wide concern, this fresh discovery is prompting the United States to consider working with like-minded nations to remedy the weakness.
The North Korean freighter is the latest of a long series of abuses involving ships sailing under a flag of convenience, the flag of a nation other than the home state.
The Pong Su was registered in the small South Pacific island-nation of Tuvalu.
Under international law, every ship must sail under the flag of a sovereign state to gain the protection of a government while on the high seas.
But to cut costs or evade scrutiny, thousands of ship owners now register under foreign flags where fees, taxes, regulations, and laws protecting seafarers are often minimal or non-existent.
The problem facing the U.S. -- and other countries determined to stop weapons of mass destruction and the means of delivering them from getting into the hands of unfriendly states and terrorist organizations -- is that international shipping is vast and unevenly regulated.
For a small fee, seagoing vessels owned by North Korea or other interests with criminal or terrorist aims can easily find the flag of another state under which to operate.
Source: http://yaleglobal.yale.edu/display.article?id=1633 [ Return to top
]
Agriculture Sector 7.
May 19, Federal Register -- Asian longhorned beetle; quarantined areas and regulated articles.
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) is amending the Asian longhorned beetle (ALB) regulations by adding portions of New York City, NY, and Hudson County, NJ, to the list of quarantined areas and restricting the interstate movement of regulated articles from these areas.
We are also updating the list of regulated articles in order to reflect new information concerning host plants.
These actions are necessary to prevent the artificial spread of the Asian longhorned beetle to noninfested areas of the United States.
This interim rule was effective May 13, 2003.
The businesses potentially affected by this interim rule are nurseries, arborists, tree removal services, firewood dealers, garden centers, landscapers, recyclers of waste material, and lumber and building material outlets.
The ALB attacks many healthy hardwood trees.
If this pest moves into the hardwood forests of the United States, the nursery, maple syrup, and forest product industries could experience severe economic losses.
Source: http://a257.g.akamaitech.net/7/257/2422/14mar20010800/edocke t.access.gpo.gov/2003/03-12390.htm 8.
May 19, Reuters -- Newcastle disease; removal of areas from quarantine.
The U.S. Agriculture Department (USDA) on Monday eased its quarantine on poultry shipments out of Arizona and Nevada after officials concluded that a highly contagious avian virus was successfully contained.
The two states have not reported any new cases of Exotic Newcastle Disease since the first initial findings earlier this year.
The USDA said it lifted 4
the federal quarantine on Mohave and Yuma counties in Arizona and Nye County in Nevada.
It also removed restrictions on the transport of birds in portions of La Paz County, Arizona, and Clark County, Nevada.
Source: http://www.alertnet.org/thenews/newsdesk/N1911260.htm [ Return to top
]
Food Sector 9.
May 19, American Society for Microbiology -- Phage therapy could remove foodborne disease from livestock.
A bacteria-killing virus found in the feces of some sheep could help remove the dangerous foodborne bacteria Escherichia coli O157:H7 (E. coli) from livestock.
Researchers from Evergreen State College in Olympia, Washington present their research Monday at the 103rd General Meeting of the American Society for Microbiology.
"Here we report a promising new natural way of reducing pathogen concentrations in livestock.
This takes advantage of bacteriophages, bacteria-killing viruses, harmless to humans and other animals, which have been used extensively as antibiotics in Eastern Europe and the former Soviet Union for over 50 years," says Michael Dyen, one of the study researchers.
Dyen and his colleagues report on a new bacteriophage CEV1 that they isolated from the feces of sheep naturally resistant to gut colonization by E. coli O157:H7.
Preliminary trials of CEV1 in the lab have shown that it can be produced easily and can efficiently infect and kill the bacteria under proper conditions.
In model systems reflecting the cow/sheep gut, CEV1 completely eliminated the bacteria in 11 days.
"CEV1 and other carefully-selected phages against E. coli O157:H7 could be used to develop an effective management strategy to eradicate this pathogen from livestock," says Dyen.
Source: http://www.eurekalert.org/pub_releases/2003-05/asfm-ptc05150 3.php [ Return to top
]
Water Sector 10.
May 18, Associated Press -- San Diego spending $827 million on water project.
Workers are putting the finishing touches on California's newest dam, the first built in the San Diego in a half-century.
The concrete Olivenhain Dam is the first of three projects designed to protect San Diego County from a potential water emergency.
Another, existing dam will be raised by 50 feet to increase its capacity, and plans are underway to build a 12-mile-long tunnel beneath freeways and neighborhoods to link the twin forks of San Diego's aqueduct.
When the dust on the $827 million project settles in 2011, San Diego, which gets nearly all of its water from the Colorado River and Northern California, will have an emergency supply that can last up to six months with strict rationing.
Source: http://story.news.yahoo.com/news?tmpl=story p_on_re_us/emergency_water_2 [ Return to top
]
Public Health Sector 5
11.
May 19, Associated Press -- New York City agencies respond to bioterror drill.
Police, local hospitals, and other agencies held a field exercise that tested their readiness to respond to a weapons of mass destruction attack on New York.
In the five-hour exercise Sunday, titled Operation Winter Sun, authorities responded to a 911 call in which "patients" simulated the effects of a chemical, biological, or radiological attack.
They were treated and decontaminated at a site in Brooklyn much as they would be in an actual attack.
At a news conference, Mayor Michael Bloomberg said the drill was a good way of showing "how responders, including local hospitals, deal with a terrorist threat while minimizing risks to themselves and others."
Source: http://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-dyn/articles/A9517-2003May1 9.html 12.
May 19, International Herald Tribune -- China and Hong Kong report lowest daily SARS count.
China and Hong Kong announced the lowest levels of new Severe Acute Respiratory Syndrome (SARS) infections Monday since daily reporting on the outbreak began weeks ago.
In Hong Kong, some 400,000 children went back to class after a seven-week school suspension to combat the disease.
By contrast, Taiwan, which has fought a virulent outbreak despite strong quarantine measures, faced mass resignations of medical workers emerging from mandatory isolation as fears mounted that the island's outbreak was continuing.
The resignation of 21 staff members from the Taipei municipality's Ho Ping Hospital today came after the rapid spread of the disease among health care workers in recent weeks and the death on Sunday of a 49-year-old nurse from the hospital.
Hong Kong, one of the hardest hit cities, reported one new case today, the 16th straight day of single digits and down from a peak of 80 new cases in a day at the peak of the outbreak.
In Singapore, which discovered a new case of the disease hours before it was due to be dropped from the World Health Organization's SARS watch list, officials said today that they expected to remain on the list until the end of the month.
Source: http://www.nytimes.com/2003/05/19/health/19CND-SARS.html?ex= 1054008000753GOOGLE [ Return to top
]
Government Sector 13.
May 19, U.S. Department of Homeland Security -- Launch of the US-VISIT program.
The DHS will, for the first time, oversee the visa issuance process.
By January 1st of next year, if a foreign visitor flies into Dulles or JFK or another international airport or arrives at a U.S. seaport, the visitor's travel documents will be scanned.
Then, once a photo and fingerprint are taken, the person will then be checked against lists of those who should be denied entry for any reason: terrorist connections, criminal violations, or past visa violations.
The information requested will include immigrant and citizenship status; nationality; the country of residence; and the person's address while in the United States.
Source: http://www.dhs.gov/dhspublic/display?content=738 14.
May 16, U.S. Department of Education -- Emergency grant program; notice inviting applications for new Emergency Response and Crisis Management Program agencies (LEAs) to improve and strengthen emergency response and crisis management awards for fiscal year 2003.
The provides grants to local educational response and crisis management plans, 6
including training school personnel, students, and parents in emergency response procedures and coordinating with local law enforcement, public safety, health, and mental health agencies.
Eligible Applicants: LEAs with a significant need for emergency preparedness improvements and a lack of fiscal capacity to implement these improvements.
Applications available: May 16, 2003.
Deadline for Transmittal of Applications: June 30, 2003.
Deadline for Intergovernmental Review: August 29, 2003.
Estimated Available Funds: $38 million.
Estimated Range of Awards: $100,000-$500,000.
Source: http://a257.g.akamaitech.net/7/257/2422/14mar20010800/edocke t.access.gpo.gov/2003/03-12394.htm 15.
May 16, Bureau of Immigration and Customs -- ICE announces agency reorganization.
The Bureau of Immigration and Customs Enforcement (ICE) on Friday announced a reorganization plan that creates a headquarters structure for the agency's operational components and a field structure that provides an integrated chain of command and more streamlined operations at minimal cost.
The plan will be effective on June 9.
At the headquarters level, the reorganization plan establishes a structure that supports five distinct operational divisions of ICE.
At the field level, the plan creates a Special Agent in Charge structure for ICE Investigations, following the model of other preeminent law enforcement agencies.
Source: http://www.immigration.gov/graphics/publicaffairs/newsrels/r eorgfin.htm 16.
May 16, Governmental Affairs Committee, U.S. Senate -- Sen. Collins introduces legislation to coordinate, simplify homeland security grant process.
On Thursday, Senator Susan Collins (R-ME), chairman of the Governmental Affairs Committee, which oversees the Department on Homeland Security, introduced the Homeland Security Grant Coordination and Simplification Act.
This legislation would eliminate duplication in homeland security planning requirements, simplify the application process, and help states and localities promote equipment interoperability.
The bill also would promote greater coordination between state and local governments.
A summary of the legislation: http://govt-aff.senate.gov/presslinks/051503summarygrant.htm Source: http://govt-aff.senate.gov/051503presssc.htm 17.
May 16, U.S. Department of State -- Kenya travel warning.
Due to increased security concerns, the Department of State has authorized the voluntary departure of family members and non-emergency personnel at the U.S. Embassy in Kenya.
The Department warns Americans to defer all non-essential travel to Kenya at this time.
The Department recommends that private American citizens in Kenya evaluate their personal security situation in light of the current terrorist threat and consider departure from the country as one option to ensure their safety.
The U.S. Government has received indications of terrorist threats in the region aimed at American and western interests, including civil aviation.
The government of Kenya might not be able to prevent such attacks.
One major airline has suspended service to Kenya.
The threat to aircraft by terrorists using shoulder-fired missiles continues in Kenya.
Source: http://travel.state.gov/kenya_warning.html 18.
May 15, Washington Post -- Feds begin crackdown on cigarette smuggling.
the government is cracking down on the growing problem of smugglers who take advantage of Virginia's 7
lowest-in-the-nation cigarette taxes.
As an example of the tough new approach, the U.S. Attorney's Office in Alexandria recently charged 10 people in a large smuggling operation cracked by an innovative sting usually associated with drugs and firearms cases.
The development bears similarities to a case in Charlotte, NC last year in which 10 members of a Hezbollah cell involved in cigarette smuggling were found to have conspired to aid the organization.
Eight people pleaded guilty, and a jury convicted two others.
One of the men was caught on wiretaps speaking on the phone with Hezbollah's military commander in Lebanon.
Source: http://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-dyn/articles/A52261-2003May 13.html [ Return to top
]
Emergency Services Sector 19.
May 19, United Press International -- N. Michigan residents assess flood damage.
Residents of Michigan's Upper Peninsula Monday assessed damage from floodwaters that devastated half of Marquette and much of the lower Dead River basin.
Gov. Jennifer Granholm toured the area by helicopter on Sunday and said she would seek federal disaster assistance.
Officials from the Federal Emergency Management Agency were to arrive in Marquette County Tuesday morning to tour the flood-ravaged zone.
On Friday, Granholm declared the entire county a state disaster area, in an order that barred boating on the bloated river from Silver Lake to Lake Superior because of debris along the riverbanks.
Source: http://www.upi.com/view.cfm?StoryID=20030519-020006-7149r [ Return to top
]
Information and Telecommunications Sector 20.
May 19, IDG News Service -- Palyh worm disguises itself as an email from Microsoft.
A mass-mailing e-mail worm known both as W32/Palyh and W32.HLLW.Mankx@mm is spreading on the Internet, masking itself as a message from support@microsoft.com.
The worm arrives as an executable attachment to e-mail messages with a variety of subjects and messages.
The virus can be released only when a user clicks on the attachment file, anti-virus company F-Secure Corp. said.
Once released the virus code modifies the Windows registry so that the worm program is launched whenever Windows is run.
It also searches an infected computer for files containing e-mail addresses that it can send itself to and looks for computers that are accessible through shared directories on a network and copies itself to those machines.
Anti-virus vendors are advising customers to update their anti-virus software.
Source: http://www.computerworld.com/securitytopics/security/virus/s tory/0,10801,81344,00.html 21.
May 19, New York Times -- Connections to broadband increase 50%.
The number of American households that connect to the Internet via high-speed, or broadband, connections grew by 50 percent in the last year, raising to nearly one-third the portion of home Internet users who now use broadband connections, according to a study to be released Monday.
But the rapid growth rate is unlikely to continue, according to the Pew 8
Internet and American Life Project which conducted the study based on surveys in March 2002 and March 2003.
Fifty-seven percent of dial-up Internet users who were surveyed said they were content to stick with dial-up access, said John Horrigan, a researcher with the Pew project.
What is more, "the people who are most likely to say they'd like broadband are those who say they can't get broadband," Horrigan said.
"It's still relatively difficult to get in rural areas."
Source: http://www.nytimes.com/2003/05/19/technology/19BROA.html 22.
May 15, internetnews.com -- DOS hole found in Linux Kernel.
Security experts Thursday warned of a vulnerability in the Linux Kernel 2.4 branch, which can be exploited to cause denial-of-service (DOS) attacks.
"By flooding a Linux system with packets with spoofed source addresses, the handling of the cache will consume large amounts of CPU power.
This could potentially bring a Linux system offline with a rate of only 400 packets per second by using carefully chosen source addresses that causes hash collisions in the table," according to a security advisory from computer security firm Secunia.
Secunia rated the flaw as "moderately critical" and cautioned that it could be exploited to bring a Linux system offline with a rate of only 400 packets per second by using carefully chosen source addresses that causes hash collisions in the table.
Red Hat has issued updated kernel packages to patch Red Hat Linux versions 7.1 through 9: http://rhn.redhat.com/errata/RHSA-2003-172.html.
Source: http://boston.internet.com/news/article.php/2207021
Internet Alert Dashboard Current Alert Levels
AlertCon: 1 out of 4 https://gtoc.iss.net
Security Focus ThreatCon: 1 out of 4 http://analyzer.securityfocus.com/
Current Virus and Port Attacks
Virus: Top 10 Target Ports [ Return to top
#1 Virus in the United States: WORM_LOVGATE.F Source: http://wtc.trendmicro.com/wtc/wmap.html, Trend World Micro Virus Tracking Center [Infected Computers, North America, Past 24 hours, #1 in United States]
137 (netbios-ns), 80 (www), 445 (microsoft-ds), 1434 (ms-sql-m), 113 (ident), 139 (netbios-ssn), 25 (smtp), 4662 (eDonkey2000), 0 (---), 53 (domain) Source: http://isc.incidents.org/top10.html; Internet Storm Center
]
General Sector 23.
9
May 19, Associated Press -- Five dead in another Israeli suicide bombing.
A suicide attacker detonated explosives at the entrance to a crowded mall in northern Israel on Monday, killing at least four shoppers, herself and wounding 31, the latest in a series of bombings that have derailed U.S. peace efforts.
The attack in the town of Afula was the fifth suicide bombing within 48 hours, following blasts in Gaza, Jerusalem and the West Bank.
The explosion - the 95th suicide attack in 32 months of fighting - went off at 5:14 p.m. at the entrance to the Shaarei Amakim mall in Afula, reportedly as shoppers were waiting in line for a security check.
Malls and other public places have significantly stepped up security since the outbreak of Israeli-Palestinian fighting in September 2000.
The attacker detonated the explosives after encountering a security guard.
Source: http://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-dyn/articles/A10103-2003May 19.html?nav=hptop_tb 24.
May 19, Washington Post -- Most of Moroccan suicide bombers identified.
Moroccan officials investigating Friday's suicide bombings said on Sunday that they had identified most of the attackers as Moroccan, and investigators were increasingly examining links to a home-grown Islamic radical group that was responsible for a spate of earlier killings of people it called "nonbelievers."
The Moroccan justice minister, Mohamed Bouzoubaa, said on television that authorities had positively identified eight of the 14 suicide bombers as Moroccans in their late teens and early twenties.
Five were still unidentified, and the 14th man, who was taken into custody when his explosives-packed belt failed to explode, was providing valuable information on the identity and motives of his accomplices.
Source: http://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-dyn/articles/A7760-2003May1 8.html 25.
May 19, AFP (Berlin) -- Germany intercepts 30 tons of suspect chemicals bound for North Korea.
The German government has intercepted a cargo of 30 tons of sodium cyanide, which can be used in the manufacture of chemical weapons, at the request of Washington which believes the shipment was bound for North Korea, according to the German weekly Der Spiegel.
The substance, commonly used in the treatment of metals, can also be in the manufacture of the deadly nerve gas Tabun (dimethylphosphoramido-cyanidate).
The cargo was officially being shipped by a German company to a warehouse in Singapore.
Last week Germany's intelligence service issued a warning about attempts by North Korea to procure banned materiel under cover of businesses based in China and Singapore, the weekly magazine said in its issue to hit newstands on Monday.
Last month the government intercepted a shipment of German-made aluminium tubes probably destined for use in North Korea's nuclear program, according to the press here.
Source: http://www.spacewar.com/2003/030517234619.fa3d0d67.html 26.
May 19, Reuters -- More arrests in Texas immigrant-smuggling case.
Authorities have made more arrests in connection with the deaths last week of 19 illegal immigrants in a botched smuggling scheme, prosecutors said on Monday.
Nancy Herrera, a spokeswoman for the U.S. Attorney for the Southern District of Texas, confirmed the arrests.
But she declined to provide any other details, saying a news conference was planned for later on Monday.
Federal prosecutors charged four people last week, after Wednesday's arrest of Tyrone Williams, 32, the driver of the airtight and overheated truck in which the Mexicans and Central Americans traveled to their deaths.
Source: http://reuters.com/newsArticle.jhtml?type=topNews71295 10
[
Return to top
]
DHS/IAIP Products 
The IAIP provides a range of bulletins and advisories of interest to information system security and professionals and those involved in protecting public and private infrastructures.
By visiting the IAIP web-site (http://www.nipc.gov), one can quickly access any of the following DHS/IAIP products:
DHS/IAIP Warnings - DHS/IAIP Assessements, Advisories, and Alerts: DHS/IAIP produces three levels of infrastructure warnings.
Collectively, these threat warning products will be based on material that is significant, credible, timely, and that address cyber and/or infrastructure dimensions with possibly significant impact.
DHS/IAIP Publications - DHS/IAIP Daily Reports, CyberNotes, Information Bulletins, and other publications DHS/IAIP Daily Reports Archive - Access past DHS/IAIP Daily Open Source Infrastructure Reports DHS/IAIP Daily Open Source Infrastructure Report Contact Information Content and nipcdailyadmin@mail.nipc.osis.gov or contact the DHS/IAIP Daily Report Team at Suggestions: 202-324-1129 Distribution Information Send mail to nipcdailyadmin@mail.nipc.osis.gov for more information.
Contact DHS/IAIP To report any incidents or to request information from DHS/IAIP, contact the DHS/IAIP Watch at nipc.watch@fbi.gov or call 202-323-3204.
DHS/IAIP Disclaimer The DHS/IAIP Daily Open Source Infrastructure Report is a daily [Monday through Friday] summary and assessment of open-source published information concerning significant critical infrastructure issues.
This is an internal DHS/IAIP tool intended to serve the informational needs of DHS/IAIP personnel and other interested staff.
Further reproduction or redistribution for private use or gain is subject to original copyright restrictions of the content.
The IAIP provides no warranty of ownership of the copyright, or of accuracy in respect of the original source material.
11
