APPENDIX O PROPOSED MITIGATION MEASURES BP CHERRY POINT COGENERATION PROJECT Prepared for by: BP West Coast Products, LLC Submitted by: Golder Associates Inc.
June, 2002 April 2003
013-1421
June, 2002 April 2003 EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
i
013-1421
This appendix provides a consolidated summary of the proposed mitigation measures to be implemented by BP in connection with the BP Cherry Point Cogeneration Project (Cogeneration Project).
The mitigation measures identified here are addressed in greater detail in Part II, Chapter 3 and in the technical appendices provided in Part III of this Application for Site Certification (ASC).
As demonstrated elsewhere in the ASC, the Cogeneration Project has been designed to avoid and minimize adverse environmental impacts as much as possible.
Where environmental impacts cannot be wholly avoided, mitigation measures have been proposed.
In several instances, the mitigation measures will result in an overall improvement in biophysical conditions and land uses: ·
The Cogeneration Project will be constructed entirely on BP property, located within the Cherry Point Major Industrial Urban Growth Area/ Port Industrial Zone and zoned for Heavy Impact Industrial development.
The Cogeneration Project will be more fuel-efficient than the stand-alone power plants that would otherwise be expected to be meet growing electricity demands in the region.
This higher efficiency means that electrical demand will be met with less natural gas consumed, and fewer criteria pollutant and greenhouse gas emissions generated.
The Cogeneration Project will enable BP to make several modifications at the Cherry Point Refinery that will reduce air emissions.
BP expects tThe result would to be a net decrease of total criteria pollutant emissions while generating 720 MW of power for the region.
The Cogeneration Project will reduce minimize fresh water consumption from the Nooksack River by using recycled dry cooling technology instead of a freshoncethrough cooling water from Alcoa. evaporative cooling system, and by taking advantage of water recycling and reuse opportunities at the Refinery.
The Cogeneration Project will provide steam to the Refinery that would otherwise be generated in the Refinery's boilers.
Boiler Bblowdown from the Cogeneration Project, in turn, would be sent to the cooling tower.
Refinery for reuse.
The net result will be an decrease of about 484 to 556 gpmincrease of only 40 gpm (average) over the Refinery's existing current water demand from the Refinery and Aloca, and only an 8% 2% increase in treated wastewater flow.
The Cogeneration Project will preserve the Terrell Creek watershed resource by keeping stormwater runoff in the watershed.
Stormwater runoff from project site roads and other impervious areas would be collected in an oil-water separator to draw off any trace oil and then routed to a detention pond to allow sediment to settle out.
Once clarified, the water would flow to wetland mitigation areas north of Grandview road.
Stormwater runoff from around the site would be routed to these mitigation areas as wellexisting ditches as it is today.
Although the Cogeneration Project will disturb approximately 35 3 acres of low-value wetlands, BP is developing has developed a wetland mitigation plan that will restore historic drainage patterns,result in a net increase in wetland functions and values and in an overall improvement in habitat value.
·
·
·
·
·
June, 2002 April 2003 TABLE OF CONTENTS 1.
2.
3.
INTRODUCTION EARTH AIR QUALITY 3.1 3.2 4.
4.1 4.2 Construction Operation and Maintenance
ii
013-1421 Page No. 1 2 4 4 4 6 6 6 7 7 8 9 9 10 11 11 12 13 14 15 16 16 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 24
WATER RESOURCES Construction 4.1.1 Stormwater Control and Treatment During Construction 4.1.2 Construction Wastewater Discharges Operation and Maintenance 4.2.1 Stormwater Control and Treatment During Operation 4.2.2 Operation Wastewater and Process Water Discharges 4.2.3 Water Consumption During Operation 4.2.4 Groundwater Construction Operation and Maintenance
5.
WETLANDS AND VEGETATION 5.1 5 .2
6.
7.
8.
9.
AGRICULTURAL CROPS AND LIVESTOCK WILDLIFE FISHERIES RESOURCES ENERGY AND NATURAL RESOURCES 9.1 9.2 Construction Operation and Maintenance
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
15.
16.
17.
NOISE LAND USE VISUAL, LIGHT AND GLARE POPULATION, HOUSING AND ECONOMICS PUBLIC SERVICES AND UTILITIES CULTURAL RESOURCES TRAFFIC AND TRANSPORTATION HEALTH AND SAFETY 17.1 Construction
June, 2002April 2003 17.1.1 17.1.2 17.1.3 17.1.4 17.1.5 17.1.6 Operat 17.2.1 17.2.2 17.2.3 17.2.4 17.2.5
iii
013-1421 24 24 24 25 25 25 26 26 26 28 28 28
17.2
Fire Prevention and Response Plan Medical Emergency Plan Spill Prevention Plan Hazardous Construction Materials Management Hazardous Waste Management Explosion Risk Management Plan ion and Maintenance Fire Prevention and Response Plan Spill Prevention Plan Hazardous Waste Management Prevention of Natural Gas Release During Operation Explosion Risk Management Plan
June, 2002April 2003
1
013-1421
1.
INTRODUCTION This appendix summarizes the various mitigation measures BP proposes to implement during the construction and operation of the BP Cherry Point Cogeneration Project (Cogeneration Project) to minimize potentially adverse impacts on the physical and/or human environments.
The mitigation measures identified here are addressed in greater detail in Part II, Chapter 3 and the Part III technical appendices of this Application for Site Certification (ASC).
In particular, the evaluation of potential impacts and rationale for these mitigation measures are provided in Part II, Chapter 3 and are not repeated here.
This appendix has been organiz discipline described in Chapter during each of the construction summarized for each discipline ed to correspond to the section headings for each 3.
Proposed mitigation measures to be implemented and operation phases of the Cogeneration Project are in the following sections.
June, 2002April 2003
2
013-1421
2.
EARTH The Cogeneration Project site is well suited for the construction of a large industrial facility.
There would be no significant impacts related to the geology of the site.
Stormwater and Erosion Control During construction of the Cogeneration Project, Best Management Practices (BMPs) will be implemented for erosion control and prevention.
The BMPs will be described in a Stormwater Pollution Prevention Plan (SWPPP) and Temporary Erosion and Sedimentation Control Plan (TESC) to be submitted to EFSEC prior to construction.
BMPs may include, but will not necessarily be limited to, the installation of control structures such as silt fences/straw bales, sediment traps, and diversion ditches.
Construction activities will also be controlled to limit erosion.
Graded areas will be smoothed and compacted such that they are free from irregular surface changes, and sloped to drain.
Extensive grading of the site will not be required because the existing slopes are 1% or less.
Disturbed areas will be bermed with stabilized soil berms or sand bags to prevent erosion from impacting adjacent areas.
Stockpiled soils from excavations and/or imported fill will be stabilized and protected using BMPs in accordance with the detailed SWPPP and TESC.
Maintaining surficial moisture content with regular application of water will control dust control and wind erosion.
Excavated materials of acceptable quality will be reused as much as possible.
Excavated materials that will not be reused will be disposed of at permitted sites.
Excavated materials will not be placed on slopes steeper than 3 horizontal: 1 vertical unless compacted to the requirements of structural fills.
Upon completion of construction, disturbed areas will be revegetated by seeding or hydroseeding.
Seed mixes would be selected that are known to effectively stabilize erodible soils in the northwestern portion of the State of Washington.
Sprinkler systems may be employed to sustain vegetation on bermed areas with high exposure to the erosive forces of wind.
Soil stockpiles will be seeded or covered with tarps or emulsion and surrounded by silt fences and/or straw bales or sand bags, where necessary, to prevent excessive erosion by wind or rain.
Erosion control measures for construction, such as silt fencing, straw bales, tarps, etc., will be inspected and maintained periodically and after major storm events as needed to ensure their continued effectiveness.
Stormwater runoff from the construction site will be collected and routed to an oil-water separator system to trap any trace free oil and then to detention ponds to allow sediment to settle.
Detention ponds would be sized for likely events ranging from typical storms (6-month, 24-hour) up to a 100-year, 24-hour event.
A preliminary sizing of the detention ponds was completed using the Western Washington Hydrology Model version 2.
The actual pond size and configuration will be finalized during the detailed engineering phase.
June, 2002April 2003
3
013-1421
Seismic Hazards The Cogeneration Project will be designed and built in accordance with applicable federal, state and local building standards and seismic codes specifically for power generating facilities.
In particular, the Cogeneration Project will be designed to comply with Seismic Zone 3 requirements.
Site-specific geotechnical studies will be conducted as part of the detailed engineering design process.
If soft soils with low average shear wave velocity are confirmed beneath the site during these geotechnical studies, then site-specific dynamic response analysis will be completed.
This analysis will assess the potential amplification of earthquake ground motions through these soft soils.
The dynamic response analysis will be used during project design to incorporate appropriate engineering measures address potential seismic impacts.
June, 2002April 2003
4
013-1421
3.
AIR QUALITY 3.1 Construction Dust may be generated during construction of the Cogeneration Project, primarily during site grading and fill.
However, much of the site will use gravel, aggregate, or other clean granular materials to provide solid working and traveling surfaces, including access roads.
BP will use water to reduce dust on roads and active construction areas where soil is exposed.
In addition, and where applicable, exposed areas will be promptly revegetated to further restrict potential dust sources.
Exposed topsoil storage piles will be seeded or otherwise managed covered with polyethylene sheeting, or other approved materials, to reduce fugitive dust.
3.2 Operation and Maintenance The design and operation of the Cogeneration Project allows BP to incorporate significant mitigation for potential air impacts.
Key mitigation measures are described below.
Greater Efficiency and Less Emissions The Cogeneration Project will enable the Cherry Point Refinery to decommission older, less efficient boilers used for Refinery steam supply and make other emission reductions.
BP expects that aA net decrease of total criteria pollutant emissions would will result while generating 720 MW of power for the region.
The Cogeneration Project will be more fuel-efficient than comparable merchant power plants.
Less natural gas is used per kWh of electricity, and less CO2 is produced as a result.
Best Available Control Technology BP will mitigate the air emissions from the facility by burning only natural gas.
NOX emissions from the CGTs and duct burners will be controlled to the BACT level of 2.5 ppmvd average at 15% O2 through the use of selective catalytic reduction (SCR).
Although clearly more expensive than BACT requires, a catalytic oxidation system will be installed for the control of CO emissions to an annual level of 2.0 ppmvd at 15% O2.
This catalytic oxidation system will also provide the added benefit of controlling about 30 percent of the VOC emissions, including toxics.
Other pollutants will be controlled using good combustion technology and good operating practices and the combustion of lowsulfur natural gas as a fuel.
June, 2002April 2003 Greenhouse Gases
5
013-1421
In 1997, BP became concerned about the influence of man-made greenhouse gas (GHG) emissions on changes in the world's climate.
Rather than wait for proof that such a linkage existed, BP took action by targeting a 10% reduction in the company's worldwide GHG emissions from 1990 levels to be achieved by the year 2010.
In early 2002, BP met this target, receiving independent verification of a reduction in annual GHG emissions of 9.5 million metric tonnes.
Having met this target, BP set a new objective to hold net GHG emissions at the same level through the year 2012, while absorbing all new growth in company operations.
Because it is possible for the Cogeneration Project to change ownership, the GHG mitigation proposal must be able to accommodate such changes.
As long as the Cogeneration Project is owned by BP, the Project's GHG emissions would be a part of BP's new GHG objective and the Project's emissions would be offset by GHG emission reductions within BP's worldwide operations.
If, at some point in the future, BP did not own the Cogeneration Project, mitigation for Cogeneration Project GHG emissions would be provided as described below: 1.
The proposed CO2 emission standard will be 0.675 lbs CO2/kWh calculated on the basis of Cogeneration Project Fuel Charged to Power in Btu/kWh. a.
Fuel Charged to Power equals (Total Fuel Consumed by the Cogeneration Unit less Fuel Charged to Steam) divided by net kWh generated.
b. Fuel Charged to Steam is equal to the steam energy used by the Refinery divided by a conversion factor of 0.9009 (LHV/HHV).
2.
Emissions in excess of the emission standard would be mitigated either by (a) an annual payment to a qualifying organization such as the Climate Trust of $0.85/ton $0.57/ton CO2, or (b) GHG reductions obtained by the Cogeneration Project owner, or (c) a combination of the two.
3.
Mitigation would be satisfied annually for 30 years, which is the assumed economic life of the project.
Mitigation would be reported to EFSEC annually.
June, 2002April 2003
6
013-1421
4.
WATER RESOURCES The Cogeneration Project is located in the Terrell Creek watershed, which is included in Water Resources Inventory Area 1 (WRIA) as designated by the Washington State Department of Ecology.
The Cogeneration Project has been designed to maintain, as much as possible, the existing hydrologic regime and water quality of the Terrell Creek watershed.
The Cogeneration Project will not require any new water intakes or associated facilities to withdraw water from the Nooksack River, Terrell Creek, or other surface watercourses.
Similarly, construction and operation of the Cogeneration Project will not impact groundwater supplies, flows, or quality.
In addition, the Cogeneration Project has been designed to minimize reduce fresh water use by participating with the Whatcom PUD and Alcoa in developing an industrial water reuse project.
Alcoa uses about 4.0 mmgpd of water from the PUD for a once through cooling water system.
This water would be captured and routed into the existing water line feeding the Cogeneration Project and the Refinery.
Considering the Refinery, Alcoa, and the Cogeneration Project together, less fresh water will be used than the Refinery and Alcoa use today.
Also, boiler blowdown water for the Cogeneration Project will be routed to the cooling tower further reducing water demand.including the use of aircooled condensers and recycling of HRSG blowdown water from the Cogeneration Project for use at the Refinery.
4.1 Construction 4.1.1 Stormwater Control and Treatment During Construction Due largely to site topographic characteristics plus minimal grading required for the Cogeneration Project, no modifications to the surface or groundwater regimes, other than routing stormwater around the site will be necessary.
Runoff quantities for the site during construction would remain approximately the same as the present condition.
Stormwater quality will be preserved during construction by preventing, to the degree possible, erosion on site, and utilizing settling and detention basins prior to discharging the stormwater into the natural drainage system north of Grandview Road.
Stormwater will be discharged into the Terrell Creek hydrologic basin as it does today.
The project site design will preserve the Terrell Creek watershed resource and promote hydrology of the wetland mitigation areas.
Stormwater runoff from project site roads and other impervious areas would be collected in an oil-water separator to draw off any trace oil and then route the stormwater to a detention pond to allow sediment to settle out.
Once clarified, the water would be allowed to flow to wetland mitigation areas north of Grandview Road.
Stormwater runoff from around the site would be continue to be routed to existing ditch along the Blaine road and then discharged to Terrell Creek.
these mitigation areas as well.
A SWPPP for construction will be prepared for the plant site, and will include stormwater management procedures.
The SWPPP will include a TESC Plan for the Project site.
The SWPPP and TESC Plan will specify Best Management Practices (BMPs) for construction activities based upon Ecology's Stormwater Management Manual for
June, 2002April 2003
7
013-1421
Western Washington.
The grading plan for the site will also specify the BMPs to control erosion.
All erosion control BMPs will be in place and functioning prior to the start of construction.
The Stormwater design for the NPDES Permit application for construction activities provided in Appendix F: Technical Report on Water (Attachment A, "Surface Water Management System Design Basis" and Memorandum, "Modifications to Surface Water Design").
Diversion ditches will prevent surface water runoff from areas outs the Cogeneration Project site from entering the site.
Stormwater runoff from within Cogeneration Project site will be contained, collected, and routed to the stormwater treatment and detention system.
Silt fences and temporary swales would lead the majority of the runoff to the treatment and detention system.
Perimeter silt fences around the disturbed construction zone will be installed to remove sediment from surface runoff before it reaches the site boundaries.
Additional localized silt fencing be used as required during construction to minimize erosion and transport of soil.
is ide the
will
Temporary swales would be constructed to accommodate areas being excavated or filled.
Once the preliminary cut-and-fill work is complete, the swales will likely remain in place until final grading.
Wherever possible, temporary swales will be incorporated into the permanent stormwater collection system.
The perimeter silt fence around disturbed areas will not be removed until the site has been stabilized.
In general, the stormwater treatment and detention system will consist of oil-water separation system equipped with a shutoff value in case of an accidental release for containment.
Emergency cleanup equipment and supplies will be available on-site for rapid response.
Stormwater will be discharged from the oil-water separation system into a final treatment and detention pond properly sized in accordance with Whatcom County and Ecology the Western Washington Hydrology Model version 2,requirements, and then eventually discharged to wetlands or existing drainage systems from the detention ponds.
The receiving wetlands will be in the same hydrologic basin from which the stormwater originated.
Runoff quantities from the water supply and natural gas connections during construction will be approximately the same as the natural (existing) conditions.
Runoff quality from these areas will be controlled through the use of erosion control BMPs such as silt fences, hay bales, diversion ditches, and plastic covering and seeding or revegetating to protect soils from erosion and ensure runoff from these areas is within water quality limits.
4.1.2 Construction Wastewater Discharges During construction, hydrostatic test water will be discharged to the Refinery wastewater treatment system.
The quality of the water will be tested and will be within acceptable limits for discharge to the treatment system.
After treatment, the hydrostatic test water will be discharged to the Strait of Georgia through Refinery Outfall 001 under the Refinery's NPDES permit.
As explained in Part II, section 3.3, discharges will not adversely affect the environment.
Additional mitigation is, therefore, not required.
4.2 Operation and Maintenance The Cogeneration Project will not discharge wastewater directly into any watercourses (including creeks, lakes, wetlands, ditches, or the marine environment), or storm drains, nor will it require any new outfalls.
During operation of the Cogeneration Project, wastewater will be generated from:
June, 2002April 2003 · · · Stormwater;
8
013-1421
Process water associated with blowdown from the steam circuit and from the water purification process; and Sanitary wastewater.
Mitigation measures to be implemented with respect to each of these waste streams are summarized below.
4.2.1 Stormwater Control and Treatment During Operation During operation, the Cogeneration Project will utilize most of the same stormwater system designed for project construction.
Grassy swales around the perimeter of the site will provide initial treatment of stormwater prior to its release into a detention basin and then into a wetland mitigation area on the north side of Grandview Road.
While acting to filter and cleanse the stormwater, the grassy swales would also provide a source of food and nutrients in the form of leaf litter and insect drift for downstream fisheries resources in the Terrell Creek watershed.
Stormwater quality from the site is anticipated to be equal to, or better quality than, that which is currently being discharged from the site.
A SWPPP will be developed for facility operations, which will include structural and operational BMPs, a Spill Prevention Control and Countermeasure (SPCC) Plan, a final stormwater management plan, and general operating procedures.
The SWPPP will be completed and implemented on site when plant operation commences.
The SPCC Plan for operation would identify structural, operational and treatment BMPs.
BMPs will include impervious containment, covers, spill control and cleanup equipment, good housekeeping, employee training, spill prevention procedures, preventative maintenance and inspections, oil-water separation systems, and detention ponds.
The Stormwater design for operation of the Cogeneration Project is provided in Appendix F: Technical Report on Water (Attachment A, "Surface Water Management System Design Basis" and Memorandum, "Modifications to Surface Water Design").
Generally, the Project site will be divided into three primary drainage areas for the purposes of stormwater runoff control and treatment.
First, the switchyard area on the eastern portion of the site will be surfaced with crushed rock to allow some percolation into the underlying soils.
The area will be graded at about a 1 percent slope to allow sheet flow to discharge towards a collection system consisting of swales, catch basins, manholes and underground pipe.
Second, the power block and selected , air-cooled condensers and most of the remaining plant areas will be asphalt-paved or covered with buildings and enclosures.
The surfaces in this area will be sloped from a high point located near the center of the main pipe rack towards low points located along the edge of the plant roads.
Runoff will be sheet flow across the site towards a collection system similar to that described above.
All surface runoff will be captured by the surface drainage system then be directed through an underground piping system to an oil-water separator and stormwater detention pond as per the requirements of the SWPPP.
Stormwater will be discharged to the existing ditch
June, 2002April 2003
9
013-1421
along Blaine Road wetlands from the detention pond.
The receiving wetlands will be in the same hydrologic basin (Terrell Creek) from which the stormwater originated.
Third, stormwater accumulating within the secondary containment structures from outside tanks or curbed areas would be collected and routed to the Refinery's wastewater treatment system.
This stormwater is expected to be a small volume and will be separated from other stormwater surface runoff.
4.2.2 Operation Wastewater and Process Water Discharges Mitigation of the industrial wastewater discharge from the Cogeneration Project would involve treatment in the Refinery's wastewater treatment system prior to discharge to the Strait of Georgia.
Wastewater discharges into the BP wastewater treatment system from the Cogeneration Project would be approximately 50 190 gpm on average, assuming 15 cycles of concentration in the cooling tower.
The wastewaters from the Cogeneration Project will originate as three streams: · Treatment of raw water to produce high quality boiler feedwater (BFW) and Refinery return condensate treatment; Demineralization treatment plant regeneration and filter backwash water, Turbine air compressor wash water, and Collection of water and/or other minor drainage from various types of equipment; and .
Cooling tower blowdown.
· · ·
Boiler blowdown will be recycled for use in the RefineryCogeneration Plant.
The remaining process wastewater produced by the Cogeneration Project would be sent to the Refinery's wastewater treatment system.
This water would increase the treated wastewater flow by 82% on average, which is well within the fluctuations of the Refinery wastewater flow rate.
Properties of the combined treated wastewater stream regulated by the existing NPDES permit would change 1% or less; in fact some properties are improved.
No changes in the NPDES permit's effluent limitations will be necessary, although tThe Refinery will have to modify its permit to recognize the additional waste stream.
After treatment in the Refinery wastewater treatment system, wastewater from the Cogeneration Project would be discharged along with the Refinery wastewater to the Strait of Georgia.
Wastewater from equipment sumps, maintenance cleaning, and demineralization of raw feed water would also be routed to the Refinery wastewater treatment system and discharged through the NPDES-permitted outfall (number 001).
4.2.3 Water Consumption During Operation The Cogeneration Project would minimize fresh water consumption by using an Air Cooled Condenser (ACC)recycled once-through cooling water from Alcoa.
instead of a fresh water evaporative cooling system, and recycling and reusing water with the Refinery.
Operation of the Cogeneration Project and water recycle project will only result in a 484 to 55640 gpm (average) increasedecrease in fresh water consumption
June, 2002April 2003
10
013-1421
over compared to that currently used by the Refinery and Alcoa together.
The Whatcom County PUD would supply the additional industrial water under an existing agreement with BP and has available certified diversion rights for this water.
4.2.4 Groundwater Groundwater recharge to the Deming Sand Aquifer will not be affected by the Cogeneration Project.
The Deming Sand aquifer is recharged from distant hills and from leakage through the overlying Bellingham Drift aquitard.
The leakage through the Bellingham Drift occurs over the entire aquifer aerial extent.
Stormwater collected on the Cogeneration Project site will be routed to an unlined surface detention pond and allowed to infiltrate or discharge to wetlands within the same hydrologic basin.
The net effect would be returning the collected stormwater to the same hydrologic system for recharge.
Although stormwater that accumulates within storage tank containment structures will be treated through the Refinery system and discharged to the Strait of Georgia, this stormwater represents less than 5 percent of the entire stormwater to the proposed Cogeneration Project (~33 acres).
This diverted stormwater represents approximately only 0.02 percent of total stormwater to the sub-basin, which is about 10,000 acres (17 square miles).
Because no impacts to groundwater quality or quantity are anticipated, no further mitigation measures are warranted.
June, 2002April 2003
11
013-1421
5.
WETLANDS AND VEGETATION The Cogeneration Project will disturb approximately 33 35 acres of low-value wetlands that have formed since farming stopped on the Project site in the 1960s.
The Cogeneration Project will mitigate this loss of wetlands by creating and enhancing wetlands directly north of the Project site as described below.
The mitigation plan will be designed to restore historic hydrology, control reed canary grass and improve habitat.produce a net increase in wetland functions and habitat value.
BP is proposing a combination of wetland restoration, rehabilitation creation and enhancement on BP-owned lands north of Grandview Road.
These lands currently consist of both upland habitats and low-value wetlands.
The wetland mitigation plan will be is designed to restore historic drainage patterns, and to improve the quality, productivity and diversity of wetlands within the vicinity of the Cogeneration Project.
The wetland mitigation measures would be initiated prior concurrently with to construction of the Cogeneration Project, or at a time mutually agreed by BP, EFSEC and the Corps of Engineers to minimize damage of the existing wetland.
The mitigation area will be and maintained in perpetuity throughout the operation and maintenance phases of the Project.
They will be designed, monitored, maintained, and managed to create a more diverse, higher quality wetland system that will benefit the regional wetland environment.
5.1 Construction · · Restoration of wetlands and wetland buffers located in the northern portion of the construction site.
Creation of newRehabilitation and enhancement of existing wetlands on the north side of Grandview Road.
Historic drainage patterns will be restored, and tThese wetlands would will be hydraulically connected to Terrell Creek, providing and provide a source of food and nutrients to downstream fisheries resources.
They These wetlands will would also serve as a wildlife and waterfowl sanctuary for various species of mammals, birds, reptiles, and amphibians.
Enhancement of existing wetlands to increase the total area and productivity of higher functional value wetlands.
Enhancement may include the planting of coniferous trees to enhance the visual screening of the plant from Grandview Road.
Native vegetation, where possible, would be preserved to reduce erosion and limit disturbance to existing habitat.
The following activities and BMPs would occur to protect the native vegetation within the Cogeneration Project area:
·
· ·
June, 2002April 2003
12
013-1421
- Native seed mixes, including native grasses, would be applied to areas that are not proposed to beinadvertently disturbed.
This will aid in the control of sediment runoff and erosion; - Native vegetation would be used to replace vegetation that is temporarily disturbed due to construction activities; - Silt fencing and weed-free straw bales would be used to control runoff, where appropriate; - BP would prepare and implement a landscaping plan that includes long-term weed control measures; - Before and after grading operations which disturb existing grasses, equipment shovels or blades would be inspected and cleaned as required to minimize the release and proliferation of noxious weed species.
5.2 Operation and Maintenance The wetlands to be created and restored, rehabilitated and enhanced during construction of the Cogeneration Project would be monitored by BP for a 10-year period following their development to evaluate and manage their success, and maintained as a wildlife and waterfowl sanctuary.
No additional loss or impacts to the existing or the created wetlands will occur during the operation and maintenance phases of the Cogeneration Project, therefore, no additional mitigation measures beyond those proposed for the construction of the project, are required.
June, 2002April 2003
13
013-1421
6.
AGRICULTURAL CROPS AND LIVESTOCK The Cogeneration Project will not significantly affect any agricultural lands.
Construction of the Project will result in the loss of a relatively small area (about 1.5 acres) currently used to grow hybrid poplar trees.
Due to the low price of pulpwood, BP does not have any specific plans to harvest these trees or to continue poplar farming in the future.
Accordingly, no mitigation is proposed.
Minor impacts may also result from loss of approximately 30 acres of BP-owned grazing land for the creation and enhancement of wetlands north of Grandview Road.
The current grazing area will likely be moved eastward to avoid the proposed wetland mitigation area.
However, this area is zoned for industrial development and is located on land zoned for is located within the Cherry Point Major Industrial Urban Growth Area/ Port Industrial Zone.
No mitigation is necessary or appropriate.
June, 2002April 2003
14
013-1421
7.
WILDLIFE Based on the assessment of wildlife resources and habitats conducted as part of this ASC, wildlife use within the area of the Cogeneration Project is low, as evidenced by the lack of wildlife trees, snags, raptor nests, or heron colony rookeries.
No impact to threatened or listed species is expected from the project.
No significant impact to wildlife in the Cogeneration Project area is expected because the Project will expand an existing industrial facility rather than the convert a rural or pastoral site to industrial use.
Light, sound and activity around the Cogeneration Project will be similar to those of the Refinery, to which wildlife have adapted over the past 30 years.
To mitigate potential minor impacts to wildlife, BP proposes to: · Plant native trees and shrubs parallel to the south side of Grandview Road, north of the Cogeneration Project site and north of the laydown areas, to the west of Blaine Road.
These trees and shrubs will provide habitat for various birds, mammals, and reptiles.
Create and Restore, rehabilitate and enhance wetlands north of Grandview Road to mitigate impacts to wetlands.
The wetland mitigation plan will be designed to restore historic hydrology, control reed canarygrass, and enhance habitat, resulting in a net increase in wetland functions and habitat values.
The mitigation area will be monitored, managed, and maintained by BP to ensure that the quality, diversity, productivity, and area of wildlife habitat is not compromised.
·
June, 2002April 2003
15
013-1421
8.
FISHERIES RESOURCES Although there are no watercourses on the site of the proposed Cogeneration Project, the site is located within the Terrell Creek watershed.
Construction and operation of the Cogeneration Project will not involve any instream works, or result in the harmful alteration, disruption, or destruction of fish habitat.
In fact, with the implementation of the proposed wetland mitigation measures, which will involve both the restoration, rehabilitation creation and enhancement of wetlands, there will be an overall net increase in food/nutrient availability for downstream fisheries resources.
The primary objectives for the protection of downstream fisheries resources during construction and operation of the Cogeneration Project will be to maintain water quality and to sustain existing baseline flows.
These objectives will be achieved by implementing the following mitigation measures: · · Development of stormwater system to keep runoff within the watershed.
Oilwater separators and settling ponds will maintain water quality.
Development and implementation of SWPPPs for both construction activities and facility operation.
The SWPPPs will incorporate BMPs to reduce erosion and protect downstream fish resources.
June, 2002April 2003
16
013-1421
9.
ENERGY AND NATURAL RESOURCES Anticipated energy and natural resource used during the construction and operation of the Cogeneration Project plant include electricity, natural gas, water, and certain nonrenewable resources such as sand and gravel.
An existing natural gas supply line, water supply lines, wastewater treatment plant, and sanitary waste line will be used for the Project, and a previously permitted transmission line corridor would carry power to BPA's transmission line running along the eastern edge of BP's property.
9.1 Construction Small quantities of electricity, water, natural gas, and non-renewable resources will be consumed during construction of the Cogeneration Project.
No adverse impacts to energy and natural resources are anticipated.
BP and the EPC contractor will make efforts to reduce, recycle, and/or reuse resources, where possible, consistent with the implementation and use of industry standard BMPs.
These BMPs may include the use of energy-efficient lighting, lighting of only critical areas during non-working hours, encouraging car-pooling, efficient scheduling of construction crews, minimizing idling of construction equipment, recycling of used motor oils and hydraulic fluids, and implementation of signage to remind construction workers to conserve energy and water.
9.2 Operation and Maintenance The following mitigation measures have been identified to reduce the potential impacts on energy and natural resources during operation and maintenance of the Cogeneration Project: · Design and implementation of air-cooling system and recycling of water as a mitigation measure The use of recycled once-through cooling water to minimize fresh water consumption.
Boiler blowdown water will be routed to the cooling tower as make up water to reduce fresh water consumption.
Cogeneration will make more efficient use of the energy in natural gas by producing steam for the Refinery as well as electricity.
Existing boilers would be taken out of service and replaced with more efficient Cogeneration Project steam generation cycle, reducing the use of natural gas resources.
· ·
June, 2002April 2003
17
013-1421
10.
NOISE During Project construction, BP will mitigate noise by requiring its EPC Contractor to: · · Comply with all federal and local regulations on truck and construction equipment noise, and use appropriate mufflers on all engine-driven equipment; Limit loud construction activities to daytime hours (7 a.m. to 10 p.m.); and
Operational noise has been mitigated in the design and configuration of the Cogeneration Project.
In particular: · · The Cogeneration Project is sited 337 feet from the nearest public road (Grandview Road), to minimize detectable noise levels at the road and elsewhere.
The three gas turbine generators have been located on the southern portion of the Project site, furthest away from noise receptors to the north and northeast.
This configuration takes advantage of optimal sound reduction through physical barriers created by the plant itself.
Stack silencers will be incorporated in the project design.
The steam turbine generator will be placed within a building.
· The three gas turbine generators and the steam turbine generator will be housed within enclosures.
·
Based on the proposed plant configuration, noise modeling indicates that the Cogeneration Project will not result in any significant noise impacts.
June, 2002April 2003
18
013-1421
11.
LAND USE The entire project, including the Cogeneration Project and support facilities, the new transmission line, natural gas and water supply lines, and construction laydown areas would be on BP-owned property, immediately adjacent to the existing Refinery, which has operated at this site since 1971.
The Refinery and proposed Cogeneration Project are contained within the Cherry Point Major Industrial Urban Growth Area/ Port Industrial Zone, as defined in the Whatcom County Comprehensive Plan (1997), on land that is zoned Heavy Impact Industrial.
With the implementation of other mitigation measures discussed in this ASC, construction and operation of the Cogeneration Project will not result in any significant unavoidable adverse impacts to land use.
Therefore, additional mitigation measures related to land use activities throughout the construction and operation phases of the project are not necessary.
June, 2002April 2003
19
013-1421
12.
VISUAL, LIGHT AND GLARE There will be no significant adverse visual, light, and glare impacts during the construction and operation of the Cogeneration Project.
Prior to construction, BP will require its EPC Contractor to prepare a Site Management Plan to provide for the orderly storage and assembly of equipment, supplies, construction materials, soils, aggregates, temporary buildings, and structures.
The intent of the Site Management Plan will be to ensure that the EPC Contractor commits to minimizing overall visual impacts associated with the construction of the Cogeneration Project.
To mitigate visual, light and glare impacts of the operating facility, mitigation measures will include: · · · · The facility will be painted with earth-tone gray colors.
The HRSG stacks will be painted gray.
a light, warm-toneor similar color.
Plant trees between the Cogeneration Project site and Grandview Road.
Provide additional screening, as appropriate, by including tree/shrub plantings, and plant vines at recommended intervals around the perimeter of the galvanized chain link fence.
Project site lighting will be designed to minimize light spillover and glare.
·
June, 2002April 2003
20
013-1421
13.
POPULATION, HOUSING AND ECONOMICS The Cogeneration Project will provide significant employment opportunities in Whatcom County and result in substantial increases in local and State tax revenue.
There will be no adverse impacts on population, housing and economies within the study area or within State of Washington associated with the construction and operation of the Cogeneration Project.
Therefore, no mitigation measures are proposed.
June, 2002April 2003
21
013-1421
14.
PUBLIC SERVICES AND UTILITIES There will be no adverse impacts on public services and utilities associated with the construction and operation of the Cogeneration Project.
BP will be supported by the Refinery's fire, security and emergency medical staff sufficient to cover all but the most extreme, and improbable, emergencies.
The project will develop response protocols with the Jurisdiction Having Authority, Fire District #7, to ensure that additional support and resources are available from the district and other fire jurisdictions through the District Mutual Aid Agreements.
Moreover, the Cogeneration Project will result in a substantial net fiscal benefit to Whatcom County, paying significant amounts in taxes while not placing incremental demands on local government spending.
Accordingly, no mitigation measures are proposed.
June, 2002April 2003
22
013-1421
15.
CULTURAL RESOURCES BP has contracted with tThe Lummi Tribe to conducted an archaeological investigation on areas that would potentially be affected by construction of the Cogeneration Project.
These areas include the Cogeneration Plant site, laydown areas, access roads, and power transmission line tower locations., and wetland mitigation areas north of Grandview Road.
Based on the archaeological investigation conducted to date, no significant cultural resources have been identified.
Additional shovel probe investigations will be undertaken within the vicinity of the Cogeneration Project site, laydown areas, as well as areas proposed for A pedestrian survey is planned for the wetland mitigation areas where the ground will be disked to control reed canary grass.
once the final location and configuration of these areas are known.
If significant cultural resources are located during those investigations, recommendations will be provided for appropriate mitigative actions.
Only a small area within Laydown area 3 was identified as containing ephemeral lithic scatter.
This small area would be monitored during preparing the area to serve as an equipment laydown area, but no significant excavation is to be performed in this location.
The project site and equipment laydown areas have been thoroughly investigated for cultural resources and require no further monitoring is expected, except for the small area within laydown area 3.
BP will retain a qualified archaeologist during excavation activities to watch for artifacts or cultural resources on the Project sitewithin laydown area 3, where a small area is described as containing ephemeral lithic scatter.
Should such resources or artifacts be discovered during excavation, the Lummi Tribe would be promptly consulted.
In accordance with the National Historic Preservation Act of 1966, construction activities would be halted until the archaeological features could be secured and removed from potential impact.
No mitigation measures are required during routine operation and maintenance of the Cogeneration Project, as there will be no potential for impacts to cultural resources.
June, 2002April 2003
23
013-1421
16.
TRAFFIC AND TRANSPORTATION During construction, the following mitigation measures will be implemented: · · · · A traffic control plan will be developed and implemented.
A responsible person will be designated as the Transportation Coordinator to manage site-generated traffic and parking.
Shift hours will be staggered or adjusted as appropriate to minimize traffic impacts where feasible; carpooling would be encouraged.
Permits or approvals will be obtained as required to conduct oversize or overweight hauls.
BP will use its rail or barge facilities for delivery of heavy or oversized equipment as practical.
The traffic and transportation study recognized that there may be potential impacts to traffic during construction of the Cogeneration Project.
BP intends to meet with the Washington Department of Transportation to discuss appropriate mitigation measures.
These measures may include: · Relocating the proposed site access road connecting with SR548 so that it complies with WSDOT guidelines for minimum sight distances.
The road would be relocated so that it is between 660 feet and 750 feet east of Blaine Road.The access road location provides a sufficient Stopping Sight Distance for westbound traffic on Grandview Road based on measurements taken by the WSDOT (April 2003).
Adding an eastbound and westbound left turn lane on Grandview Road at the Blaine Road intersection.
Adding a traffic signal at the SR548 ­ Portal Way intersection.
· ·
Routine operation and maintenance of the Cogeneration Project is not expected to adversely affect traffic.
Therefore, no additional traffic mitigation measures are proposed.
June, 2002April 2003
24
013-1421
17.
HEALTH AND SAFETY Potential impacts related to risk of fire and explosion, spills, and hazardous or toxic materials management and handling will be effectively managed through BP's existing fire, medical emergency, and security infrastructure currently in place at the Refinery.
During construction of the Cogeneration Project, BP's existing health and safety resources may will be augmented by the EPC Contractor's first aid, fire response, and security personnel.
17.1 Construction Prior to construction, BP will require its EPC Contractor to prepare and submit a health and safety program to address the management, prevention, and control of possible fire or explosion during construction of the Cogeneration Project.
During mobilization at the initiation of the construction project, the EPC Contractor will coordinate with the Refinery Fire Marshal and the Whatcom County Fire Department regarding activities that will be occurring at the construction site.
17.1.1 Fire Prevention and Response Plan During construction, fire prevention and detection will be the responsibility of the various contractors and individuals working at the site.
Safe working practices will be exercised.
These will include, but will not be limited to: · · · Maintaining appropriate fire extinguishers within easy access of any work being done; Prohibiting smoking as per the project Health, Safety and Environmental plan; and, Using a permit system for all hot work (welding, cutting, and grinding) outside of designated "free burn" areas.
17.1.2 Medical Emergency Plan Construction staff will address minor injuries and provide initial first aid on more serious situations.
On-site treatment will may be provided in medical situations that require first aid treatment only or stabilization until professional medical attention is obtained.
Any injury or illness that requires treatment beyond first aid will be deferred to a local medical facility.
17.1.3 Spill Prevention Plan The EPC Contractor will be responsible for implementing spill control measures and training of all construction personnel and subcontractors in spill avoidance.
Training will also address appropriate spill response, containment, clean up, and reporting procedures consistent with applicable regulations and BP policy.
With respect to petroleum products located on site during and after construction:
June, 2002April 2003 ·
25
013-1421
Lubrication oil stored on site will be contained in barrels.
The barrels will be stored in a secondary containment area to contain any spillage, or in temporary warehouses; Construction refueling will be closely supervised to avoid leaks or releases.
If fuel tanks are used during construction, the fuel tank(s) will be located within a secondary containment with an oil proof liner sized to contain the single largest tank volume plus an adequate freeboard allowance for rainwater.
When filling transformers with oil, the oil will be pumped from a truck within a temporary secondary containment area to contain any spillage.
·
·
17.1.4 Hazardous Construction Materials Management A specific area on the site will be designated for servicing and fueling the construction equipment.
This will ensure localization of spills and implementation of appropriate control measures.
The EPC Contractor's responsibility will include training of all construction personnel and subcontractors in spill avoidance, containment, cleanup, and reporting procedures consistent with BP policy and regulatory requirements.
Paint, coatings, solvents, adhesive materials, and other hazardous materials will be stored in a locked utility shed or secured in a fenced area.
Storage will conform to OSHA and other applicable state guidelines.
Construction personnel will be trained in handling hazardous materials and will be alerted to the dangers associated with these materials.
An on-site Safety Engineer will be designated to implement health and safety guidelines and to contact emergency response personnel and the local hospital, if necessary.
Material Safety Data Sheets for each on site chemical will be kept on site and construction employees will be made aware of their location and content.
17.1.5 Hazardous Waste Management A licensed Solid Waste Management Contractor will be responsible for treating or disposing of wastes generated during construction in compliance with all federal, state, and local regulations.
To minimize the potential release of hazardous materials during construction, BMPs will be employed, including good housekeeping measures, inspections, containment facilities, and spill prevention practices.
EPC construction personnel will be instructed regarding the management requirements, and BP's on site Project Manager will be responsible for their implementation.
17.1.6 Explosion Risk Management Plan The risks of fire or explosion during construction of the pipeline connections are minimal.
Proper work and pipeline isolation procedures will safeguard this work.
Examples of such procedures include locating and marking the existing gas pipeline to avoid construction damage, and limiting construction equipment or heavy haul crossings to suitable designated locations.
On-site inspectors from BP will be present during construction to verify that the EPC Contractor is following all engineering specifications and meeting all regulatory requirements.
June, 2002April 2003
26
013-1421
17.2 Operation and Maintenance During operation and maintenance of the Cogeneration Project, the Refinery's existing plans, procedures, and protocols for managing worker and public health and safety will be developed.
supplemented to include the Cogeneration Project.
These may include: the existing: · · · Safety and Health Manual; Emergency Preparedness Response Plan; and Fire Emergency Response Operations (FERO) Plan.
17.2.1 Fire Prevention and Response Plan Prevention is the first consideration in any fire protection program.
The following elements of fire prevention will be implemented during plant operations: · · · · · · · · · · · · Protective materials used for equipment and pipelines; Ability to gauge the contents of materials contained in storage vessels; Spill kits; Signs; Preventive maintenance program; Visual inspections; Good housekeeping; Procedures for handling flammable liquids; Mandatory HAZCOM written procedures and training program; Designated flammable storage areas; Employee training; and Regular safety and environmental audits.
In addition, a response protocol will be developed with Fire District #7 to ensure that additional support and resources are available from the district and other fire jurisdictions through the District Mutual Aid Agreements.
17.2.2 Spill Prevention Plan To minimize the potential for hazardous material and chemical spills during operation of the Cogeneration Project, the following measures will be implemented: The following tanks hold diesel fuel oil for the emergency generator and fire water pump or lube oil for major rotating equipment.
These tanks will be provided with secondary containment for spill control with adequate freeboard for rainwater.
June, 2002April 2003
27
013-1421
The fire pump diesel fuel storage tank will be a horizontal tank with a capacity of approximately 460 gallons and dimensions of 4 feet diameter x 5 feet long.
The diesel generator diesel fuel storage tank will be a vertical tank with a capacity of approximately 1,500 gallons and with dimensions of 6 feet diameter x 8 feet high.
The steam turbine lube oil storage tank will be a rectangular tank with a capacity of approximately 7,200 gallons and with dimensions of 24 feet long x 12 feet wide x 7 feet high.
Depending on the supplier of the steam turbine, the electro-hydraulic control oil system may be integrated with the lube oil system or it may be a standalone system.
One combustion turbine lube oil storage tank will be provided for each of the three CGTs.
Each tank will have a capacity of approximately 6200 gallons and with approximate dimensions of 28 feet long x 10 feet wide x 4 feet high.
These lube oil tanks are located inside the accessory module that is furnished as part of the CGT vendor scope of supply.
Transformers will be installed into secondary containment areas that will hold the transformer's volume plus an adequate freeboard to accommodate rainwater.
Transformer oil will be pumped from a truck within a temporary secondary containment area.
Spills that occur during filling of the transformer will be properly cleaned up and reported.
A secondary containment area will be constructed around the ammonia tank that will contain 150% of the working volume.
The additional containment is provided to accommodate water from a deluge spray system and rainwater.
The caustic tanks will be surrounded by a secondary containment area and sized with sufficient freeboard for rainwater.
The acid tanks will be located within a secondary containment area lined with an acidproof coating and sized with sufficient freeboard for rainwater.
Oxygen scavenger, neutralizing amine, corrosion inhibitors, phosphate and cooling tower chemical storage tanks will be contained in a curbed area sufficiently sized to contain the volume of the single largest storage tank.
June, 2002April 2003
28
013-1421
The BP Cogeneration Facility will be provided with an oil-water sewer (OWS) system that collects selected equipment drains and rainfall and washdown runoff from within curbed areas that could carry trace oil.
Collected drainage and runoff will be pumped to the existing Refinery treatment system.
Table 9.2-1 lists the underground Oily Water and CGT Wash Water sumps that are included in this system.
Above ground containers for steam-cycle chemicals including oxygen scavenger, neutralizing amine, and phosphate storage tanks, will be located indoors and will be contained in a curbed area sized sufficiently to contain the single largest storage tank volume; The above ground acid tank will be located within a secondary containment area lined with an acid-proof coating and sized with sufficient freeboard to accommodate rainwater; The above ground caustic tank will be located within a secondary containment area and sized with sufficient freeboard to accommodate rainwater; The above ground step-up transformer mineral oil storage tanks will be located within secondary containment areas that will hold the transformer volume plus an adequate freeboard to accommodate rainwater; and, An oily water sewer (OWS) system will collect selected equipment drains and potentially oily rainfall and washdown runoff from within the curbed areas.
Collected drainage and runoff will be pumped to the existing Refinery treatment system.
17.2.3 Hazardous Waste Management Very little waste will be produced during the operation and maintenance of the Cogeneration Project.
The used lubrication and transformer oils, small quantities of used paints, thinners, and solvents used during operation will be disposed of in accordance with federal, state, and local regulations.
Safeguards will include bermed secondary containment, tank overfill protection, routine maintenance, safe handling practices, supervision of all loading/unloading by plant personnel and the truck driver, and appropriate training of operation and maintenance staff.
17.2.4 Prevention of Natural Gas Release During Operation BP will comply with all federal and state regulatory requirements regarding pipeline safety.
In addition, all underground gas piping and pipeline connections to the Cogeneration Project will be protected by cathodic protection systems and corrosionresistant coatings.
17.2.5 Explosion Risk Management Plan Several mitigation measures will ensure prompt detection of a natural gas release at the Project site.
First, the natural gas will be odorized with Mercaptan to it to give it a strong, distinctive odor that will make any gas leak readily apparent.
Second, a breach in the natural gas system would result in a drop in the pressure of the gas line, which would be promptly detected in the control room, so that the system would be shut down until the situation is resolved.
Automatic shutoff valves in the existing pipeline would close to limit the amount of gas that could leak from the system.
June, 2002April 2003
29
013-1421
If a local, small gas leak were suspected, a combustible gas indicator (CGI) would be used to measure the percentage of oxygen and concentrations of natural gas in the ambient air.
In the event of a leak, the system will be isolated by closing the shutoff valve(s).
The leaking section will be repaired or replaced by a licensed contractor.
Upon completion of the repair work, the system will be pressure tested to ensure that the leak has been appropriately addressed.
Chances of a gas line failure are minimized by reducing the opportunities for failure.
Pipeline appurtenances are limited areas within the fenced in areas of the plant site.
The pipeline is buried in all other uncontrolled locations.
Gas line appurtenances will be protected on the Cogeneration Site by being contained within buildings or within immediate fenced in areas.
Bollards will be erected as required to ensure that on site vehicles are not able to reach critical areas.
Access to critical areas will be limited to authorized personnel.
