11.00 A.
RETAIL AND WHOLESALE PET ANIMAL DEALERSHIP REGULATIONS FACILITY STANDARDS 1.
Definition of Pet Animal Dealership.
"Pet animal dealership" as used herein means any place or premise used in whole or in part, whether on a permanent or temporary basis, for the sole or exclusive purpose of either wholesale commerce or retail sale, trading, bartering, or otherwise transferring pet animals to the public.
a.
Licensure for retail and wholesale animal dealerships.
There shall be subclassification for pet animal dealerships: pet one
Retail Aquarium Only Pet Animal Dealerships: Facilities that trade, sell, barter, or otherwise transfer only fish or other aquatic pet animals, not including reptiles and amphibians, to the public.
The determination of licensing of facilities within this subclassification shall be at the sole discretion of the Commissioner.
b. Bird hobby breeders, canine hobby breeders, feline hobby breeders, and small animal hobby breeders who do not transfer pet animals in excess of the limits established in PACFA § 3580-102 or ferret hobby breeders who do not transfer over 24 ferrets per year shall not be considered a pet animal dealership.
c.
In addition to the traditional pet shop or wholesaler, pet animal dealerships shall include the keeping for transfer or the transfer of pet animals at temporary facilities ("temporary pet animal dealerships") such as flea markets, mobile facilities, department stores, merchandise outlets, discount outlets, pet animal shows conducting a sale, and other types of retail outlets.
2.
License Requirements:
15
a.
No person shall operate a pet animal dealership unless the person holds a valid license issued by the Commissioner pursuant to PACFA and Sections 2.00 and 3.00 of these rules and regulations.
The twelve month license period shall commence the first working day of March and must be renewed on or before the first working day of March the following calendar year. b.
Any person who imports or causes to be imported any pet animal for the purpose of sale, resale, trade, or barter shall be licensed pursuant to PACFA. c.
A pet animal facility operating a mobile adoption site must be either licensed as a shelter or rescue, or as a pet animal dealership.
d.
On the application for licensure, temporary pet animal dealerships shall identify themselves as such and shall provide a street address for each place or premise at which they keep or transfer pet animals.
3.
Structural Plan Evaluation: a.
Plan Submission.
Detailed plans and specifications shall be submitted to the Department whenever it is proposed to erect or extensively remodel any pet animal dealership, specifically any remodeling that requires a building permit and affects a minimum of 25% of the square footage of the existing facility.
Plans pertaining to upgrades which are only electrical or plumbing in nature will not require a plan submission.
Each pet animal dealer or person intending to become a pet animal dealer shall be responsible for submitting all plans and specifications.
Plans shall be approved or disapproved by the Department, typically within 10 working days of submission.
Approval of plans and specifications is necessary before construction can begin and final approval of the constructed facility is necessary before operation can start.
16
b. Plan Specification Content Requirements.
Final plans and specifications shall comply with these rules and regulations and shall include schedules describing the ventilation system, plumbing fixtures and floor, wall, and ceiling finishes.
Plans need not be professionally drawn, providing the plans are legible, drawn or sketched to consistent scale, with dimensions indicated, accurately depicting the intended construction or remodeling.
c. Temporary pet animal dealerships are exempt from the requirements to submit plans to the Department.
They shall, however, comply with the standards set forth in these rules and regulations.
Temporary pet animal dealerships shall notify the Commissioner in writing 10 working days in advance of all scheduled dates of sales and the corresponding sales location(s).
4.
Physical Facility Standards: a.
Structural Standards.
dealership shall: Each pet animal
(1) Be constructed of building materials that will ensure the establishment of a sound physical structure.
(2) Be maintained in good repair.
(3) Protect animals kept there from injury, restrict entry of other animals from outside and ensure containment of animals within the pet animal dealership.
b. Interior Building Surfaces.
Interior building surfaces, including walls, ceilings, and floors, shall be constructed so as to be water resistant and capable of being readily cleaned and maintained.
Any request for exception to this provision by a temporary pet animal dealership shall be made by petition to the Commissioner.
c. Electric Power.
Electric power shall be provided.
Any request for exception to this provision by a temporary pet animal dealership shall be made by petition to the Commissioner.
17
d. Water.
Potable water for drinking purposes shall be provided, with a back flow prevention device installed on any threaded faucets where hoses may be attached for cleaning the facility or on the main water line serving the facility.
Any request for exception to this provision by a temporary pet animal dealership shall be made by petition to the Commissioner.
e. Washrooms and Sinks.
Readily accessible washrooms or sinks shall be provided, convenient to all work areas, to ensure maintenance of personal hygiene by animal caretakers.
A sink in good repair shall be provided for washing and sanitizing equipment and utensils.
Single service soap and towel dispensers must be available at all hand washing sinks.
Any request for exception to this provision by a temporary pet animal dealership or a fish store shall be made by petition to the Commissioner.
f. Heating and Cooling.
Housing for pet animals shall be sufficiently heated or cooled when necessary to protect animals from cold or heat to provide for their health.
The ambient temperature shall be consistent with the requirements of the specific pet animals.
Heating shall be deemed necessary when the inside ambient temperature of the facility falls below 50 degrees Fahrenheit for a period of 4 consecutive hours and cooling shall be deemed necessary when the temperature of the facility rises above 85 degrees Fahrenheit.
g. Ventilation.
All facilities housing pet animals shall be adequately ventilated with fresh or filtered air to minimize drafts, odors and moisture condensation and to provide for the health and comfort of the animals at all times.
Ventilation shall be provided by either natural or mechanical means.
The necessary equipment or comparable means shall be provided to exhaust the air from the animal area to outside of the building.
18
h. Lighting.
Uniformly distributed natural and/or artificial lighting shall be provided to permit routine inspection and to facilitate routine cleaning and the proper care and maintenance of the pet animals.
Lighting shall be so arranged as to protect each animal from excessive illumination.
i. Sewage Disposal.
Sewage and waste shall be disposed of by connection of drains to a sanitary sewer or a state, county or locally approved sewage disposal system.
Drainage systems shall be provided with back flow prevention devices on submersible inlets and hair traps, if required by law, on all plumbing lines in animal areas where hoses may be attached for cleaning of the facility.
j. In-house Grooming Facilities.
When a grooming service is offered by the pet animal dealership, the grooming work area shall be physically separated from primary animal enclosures, animal food storage areas, and isolation areas for housing sick animals.
Any request for exception to this provision by a temporary pet animal dealership shall be made by petition to the Commissioner.
k. Isolation Area.
All pet animal dealerships must have an isolation area where animals that are infected with a contagious disease or are suspected of being infected will be segregated from the rest of the pet animal population.
Unless a specific exemption is obtained from the Commissioner, in any pet animal dealership erected or extensively remodeled, specifically any remodeling that requires a building permit and affects a minimum of 25% of the square footage of the existing facility after March 1, 1995, the isolation area shall be a separate room with separate ventilation.
B. PET ANIMAL PRIMARY ENCLOSURE STANDARDS 1.
Definition: Primary enclosures are those animal enclosures in which the animal normally rests or sleeps (also referred to as temporary housing).
19
2.
Structural Requirements: a.
General.
Primary enclosures shall be structurally sound and maintained in good repair to protect the animals from injury, to contain them, and to keep predators out.
Primary enclosures shall be constructed such that they can be routinely maintained to allow animals to stay dry and clean (as appropriate for the species) and to provide convenient access to clean food and water.
b. Cage/Kennel Floors.
The floor of the primary enclosure shall be constructed to prevent injury to the animals' feet and legs.
Enclosures for pet animals may have wire flooring provided that the wire is of adequate gauge to prevent sagging under the animals' weight and the mesh is small enough to prevent their feet from passing through.
c. Cleaning Requirements.
All the surfaces of the primary enclosure must be constructed of a material that is water resistant and can be cleaned and sanitized. d. Space Requirements.
All primary enclosures shall allow each pet animal to turn around, exercise normal postural movements, and to experience necessary socialization with cage mates.
The following minimum space requirements shall be met: (1) CATS: Size Small Medium Large Weight (lbs.) 2 2-5 6-10
Number of Animals Area (sq. ft.) Small Medium Large 2 3 4 3 6 10 20
2 3 4
1 2 3
(a) If the floor of the primary enclosure is constructed of wire, a solid resting surface or surfaces that, in the aggregate, are large enough to hold all the occupants at the same time must be provided.
(b) A solid resting surface or surfaces must be provided in any primary enclosures for cats.
The resting surface must be elevated high enough that a cat can fit underneath.
For primary enclosures with a solid floor, a hooded litter box is satisfactory as a resting surface.
(c) If a litterbox is utilized which is not hooded, the space taken by the litterbox shall not be included in the calculation of total area.
(For example, a requirement of 2 sq. ft. would be 2 sq. ft. plus the space taken by the litterbox.) (d) The height of the primary enclosure shall be such that the cat can stand up and exercise normal postural movements.
(e) Minimum space requirements for cats weighing over 10 pounds will be determined by the Commissioner on an individual basis.
(2) DOGS Weight (lbs.) 1-10 11-20 21-30
Size Small Medium Large
Number of Animals Area (sq. ft.) Small Medium Large 4 5 21
2 2
1 2
None 1
(a) The height of the primary enclosure shall be such that the dog can stand up and exercise normal postural movements.
(b) Enclosures may have grated flooring provided that the grated material is of adequate gauge to prevent sagging under the weight of the animals.
In the event that a dog's feet are small enough to pass through the grated flooring or the dog displays discomfort in standing on the grated surface, then each primary enclosure shall contain a solid resting surface.
Solid resting surfaces shall be water resistant, be able to be easily cleaned and sanitized, and shall be one sq. ft. minimum for small and medium dogs, and two sq. ft. minimum for large dogs.
(c) Minimum space requirements for dogs weighing over 30 pounds will be determined by the Commissioner on an individual basis.
(d) Doubling of the minimum space requirements permits doubling of the number of small, medium and large dogs, respectively, that can be housed therein.
(e) The licensee shall have a plan file providing for the exercise puppies that are over 16 weeks of or over 12 inches in height at shoulders.
(3) RABBITS Size Small Medium Large Weight (lbs.) 2 2-4 5-12 on of age the
22
Number of Animals Area (sq. ft.) Small Medium Large 2.5 4 6 4 8 12 2 4 6 0 1 2
(a) The minimum height of the primary enclosure shall be 14 inches.
(b) The floor of the rabbit's primary enclosure shall be ½ inch x 1 inch galvanized, welded steel grid.
If a rabbit develops pododermatitis (foot problems) a partial solid floor resting surface shall be provided.
(c) Not later than April 1, 1997, no aquariums shall be used in existing facilities; effective immediately in newly constructed or remodeled facilities no aquariums shall be used.
In the event of new technology which afford ventilation of the aquarium, the licensee may petition the Commissioner for an exemption to this provision.
(d) Cedar shavings shall not be used as a litter material.
(4) GUINEA PIGS Weight (gms.) 350 351-700 701 Number of Animals Small Medium Large 4 6 7 10 3 4 5 7 2 3 4 6
Size Small Medium Large
Area (sq. in.)* 288* 360* 432* 624*
23
(a) The minimum height of the primary enclosure shall be 12 inches for retail dealerships and 7 inches for wholesale dealerships.
(b) Guinea pigs shall only be housed in primary enclosures with a solid floor.
Cedar shavings will not be used as a litter material.
(5) HAMSTERS AND GERBILS Weight (gms.) 
Size Small Medium Large
Area (sq. in.)* 288* 360* 432* 624*
(a) The minimum height of the primary enclosure shall be 5½ inches for dwarf species.
For all other animals, the minimum height of the primary enclosure shall be 12 inches for retail dealerships and 6 inches for wholesale dealerships.
(b) Hamsters and gerbils shall only be housed in primary enclosures with a solid floor.
Cedar shavings will not be used as a litter material.
(6) RATS Weight (gms.) 
Size Small Medium Large
24
Area (sq. in.)* 200* 288* 360* 432* 624*
Number of Animals Small Medium Large 16 24 30 36 52 12 18 22 27 39 8 12 15 18 26
(a) The minimum height of the primary enclosure shall be 7 inches, however, the animals shall be able to reach food and water.
(b) Rats shall only be housed in primary enclosures with a solid floor.
Cedar shavings will not be used as a litter material.
(c) Minimum space requirements for rats over 500 grams will be determined by the Commissioner on an individual basis.
(7) MICE Weight (gms.) 15 16-25 
Size Small Medium Large
Area (sq. in.)* 200* 288* 360* 432* 624*
(a) The minimum height of the primary enclosure shall be 5½ inches.
(b) Mice shall only be housed in a primary enclosure with a solid floor.
Cedar shavings will not be used as a litter material.
25
* Minimum space requirements (area measured in sq. in.) figures for guinea pigs, hamsters and gerbils, rats, and mice are equivalent to standard aquarium sizes as follows: 10, 20 high, 20 long, 30, and 55 gallon.
(8) FERRETS (sq. in.)
Area 288 576 864 (sq. ft.) Area 2 4 6 #of Animals 3 6 9 Comments
Cage Dimensions (in.)
Cage Type Small Medium 2-story Length 24 24 24 Width 12 24 24 Height 14 14 16
3-story 55 gal.
24 48
24 13
34 20
1152 624
8 4.3
12 10
Single sleeping platform 2 sleeping platforms Screen top aquarium
(a) The minimum space and housing requirements for ferrets over 4 months of age will be determined by the Commissioner on an individual basis.
(b) A single sleeping platform is equivalent to 288 sq. in. of floor space.
A hammock may be utilized as a sleeping platform.
(c) Cedar shavings will not be used as a litter material.
(d) Ferret Cages.
Primary enclosures for ferrets when constructed using a steel mesh shall be of small enough mesh to prevent humans from putting their fingers into the cage and to prevent the ferret from being able to get its snout through the mesh.
Other suitable cage designs are subject to approval by the Department.
26
(9)
CHINCHILLAS (sq. in.)
Area 288 576 864 (sq. ft.) Area 2 4 6 #of Animals 2 3 4 Comments
Cage Dimensions (in.)
Cage Type Small Medium 2-story Length 24 24 24 Width 12 24 24 Height 14 14 16
3-story
24
24
34
1152
8
6
Single perching platform 2 perching platforms
(a) The minimum height of the primary enclosure shall be 12 inches.
(b) There must be sufficient space within the primary enclosure for a minimum of one sleeping house and a dust bath bowl.
(c) Cedar shavings will not be used as a litter material.
single perching platform is (d) A equivalent to 288 sq. in. of floor space.
(10) Minimum space requirements for exotic animals such as hedgehogs, spiny mice, deer mice, etc. will be determined by the Commissioner on an individual basis.
3.
Specialty Enclosures: a.
Display Cases.
Display cases may be utilized as primary enclosures during the workday; however, animals may not be kept in display cases overnight unless the display case also meets the requirements of and functions as a primary enclosure.
(1) Display cases must be constructed of a material that is water resistant and can be cleaned and sanitized.
(2) Display cases must be well constructed and kept in good repair.
27
(3) The area around the display case must be well ventilated to prevent odor buildup.
b. Bird Cages.
Primary enclosures for birds (cages) shall be maintained in good repair and constructed of metal or other water resistant material which can be cleaned and sanitized.
(1) Minimum Space Requirements (a) The cage must be large enough to provide full body extension without contact with the confines.
The cage must be wide enough in at least one direction to accommodate completely stretched wings.
(b) A single well-placed perch may be adequate for Psittacines ie., the bird can stand completely upright on the perch without having the head contact the ceiling of the cage and at the same time not having the tail contact the floor or grate.
For those species, such as Finches, Canaries, etc. that prefer flying or jumping to climbing, two perches, one at each end of the cage, must be provided.
Perches must be strategically placed to prevent droppings from contaminating other birds and the birds' food and water and to also prevent the bird's tail from coming into contact with the food and water.
(c) Minimum space requirements for multiple birds housed temporarily depends on the calculated Housing Density Factor and the overall length of the bird as measured from the tip of the tail to the top of the head.
The following calculation will be used to determine the number of birds that can be housed in a given cage:
28
L x W x H ÷ Density Factor = total length of birds permitted.
Total length of birds permitted ÷ length of bird = number of birds allowed in that size cage Housing Density Factor Table: Species Finch Parakeet Cockatiel Cockatiel-type Amazon Cockatoo Macaw Each bird's overall length (in.) 3 8 9-12 9-12 (heavier body) 13-24 25-35 34-45 Density Factor 60 50 60 75 325 800 1400
Cage measurements are based on the actual living space and do not include T-stands or perches attached to the outside of the cage or the space below the cage grate.
(d) For birds housed over 60 days, the Density Factor should be doubled for birds 12 inches in overall length or less.
For birds housed over 90 days, the Density Factor shall be doubled for birds 12 inches in overall length or less.
(e) All cage accessories (ladders, toys, perches, etc.) made of unsealed wood shall be cleaned daily and replaced as often as necessary to maintain sanitary conditions.
regulations pertaining (f) For breeding birds see Section 13.00. to
c. Outdoor Aviaries.
The size, shape, and design of the cages shall be appropriate for the species being housed and shall allow space, without overcrowding, for the normal exercise requirements of each bird.
Flight cages shall be constructed to prevent injury to birds.
A
29
covered portion of each cage shall be provided where birds can avoid direct sunlight or adverse weather conditions and commingling with noncaptive animals.
d. Freshwater Fish.
The primary enclosure for freshwater fish is an aquarium, fish tank, or pond.
The size of the aquarium is determined by the size, number and behavioral characteristics of the fish.
The number of fish kept in the aquarium can be increased substantially by frequent water changes and/or auxiliary filtration.
(1) Aquariums and ponds can be constucted of glass, plastic, acrylic, wood, or metal.
Ponds can be constructed of materials such as rubber, fiberglass, rock, concrete and similar materials.
(2) Aquariums and ponds shall be in good repair and maintain adequate water levels to sustain aquatic life.
(3) Aquarium lids, constructed from glass or plastic, can be used to keep dust out and prevent fish from escaping.
When aquarium lids are used they should not provide an airtight barrier.
(4) Substrate.
Quartz gravel or epoxycoated rock chips or pebbles should be used as the filter bed material to cover the bottom of the freshwater aquarium if an underground filter is utilized.
Filter-bed material will be a minimum of 1 inch thick across the entire bottom of the aquarium.
(5) Filtration Systems.
Filtration systems will be employed to remove the waste products produced by the fish and to enhance the quality of the water and shall include individually or in combination biological, mechanical and chemical types.
(a) Common types of filtration systems used by pet animal dealerships include undergravel filters, outside power
30
filters, canister fliters, filters, and sponge filters.
wet/dry
(b) Labyrinth fish, such as Bettas, do not require the use of filtration systems, but must have the water in the primary enclosure changed at least weekly.
(6) Water Quality Maintenance.
Good water quality and water chemistry, as measured using commercially available test kits, are essential to maintain a healthy aquarium environment for the fish.
(a) Water chemistry shall be tested to make sure the following specific criteria are within prescribed limits for established aquariums: Free ammonia concentration ­ the presence of free ammonia indicates that the biological filter is not working properly or the aquarium is overcrowded or overfed.
The maximum acceptable level of free ammonia in a healthy aquarium is 1 ppm. PH ­ measures the acidity or the alkalinity of the water.
The PH reading can vary from 5.5 to 9.0 depending on the requirements of a particular species of fish.
(b) Any time more than 30% water change with chlorinated water occurs, the aquarium shall be treated with a water conditioner that will specifically remove chlorine and/or chloramines.
(c) Dead fish shall be removed from the enclosure a minimum of once daily, or more often if necessary.
(7) Water Temperature Control.
The water in a freshwater aquarium shall normally be
31
maintained at a temperature of 68 to 82 degrees Fahrenheit for tropical fish, as appropriate to the species.
If necessary, a thermostatically controlled heater shall be used to maintain the required temperature.
The heater should be capable of delivering 2 to 5 watts per gallon.
Accurate water temperature will be measured by a suitable aquarium thermometer.
(8) Feeding and Nutrition.
(a) Freshwater fish shall be fed on a routine basis to maintain good fish health and to maintain good water quality.
(b) A variety of foods shall be provided such as flake, frozen, live and dried pellets to ensure that all the fish in the aquarium, including bottom dwellers, are fed. e. Saltwater Fish.
The primary enclosure for saltwater fish is the aquarium or fish tank.
The size of the aquarium is determined by the size, number and type of marine fish and invertebrates.
The surface area of the tank (length and width) is more critical than the depth of the tank.
The larger the surface area and the more frequent the water changes, the greater the fish population can be.
(1) Aquariums can be constructed of glass, plastic, acrylic, or specially treated wood.
(2) Aquariums shall be in good repair and watertight.
(3) Aquarium lids, constructed from glass or plastic, can be used to keep dirt out, minimize tank water evaporation and prevent fish from escaping.
When aquarium lids are used they should not provide an air-tight barrier.
32
(4) Substrate.
When necessary to use a substrate in a saltwater aquarium only materials with a calcareous composition such as coral sand, limestone, oyster shell, dolomite, and the like shall be used.
When used together with an undergravel filter the depth of the substrate shall be 1½ to 3 inches to satisfy biological requirements.
(5) Filtration Systems.
Filtration systems will be employed to remove the waste produced by the fish and to enhance the quality of the water and can include, individually or in combination, biological (removes ammonia and ammonia products); mechanical (removes particulate matter); and chemical (removes dissolved organic compounds) types.
(6) Water Quality Maintenance.
Good water quality and water chemistry, as measured using commercially available test kits, are essential to maintain a healthy aquarium environment for the fish and invertebrates.
(a) Water make sure criteria limits for chemistry shall be tested to that the following specific are within the prescribed established aquariums:
Combined ammonia (NH 3 + NH 4) ­ 0.25 ppm maximum.
PH ­ 7.8 to 8.5.
Specific gravity (salinity) ­ 1.018 to 1.024 at 75 to 80 degrees Fahrenheit as measured by a hydrometer.
Nitrite (intermediate step in nitrogen cycle) ­ 0.5 ppm maximum.
the
Nitrate (chemical product of nitrite conversion) ­ 60 ppm maximum for fish and 40 ppm maximum for invertebrates.
The recommended levels are 30 ppm for fish and 20 ppm for invertebrates.
33
(b) Dead fish shall be removed from the enclosure once daily, or more often if necessary.
(7) Water Temperature Control.
The water in a tropical saltwater aquarium shall normally be maintained at a temperature of 72 to 80 degrees Fahrenheit.
If it is necessary to use a thermostatically controlled heater to maintain the required temperature, the heater should be capable of delivering 2 to 5 watts per gallon.
Accurate water temperature will be measured using a suitable aquarium thermometer.
(8) Lighting.
For proper keeping of corals and other invertebrates, the photoperiod (amount of time the aquarium light is on) is very important and should not be less than 10 hours.
The spectrum of lighting used will be appropriate to the species.
(9) Feeding and Nutrition.
(a) Saltwater fish and invertebrates shall be fed as appropriate to the species, a minimum of 3 times per week.
(b) A variety of foods shall be provided such as flake, dried pellets, frozen, live and complex nutrient liquids for filter feeding invertebrates. a.
Reptiles and Amphibians.
(1) Standard Husbandry Requirements. reptiles and amphibians, regardless species, shall be provided with following basic environmental maintenance needs: All of the and
(a) Housing/Enclosures.
The primary enclosures shall be constructed of materials such as glass, acrylic, wire, and wood and of suitable size to prevent overcrowding.
The enclosure
34
will be constructed so as to keep the animal safely within.
(b) Ground Medium.
The bottom of the primary enclosure shall be covered with a substrate material that is suitable for the particular species, eg. sand for desert lizards; moistened potting soil (without perlite) or fine to medium grade orchid bark for forest lizards, box turtles, and some frogs; brown wrapping paper and newspaper for the White's tree frog; and pine shavings and alfalfa pellets for snakes, to name a few examples.
(c) Landscaping.
The primary enclosure shall be provided with a variety of structures, materials and plants, as appropriate, to meet the needs and satisfy behavioral characteristics of different species.
Suitable landscaping materials include rocks, dried branches, vertical sections of cholla wood and cork bark slabs for climbing; natural or commercially produced shelters, both vertical and horizontal, to protect the animal and reduce stress; and various live and/or artificial plants to help recreate the animal's natural environment.
(d) Basking Areas.
When appropriate to the species, a basking area affording both heat and light shall be provided so that the animal can selfregulate its body temperature to improve digestion of food, improve appetite and reduce respiratory infections.
The objective is to establish an area within the primary enclosure where a temperature gradient is created where both the air and surface temperature decrease as the distance from the heat source increases.
35
A basking area can be easily created by locating an incandescent lightbulb or spotlight in a reflector-type fixture above the basking surface to radiate heat onto a flat rock or along the length of wood branch or piece of cork bark diagonally placed in the primary enclosure.
Acceptable secondary heat sources can include such items as hot rock-type heaters, undertank heating pads, and ceramic infrared element bulbs with the correct wattage for the primary enclosure size.
(e) Temperature Control.
Maintenance of the correct environmental temperature, air or water, is essential for the proper health and well being of the animal.
The specific temperature requirement depends on the particular species; the climate of the animal's natural environment, eg. desert/semiarid, temperate, subtropical, tropical, mountain or shoreline; and the location of the temperature measurement i.e. nearest the heat and light source (basking area), furthest away from the heat source (shelter), or nighttime temperature.
i. A thermometer shall be used to determine the temperature inside the primary enclosure. ii. Typical temperature ranges (Fahrenheit) for most reptiles and amphibians are: air (68-95); basking (80-95); nighttime (6585). (f) of Lighting.
Depending on the needs the particular species, an
36
incandescent bulb with a reflector-type fixture will be provided to develop the necessary temperature gradient inside the primary enclosure.
The recommended photo period is twelve hours on and twelve hours off. (g) Water.
Potable water shall be provided, whether for drinking, primary environment or soaking.
Depending upon the species, fresh drinking water shall be made available a minimum of once per day or more often if necessary, in a shallow container, heavy crock, etc. or by misting plants and sides of the primary enclosure or through the use of an overhead drip system to drip water on plant leaves.
(h) Feeding.
The diets of reptiles and amphibians in captivity are as varied as the number of species and range from crickets, wax worms, mealworms and wingless fruitflies (for insect eating lizards); floating foods, guppies, goldfish, earthworms and finely chopped mixed vegetable (for water turtles); crickets, mealworms, earthworms, strawberries, cantaloupe, romaine lettuce and tomatoes (for box turtles); crickets, "pinky" and "fuzzy" mice (for White's tree frogs); to goldfish, mice, rats, rabbits and poultry for snakes.
i. Successful feeding of a particular species shall take into account not only diet, but also size of prey vs. size of animal's head, frequency of feeding, amount of food and environmental factors such as heat, light, humidity, and proper landscaping that significantly affect feeding response.
37
ii.
In addition to a well balanced and varied diet, commercial vitamin/mineral and calcium supplements (in powdered form) shall be put on the appropriate animal's food every 3 to 4 feedings. (i) Primary Enclosure Maintenance.
The primary enclosure shall be cleaned at least weekly or more often if necessary to remove feces and soiled ground medium or substrate.
For water turtles, the enclosure water shall be changed weekly or more often if necessary to minimize animal health hazards and odors.
Clean and sanitize drinking water containers and soaking and bathing containers weekly or more often if necessary.
(j) Specialized Husbandry Requirements i. Lizards.
Dimensions of the primary enclosure for a single animal, excluding the tail, shall be: Length ­ 1½ times the length of the animal; width - ½ the length of the animal; height - 6 inches minimum.
Minimal space requirements for multiple animals within a given primary enclosure shall be based on the following calculation: L x W x H ÷ Density Factor = total length of animals permitted.
Total length of animals permitted ÷ length of animal = number of animals allowed in that size enclosure.
The calculated density factor varies with the length range of the lizard being housed.
("DF" is density factor.)
38
Industry Designated Aquarium Size (gal.)
Volume
Total Lizard Length Allowed
Cu. In.
10 15 20 long 20 high 29 30 55 2400 3456 4320 3456 5760 6912 12480
2-6" DF15 160 230 288 230 384 460 832
7-12" DF30 80 115 144 115 192 230 416
13-24" DF60 ----72 --96 115 208
24-48" DF120 ------------104
Humidity levels can be increased in the primary enclosure by using a ground medium that contains water in the enclosure and/or partially sealing the top of the enclosure to decrease the rate of evaporation.
(k) Water turtles.
Minimum space requirements for multiple animals within a given primary enclosure shall be based on the following calculation: L x W x H ÷ Density Factor = total length of animals permitted.
Height in the equation is equivalent to the depth of water in the enclosure.
For a water turtle with 6 inches as measured diagonally across the carapace, the DF is 30.
The depth of water in the primary enclosure shall be at least equal to the carapace length of the turtle with a gradual access leading to a basking area.
The deeper the water, the wider the range of normal behavior that can be exhibited.
(l) Box Turtles.
Clean potable water shall be available at all times in a shallow pan that the turtle can easily get into or out of, with a water depth no more than the height of the turtle.
The number of box turtles recommended to be housed per type of 39
enclosure below is based on the best combined pet animal retail and wholesale knowledge and experience available at the present time.
Enclosure Size (gal.)
Number of 6" turtles Area (sq. in.)
10 15 20 long 20 high 29 30 55
4 6 8 6 8 10 15
200 288 360 288 360 432 624
For larger sizes, the number is based on providing 40 sq. in. per turtle.
(m) Frogs.
Minimum space requirements for multiple animals with a given primary enclosure shall be based on the following calculation: LxWxH÷ Density Factor = total length of animals permitted.
Total length of animals permitted ÷ length of animal = number of animals allowed in that size enclosure.
For frogs with a body length less than 2 inches, the DF is 7; for frogs with a body length of 2 to 6 inches, the DF is 15; and for frogs with a body length over 6 inches, the DF is 30.
Clean, potable water shall be available at all times in a bowl or built-in pool.
(n) Snakes.
The calculated density factor for snakes depends on the type or family of snake and is based on enclosure area (sq. in.) rather than enclosure volume (cu. in.).
The DF for the Family Boidae (pythons, boas, etc.) is 2.0 and the DF for the Family Colubridae (cornsnakes, milk snakes, king snakes, etc.) is 0.75.
Aquarium Size (gal.)
Area (sq. in.)
Number of Snakes Boidae (3') Colubridae (4')
40
20 long 55
360 624
5 8
10 17
(o) Poisonous Animals.
An enclosure containing poisonous animals, including, but not limited to poisonous snakes, frogs, and insects shall be clearly labeled as "Poisonous".
The enclosure shall have solid walls.
The top of the enclosure shall be constructed of screen mesh, or similar material to prevent injury to the public by the animal.
C. SANITATION STANDARDS 1.
General Conditions. a.
Cleaning of Pet Animal Enclosures.
Animals shall be removed from the primary enclosures when water or any chemical solution is used in cleaning.
Animal wastes shall be removed from primary enclosures and/or display cages daily or more frequently if necessary to prevent contamination of the pet animals and to reduce disease hazards and odors.
Occupied primary enclosures and display cases shall be cleaned as often as necessary to maintain sanitary conditions by washing all surfaces with effective cleaning and sanitizing agents and methods.
b.
Other Cleaning.
Food and water containers and all other utensils shall be cleaned and sanitized using heat or chemical sanitizing solution.
A dishwasher which utilizes heat or chemical sanitizing solution may suffice.
These containers shall be cleaned and sanitized daily or more often if necessary to maintain sanitary conditions.
c. Waste Disposal.
Animal and food wastes, used bedding, debris and any other organic wastes shall be removed from the pet animal facility daily.
41
d. Premises Housekeeping.
The building and grounds shall be kept clean, in good repair and free of trash.
e. Pest Control.
All pet animal dealerships shall be free from infestation of vermin, insects or other pests.
Food contaminated by rodents must be discarded.
f. Supply Storage.
Pet food intended for inhouse use must be kept in waterproof, closed containers or at least 4 inches off the floor.
Opened bags of pet food must be stored in waterproof, closed containers.
g. Flight Cages.
Aviaries must be weekly or more often as necessary to excessive buildup of bird wastes and food.
D. FOOD AND WATER 1.
Feeding and Water Requirements.
Pet animals shall be fed consistent with the nutritional needs for the age and species, except when under special veterinary care. a.
Animal food shall be of such nutritional value necessary to meet the normal daily requirements for the condition and size of the animal.
b. Perishable food shall be refrigerated.
be in located primary amount cleaned prevent uneaten
c. Animal food receptacles shall sufficient number, of adequate size and so as to enable each animal in the enclosures to be supplied with an adequate of food. d. Animal food and water kept clean and sanitary.
containers
shall
be
e. Potable water shall be available to pet animals consistent with the species, sufficient to prevent dehydration or heat prostration, except when under special veterinary care.
42
f. Open food and water containers shall accessible to the pet animal and located minimize contamination by excreta. g. Disposable containers discarded after each use.
may be utilized
be to
if
h. Self feeders and waterers may be cleaned pursuant to Subsection C above.
used
if
i. Food and water suitable for the specific species shall be available to birds at all times.
2.
Classification and Separation Requirements.
Pet animals housed in the same primary enclosure shall be maintained in compatible groups.
a.
Any pet animal exhibiting aggressive behavior shall be housed individually and in primary enclosures that will prevent such animal from biting or injuring the public.
b. Pet animals under quarantine or treatment for a suspected communicable disease shall be physically separated from other susceptible animals to minimize dissemination of disease as set forth in Section 1.00 and Subsection F below.
c. Pet animals used for breeding purposes may not be displayed for sale and must be kept in a primary enclosure separate from other animals.
d. Feeder animals, those consumed as food by other pet animals, such as crickets, fish, etc. must be housed in enclosures that do not permit escape but provide adequate physical space for the particular species.
E. RECORD REQUIREMENTS 1.
Sales Records.
All pet animal dealerships shall maintain a record of all sales or other disposition of dogs, cats, psittacine birds and iguanas for a period of 2 years from the transaction date, with the records kept at the physical facility site for 90 days.
43
a.
Sales records shall include, at a minimum, date of transaction, species or breed of animal, color, sex (where possible to determine), and the name, address and phone number of the purchaser. b. Sales records for psittacine birds shall also include the band number or other identification approved by the Commissioner.
c. Sales records for each sales day for temporary pet animal dealerships shall be kept at the sales location on said sales day, during normal hours of operation.
Thereafter, the records may be kept at the address specified in the license application.
2.
Purchase Records.
All pet animal dealerships shall maintain a record (invoices, etc.) of all pet animal purchases (except feeder animals) or other means of acquisition for a period of two years, with said records being kept at the physical facility site for 90 days after the transaction date.
Minimum information required shall include transaction date; name, address and phone number of the supplier; number of animals received; animal breed or species; and bird band number, if applicable.
3. Record Accessibility.
All required sales purchase records shall be made available to inspector authorized by the Department at reasonable time during regular business hours, or other mutually agreeable times.
and any any at
4.
Psittacosis Warning.
Pet animal dealers selling psittacine birds shall furnish to each retail purchaser of one or more psittacine birds, a special Psittacine Bird Dealer Sales Record prescribed by the Department, giving the business name of the dealer, the name, address and phone number of the person purchasing the bird(s), and number, species, and leg band identification number for each bird sold.
Printed on this sales record in type not less than 1/8 inch high shall be a warning to the purchaser of a possible psittacosis hazard.
This warning shall include a description of the disease signs in birds, symptoms in humans and the critical need for prompt medical diagnosis and treatment.
44
5.
Salmonellosis Caution.
Pet animal dealers selling reptiles shall have each retail purchaser of one or more reptiles read an educational document prescribed by the Department.
This educational document shall state the possible salmonellosis hazard to people and describe common hygienic practices to help prevent salmonella exposure to humans.
The purchaser shall sign a dated register provided by the pet animal dealer after reading this educational document.
6.
Veterinary Treatment Records.
Treatment records shall be kept on all pet animals that receive any medications and/or vaccinations used in the treatment or prevention of illness, or the treatment of injury, while in the care of the pet animal dealership.
These records shall include the identification of the pet animal receiving medical treatment, the type of medication used, the amount of medication used, and the time and date on which the medication and/or vaccine was administered.
These records shall be kept at the pet animal dealership facility for a period of 60 days after the sale of the pet animal.
F. VETERINARY CARE/DISEASE CONTROL 1.
Veterinary Requirements. a.
Veterinary Services.
All pet animal dealer facilities shall have a working relationship with a veterinarian to provide timely treatment for injured or diseased animals.
The name and phone number of the veterinarian will be available to the inspector upon request.
b.
Any pet animals (except feeders, fish and invertebrates) that become seriously ill or seriously injured must be diagnosed by a veterinarian in a timely manner and prescribed therapy followed.
c. Pet animals shall be observed daily for signs of disease by the person in charge of the pet animal dealership or by an employee working under his or her direct supervision.
An animal suspected of having an infectious disease shall be physically separated from other susceptible
45
animals and placed in an isolation area until the condition is determined to be noninfectious. d. Sick or injured animals must be provided with timely veterinary care or be euthanatized humanely under the supervision of the pet animal dealership's attending veterinarian, pursuant to § 35-80-102(7). e.
As to animals that die at the pet animal dealership, the licensee may wish to refer to § 25-1-612, C.R.S., as amended, and any local ordinance or rules and regulations concerning proper disposal.
2.
Disease Control Requirements a.
Reporting of Zoonotic Diseases.
Reporting requirements exist under § 25-1-662, C.R.S., as amended, as well as possibly other statutes, rules and regulations.
b. Cleanliness.
All primary animal enclosures, cages, isolation rooms or areas, etc., which contain pet animal(s) (except fish and amphibians) having infectious or transmissible disease shall be cleaned and disinfected each day. c. Sale or Transfer.
Reasonable care shall be taken to release for sale, trade, or adoption only those pet animals that are free of undisclosed disease, injury, or abnormality.
It is unlawful to sell, transfer, or adopt dogs or cats under the age of 8 weeks or guinea pigs, hamsters or rabbits under the age of 4 weeks.
d. Quarantine.
under §§ 25-4-604 110, C.R.S., as statutes, rules and G. Quarantine requirements exist and 605, 25-4-709, and 35-50amended, and possibly other regulations.
SPECIAL REQUIREMENTS FOR PSITTACINE BIRDS 1.
Possession Restrictions. a.
Authorized Bands.
In accordance with PACFA, § 35-80-108(1)(i), no person shall import or have
46
in his possession for the purpose of selling, trading, giving or otherwise transferring any psittacine bird that has not been legally banded with a type of leg band authorized by the Commissioner applied during the prefeathered stage of development and appropriate to the size and species of the bird.
The Commissioner authorizes the following bands: a traceable seamless or seamed Colorado leg band, a United States Department of Agriculture Quarantine Station leg band, or a band approved by any state.
Seamed or split leg bands may only be applied when ordered through the Commissioner.
b. Leg Band Assignment.
No licensed pet animal dealership shall use another licensee's registered leg band nor shall a licensee sell or transfer their registered leg band to another person.
c. Application for Band.
Application for a traceable seamed leg band must be made to the Department.
Necessary documentation to be provided includes all purchase or transfer records, health certificates, or quarantine information.
d. Leg Band Removal.
A causing injury to a bird may the Department is notified.
other means of transfer, accompanied with a traceable the Commissioner.
leg band that is be removed provided Upon sale, trade, or the bird must be leg band approved by
e.
From time to time, the Commissioner may require other species of birds to be banded, in the Commissioner's discretion.
In such event, the Commissioner shall provide written notification to any licensee affected by mailing to the last address provided by the licensee to the Commissioner.
H. TRANSPORTATION WITHIN A VEHICLE 1.
Enclosures. a.
Temporary enclosures, such as compartments or transport cages, or animal crates, if used to
47
transport animals shall be secured, well constructed of cleanable or disposable material, and designed to protect the health and ensure the safety of the animals.
Such enclosures shall have ventilation to ensure the comfort and health of the animals at all times.
b.
Such enclosures shall be constructed positioned in the vehicle such that: (1) Each animal has access air for normal breathing.
(2) The openings of such accessible at all times removal of the animals.
(3) The animals are from the elements.
to or
sufficient
enclosures are for emergency
afforded
protection
(4) The animal areas of the vehicle shall be heated or cooled when necessary to prevent hypothermia or hyperthermia of the pet animals being transported.
The requirements of the specific species, age of the animal, and the specific health condition of the animal(s) should be considered.
c. Animals shall not be placed in enclosures over other animals in transit unless such enclosure is fitted with a floor of material which prevents animal excreta from entering lower enclosures. d. Enclosures shall be large enough so that each animal has space to turn around, stand and lie down.
Animals which are not conditioned to each other may not be transported in the same primary enclosure. e. Enclosures shall between each animal necessary.
be cleaned and sanitized use, or more often if
f. Pet animals being transported shall be kept hydrated.
48
g. Pet animals transported for longer than eight hours must be offered food in accordance with above feeding sections.
h. Dogs shall be removed from the vehicle while in active transportation a minimum of every 8 hours and allowed to urinate, defecate, and obtain exercise.
i.
If the a litterbox for cats.
than 50% of trip is six hours or more in length, shall be provided within each crate The litterbox shall not cover more the crate floor.
j. A manifest shall be kept showing an inventory, by number and species, of animals being transported.
2.
Vehicles. a.
Vehicles used primarily in the transportation of pet animals shall be equipped to provide fresh air to all animals being transported without injurious drafts. b.
The animal cargo space shall be so constructed and maintained so as to minimize the ingress of exhaust from the vehicle's engine.
49
