BEFORE THE ARKANSAS WORKERS' COMPENSATION COMMISSION CLAIM NUM BER F107903 WILLIAM DICKERSON, EMPLOYEE CROTHALL SERVICES GROUP, EMPLOYER INSURANCE COMPANY OF THE STATE OF PENNSYLVANIA, CARRIER CLAIMANT RESPONDENT RESPONDENT OPINION FILED SEPTEMBER 18, 2003 A hearing was conducted on August 20, 2003, before ADMINISTRATIVE LAW JUDGE DON N. CURDIE, at Little Rock, Pulaski County, Arkansas.
The claimant was represented by Gary Davis, Attorney at Law, Little Rock, Arkansas.
The respondent was represented by Frank B. Newell, Attorney at Law, Little Rock, Arkansas.
STATEMENT OF THE CASE The hearing w as he ld on Au gust 20 , 2003, in Little Roc k, Arka nsas .
It was stipulated as follows: 1.
The employee-employer-carrier relationship existed at all relevant times.
2.
The temporary total disability rate is $195.00 and the permanent partial disability rate is $154.00.
3.
The claimant sustained a compensable left lower extremity (left knee) injury on June 10, 2001.
The issues to be litigated at the hearing were as follows: 1.
Is claim an t en titled to m ed ical b en efits and cos ts a ss oc iate d w ith his 1 left knee replacement? (Claimant alleges that the compensable injury of June 10, 2001, aggravated, accelerated or combined with his pre-existing left knee condition to produce the nec essity for the su rgery.)
2.
Is the claimant entitled to temporary total disability from August 1, 2001, to a date to be determined? (Respondent alleges that the healing period ended on Aug ust 1, 200 1).
3.
Is claimant entitled to an attorney's fee? The claimant, 33 years of age, testified that in 1985 he was involved in a non-work related motor cycle wreck at age 14.
He testified about the wreck and the injuries he received: "A. Yes, my femur was broke and several of my phalanges, which are your toes, we re com poun d fracture d, and I ha d a rope m ark on m y knee wh ere when it scraped across the ground, it rubbed a hole in the top of my knee, and they had wound up having to do an amputation of my toes, threequarters of my foot, and from some deal up in there around the tibia and fibula they put a screw in the back side of my knee.
I don't exactly know wha t it was for.
The knee cap itself wasn't broke or any ligaments wasn't damaged, and they had a p in in my fem ur. Q. Part of the extent of that surgery, you had the broken fem ur up above your knee? A. Uh-h uh (affirm ative).
Q. Th ey had to su rgically break your tibia and your fibula in orde r to accomplish a leg lengthening, I believe? A. Tha t's correct.
Q.
And it was a pretty extensive process that you had to go through up through 1989, res ulting in pretty muc h the am putation of your foot, correc t? A. Tha t's correct."
2 (T-9, 10) The claimant testified that he did not have any knee surgery as a result of that 198 5 acc ident.
In Febru ary, 1992, the c laima nt injured his kn ee wh ile working at A uto Zone, Inc.
As a result of that accident, he had a posterior cruciate ligament replacement.
He testified that from October 13, 1992, to June 10, 2001, he did not req uire any tre atm en t for his k ne e. H e did tes tify tha t on one occ as ion h e ha d to quit one job h e had d ue to his kn ee hurting, b ecau se of the need f or lifting heavy objects.
Additionally, the claimant testified that he had some jobs from October, 1992 until the com pens able Jun e 10, 20 01, injury that required him to do exten sive ben ding and lifting.
He worked for the Humane Society as a kennel master and animal abuse officer.
He was required to be on his feet, bend and stoop on a regular basis.
He worked as a pest control employee.
He was a termite inspector, a job which required him to crawl and bend under houses to inspect for pest damage.
He worked in a liquor store, stocking the cooler and liquor shelves.
He worked for Rock Church International as a business maintenance employee.
He was required to paint, re-do and buff floors.
The claimant then began w orking for the respondent/em ployer, a job which required extensive physical labor.
His job, basically, was to clean hospital rooms.
He performed that job without any trouble for one month before his injury on June 10, 2001.
He had to clean many rooms a day.
This job required him to make beds, dust, mop, sweep and clean comm odes.
The claimant testified that the only real problems he had prior to the 2001 injury were arthritic problem s that we re aggra vated w hen the weath er wou ld chang e. 3 Th e c laim an t de sc ribe d h is J un e 1 0, 2 00 1, c om pe ns ab le in jury: "Q.
Now Gene, here we are now, June 10th of 2001.
Tell us what happened on that date.
A.
I was coming from the break room in the basement, I was running real late so I was walking pretty fast, and when I came around the corner in the ba se m en t, the re's like a dec line g oing dow n to the elev ato rs.
A nd I still don't know if it was water or oil or whatever it was, but there was something in the floor, and I slipped and fell right down on my knee.
Q.
And you experienced pain? A. Yes, s ir. Q.
Can you be descriptive about what sort of symptoms? A.
At first it was a real sharp stabbing pain and throbbing, so I hopped back to my supervisor's office, which was around the corner.
I was going to put some ice on it and go home, but she told me to go around to the ER." (T-15, 16) The claim ant's knee becam e swollen, painful and required extensive medical treatment.
He had physical therapy and was prescribed medication, neither of which helped the claimant a great deal.
He was told he was going to need a total knee replacem ent.
The claimant had the total knee replacement on November 30, 2001.
He underwent therapy, and was prescribed medication.
He wanted to get a job, but testified tha t be ca us e of the m ove m en ts re qu ired to pe rfo rm any jo bs he w as cap ab le of , he d id not believe he could perform the jobs.
The claimant did not believe that he could bend or stand, squat with his knees, nor could he run, skip, or jump.
(T-23) Th e cla im an t be ga n st ud ying f or h is A ss oc iate in Ar ts (A A) d eg ree in accounting in March, 2002.
In December, 2002, he obtained his AA degree.
About that 4 tim e th e cla im an t be ga n re ce iving soc ial se cu rity disa bility.
He tes tified tha t he wo uld like to get off of social security disability so that he can work.
He has applied for some jobs based on his AA degree in accounting.
The claimant complains of current left knee problems.
At the hearing, he demonstrated how the left knee was clicking and somewhat off center.
According to the claimant, his condition is not "fixable".
He testified that he was told by Dr. Carl Nelson that he w ould have to "live with it".
The medical records in this case reflect that the claimant came under the ca re o f Dr .
Jo hn Va nd er S ch ilden , an orth op ae dic s urg eo n an d pr ofe ss or o f ort ho pa ed ic surgery at the U niversity of Arkan sas fo r Medica l Science s at Little Rock , Arkans as.
Dr. Vander Schilden took extensive x-rays of claimant's left knee.
He stated that the claimant had "previous end stage degenerative arthritis" and a "strong possibility of patella fracture."
Dr. Vander Schilden's note of July 17, stated that the claimant's June 10, 200 1, com pens able injury cause d no "increa sed m orbidity to the knee w hatso ever."
According to Dr. Vander Schilden, the claimant reached maximum m edical improvement on August 1, 2001.
On August 20, 2001, Dr. Nelson stated that the claimant suffered from advanced degenerative arthritis of the knee, and would need total knee replacement sometime in the future.
The claimant had a total knee replacement in November, 2001.
On December 21, 2001, Dr. Vander Schilden sent a letter to the claimant's attorney stating: "Mr. Dickerson's injury of 6/10/2001 did aggravate and accelerate the 5 nee d for th e kn ee re plac em ent s urge ry.
I cannot provide him a permanent impairment rating secondary to the injury.
H is un de rlying d eg en era tive a rthritis wa s so sev ere tha t the fall d id not cau se an y further dege neration tha t was no t already presen t prior to the injury."
( Cx-1, p. 19)(E m phas is added .)
Dr. Carl Ne lson, wh o perform ed claim ant's total kne e replace m ent, sen t a letter to the attorney for respondent on August 5, 2003.
The letter stated: "I did not evaluate Mr. Dickerson to determine if his knee injury was associated with his subsequent surgery and I therefore have no opinion or no knowledge that I can impart to you in this area.
... ...
I have no idea whether this surgery was necessitated by the advanced degenerative condition of his knee resulting from previous accidental injury."
(Rx-1, p. 1) Dr. Vander Schilden gave a deposition in this case on May 19, 2003.
He stated that his opinions were within a reasonable degree of medical certainty.
He is a professor of orthopaedic surgery at UAMS, and has been there for 18 years.
Dr. Vander Schilden testified that when he saw the claimant on June 12, 2001, the claimant had "en d st ag e de ge ne rative arth ritis."
H e te stifie d w ha t the def inition of e nd sta ge arth ritis was: "There are three compartments in the knee, the inside of the knee, the outside of the knee, and around the kneecap, and all three compartment had ex trem ely severe degen erative arth ritis."
(Rx-3, p. 6)(Em phas is added .)
X-rays taken by Dr. Vander Schilden showed "strong possibility of a patellar fracture ."
"Q. Okay.
Ikay.
W as it obvious the first time you saw him on June 12 that he wa s hea ding for a tota l knee rep lacem ent? 6 A. Yes.
Q. Okay.
And then I - - I think you saw him again on July 17? A. Tha t's correct.
Q.
An d at tha t tim e you obs erve d th at - - I'm rea ding from your re po rt, his presen t injury caused no increase d m orbidity to the knee w hatso ever.
Is that still your opinion? A. Yes.
Q .
O ka y. A.
It did not - - the arthritis was there.
You're not going to make the arthritis any worse.
Did it hasten his chances of having a knee replacement? Yes, because it's like throwing gasoline on a sm oulder ing fire."
(Rx-3, p. 7, 8)(Em phas is added .)
Dr. Vander Schilden stated that as of July 17, the fracture line that he could se e in the x-ray in June h ad disap peared .
Dr. Vander Schilden testified as follows: "Q.
And once a fracture like that heals, does it typically cause residual symptoms? A.
The fracture itself did not.
The trauma to the knee, as I mentioned, was like throwing gasoline on a smouldering fire.
I mean the arthritis was there, but the traum a to the kn ee cau sed an exace rbation o f his symp tom s w hich un doub tedly led to his kn ee rep lacem ent sooner rather than later.
Q.
Did the injury - - whatever injury - - well, let me back up.
You un de rsta nd m y clien t do es n't dis pu te th e fa ct th at h e fe ll and tha t he hit his knee and that he was hiving pain.
A.
He would have required a knee replacement anyway in the future.
Q .
O ka y. A.
The fall made - - required him to have the knee replacement 7 soon er rathe r than later.
Can I give you an exact time? No.
Q.
All right.
W ell, I was going to ask you that question.
Is your opinion tha t his Jun e - - th is ac cide nt h ap pe ne d on Jun e 10 - - tha t his Jun e 10 fall in which h e hit his knee acce lerated the k nee fo r knee rep lacem ent surg ery som ewh at spec ulative since o bviously we ca n neve r know wheth er or not - when he would have needed a knee replacement surgery had he not fallen? A. Ex ac tly. Q .
O ka y. A.
But I believe it did hasten the requirement for a knee replacement because of the intractable pain that he was having.
Q.
That was my next question.
W hy did he - - why do you believe he had the knee placement when he did? A. Because of pain.
Q.
Because of pain? A.
I mean you don't replace a knee, no matter how bad the x-rays look, unless the patient is extremely symptomatic.
Q. W hat caused the pain? A.
The trauma to the knee.
So it's not the small fracture that he had on his p ate lla.
It's the trau m a th at ind uc ed the frac ture tha t ca us ed his unde rlying deg enerative a rthritis to flare up."
(Rx-3, P. 10, 11, 12) .....
Q.
Do cto r, the term acc eler ate is ap pro pria te a s a d es crip tion of h ow this trauma played into the necessity of ultimately having to have this knee replacement surgery which was done on November the 30th of 2001, true? A. That's true.
Q.
And you of course mentioned the term throwing gasoline on a smouldering fire.
Another term that might be appropriate, the straw that broke the camel's back? A. Tha t is correct."
8 (Rx-3, p. 16)(E m phas is added .)
FI ND IN G S O F F ACT AND CO NC LU SI O NS O F L AW 1.
The employee-employer-carrier relationship existed at all relevant times.
2.
The temporary total disability rate is $195.00 and the permanent partial disability rate is $154.00.
3.
The claimant sustained a compensable left lower extremity (left knee) injury on June 10, 2001.
4.
The preponderance of the evidence reflects that the claimant is entitled to medical treatment and costs associated with his total knee replacement.
The compensable injury of June 20, 2001 accelerated and combined with claimant's preexisting condition to produce the need for medical treatment.
The treatment was rea so na bly n ec es sa ry an d re late d to the co m pe ns ab le in jury.
5.
Th e pr ep on de ran ce of th e ev iden ce refle cts tha t the claim an t is entitled to tem porary total disability from Au gust 1, 20 01 to Ja nuary 21, 20 02.
6.
Th e pr ep on de ran ce of th e ev iden ce refle cts tha t the claim an t is entitled to an attorney's fee for his attorney Mr. Gary Davis for controversion.
DISCUSSION 1.
MEDICAL TREATMENT A pre-existing disease or infirmity does not disqualify a claim if the em ployme nt aggra vated, ac celerated or com bined w ith the diseas e or infirm ity to produc e the disa bility for which com pens ation is sou ght.
See: Nashville Livestock 9 Comm ission v. Cox , 302 Ark .
69, 787 S .W .2d 664 (1990); St. Vincent Medical Center v. Brown, 53 Ark. App. 30, 917 S.W .2d 550 (1996).
As is comm only stated, the employer takes the em ployee as he finds him .
In such c ases , the test is not w hether the injury causes the condition, but rather the test is whether the injury aggravates, accelerates, or combines with the condition.
However, although a disabling symptom of a pre-existing condition may be compensable if it is brought on by an accident arising out of and in the co urs e of em ploym en t, the em ploye e's e ntitle m en t to c om pe ns atio n en ds wh en his cond ition is restored to the cond ition that existed be fore the injury, unless the injury contributes to the condition by accelerating or combining with the pre-existing condition.
The present case turns on an issue of medical causation, and Dr. Vander Sch ilden is the only physician to ha ve rende red an e xpert m edical opinion in this case.
As I interpret Dr. Vander Schilden's deposition testimony and reports, Dr. Vander Schilden has concluded that the claimant's work related injury accelerated his left knee condition at issue in this case, causing a need for knee replacement surgery to the left knee.
The record is clear that Dr. Vander Schilden's medical opinion regarding ca us atio n ar e ba se d pr im arily on his e xam inat ions and x-rays , ob ject ive d iagn os tic tes ting and his o wn years of e xpe rien ce as a kne e su rge on and pro fes so r of o rtho pa ed ic surgery.
Dr. Vander Schilden's medical opinion appears to be based largely on facts not only related to him by the claim ant, but du e to indepe nden t know ledge up on wh ich Dr. Va nd er S ch ilden has bas ed his m ed ical o pinio ns on c au sa tion .
Dr. V an de r Sc hilde n is the only expert medical witness to testify in this case, and Dr. Vander Schilden opined that the claimant's work related left knee injury accelerated his left knee condition 10 ca us ing the ne ed fo r re pla ce m en t su rge ry.
I cannot find any medical records introduced into evidence regarding the cla im an t's k ne e p rob lem s f rom Oc tob er, 19 92 un til th e d ate of his co m pe ns ab le in jury, June 10, 2001.
The claimant apparently had numerous physically stressful jobs from October, 1992 through June 10, 2001.
The claimant testified that he did not have the need to go to the doctor for his knee during that period of time, but did certainly have knee pain.
However, after his admittedly compensable injury on June 10, 2001, the claimant has demonstrably objective medical findings of an injury which resulted in a recommendation from the chairman of hip and knee reconstruction at the Department of Orthopaedic Surgery at UAMS in Little Rock, Arkansas that he have a total knee replacement.
No one recommended knee replacement for the claimant BEFORE the compensable injury.
And, if he needed knee replacement, the preponderance of the evidence certainly reflects that the compensable injury ACCELERATED the need.
As Dr. Vander Schilden stated, the claimant's injury was "like throwing gasoline on a sm ou lder ing f ire."
T he pre po nd era nc e of the evid en ce the n re flec ts th at th e cla im an t's work relate d left knee injury aggravated a nd ac celerated claima nt's left knee cond ition to such extent as to require a left knee replacement.
The claimant's medical treatment and costs associated with his left knee replacement is reasonably necessary medical treatm ent and related to his Ju ne 10, 2 001, co m pens able injury.
See: W ackenhut Corp. v. Jones , 73 Ark. App. 158, 40 S.W .3d 333 (2001) (affirming Full Commission Opinion, Jone s v. W acke nhut C orp ., E9018 48, Ma y 15, 2000).
2.
IS CLAIMANT ENTITLED TO TEMPORARY TOTAL DISABILITY BENEFITS FROM AUGUST 1, 2001, TO A DATE TO BE DETERMINED? 11 The claimant sustained a scheduled injury to his left lower extremity.
An injured employee is entitled to temporary total disability compensation for a scheduled injury during the period of time that he is within his healing period and has not returned to work.
The respondent alleges that claimant's healing period ended on August 1, 2001.
(Rx-2, p. 28) Dr. Vander Schilden, in his report of July 17, 2001, indicated that the claimant's fracture had healed ,according to x-rays.
Dr. Vander Schilden stated that the present injury caused no increased "morbidity" to the knee whatsoever.
He opined that the claimant was going to need a total knee replacement "in the very near future," (and "the future" was made more imm ediate because of the compensable injury.)
He referred the claimant to Dr. Carl Nelson since Dr. Nelson performs total knee replacements and Dr. Vander Schilden does not.
According to Dr. Nelson's report of August 20, 2001, the claimant was complaining of left knee pain when he saw him.
Dr. Nelson's x-rays on August 20, 2001, showed "marked joint narrowing, osteophyte formation in the lateral compartment, a cyst and joint narrowing."
(Rx-2, p. 30) Dr. Nelson scheduled the claimant for a total knee replacement in November, 2001.
The hearing period is defined as the p eriod nec essa ry for the healing of a n injury resulting from an acc ident.
A.C.A .
� 11-9-102(12) (Repl. 2002) The healing period continues until the injured employee is as far restored as the permanent character of the injury will permit.
The healing period ends once the underlying condition has become stable and when nothing further in the way of m edical treatm ent will impro ve the pe rm anen t charac ter of the injury.
Mad Butcher, Inc. v. Parker, 4 Ark. Ap p. 124, 62 8 S.W .2d 582 (1982).
Subsequent to the total knee replacement in November, 2001, the claimant told his treating medical personnel that Dr. Nelson had "dismissed him."
(Rx-1, p. 76) 12 Add itionally, it appears tha t the claim ant re-injured his left knee on Jan uary 21, 200 2.
Th e n ote at R es po nd en t's E xh ibit 1 , Pa ge 71 sta tes tha t th e c laim an t "fe ll tod ay" (Janua ry 21, 2002) on to his left knee .
His left knee was "w arm , painful."
"Popping/cracking" were noted.
According to the medical records, Dr. Nelson had dismissed the claimant an d to ld him tha t he wo uld h ave to live with som e sw elling and pain .
Ad ditio na lly, it would take speculation and conjecture to state that the claimant's healing period lasted past January 21, 2002.
This new injury required the claimant to "heal."
The new nonwo rk re late d fa ll occ urre d sh ortly af ter th e cla im an t's s urg ery.
T he ref ore , the claim an t is entitled to temporary total disability from August 1, 2001, until January 21, 2002.
Th e cla im an t ha s sh ow n by a pre po nd era nc e of the evid en ce tha t he is entitled to an attorney's fee for controversion of the above-described and discussed benefits.
AWARD The claimant is awarded the benefits specifically described herein, along with the attorney's fee for claimant's attorney, Gary Davis, pursuant to the Arkansas W orkers' Co m pens ation law.
Th is Awa rd shall bear intere st at the legal rate u ntil paid.
IT IS SO ORDERED.
DON N. CURDIE, Administrative Law Judge DC 13
