Primary Subject Area Science Grade Level 7 /8 th th Food for Your Health Overview The students will locate information about the effects that diet may have on the body as it relates to (1) anemia, (2) osteoporosis, (3) heart disease, (4) obesity, and (5) diabetes.
This lesson can be used to teach health, nutrition, or food-related topics.
Approximate Duration 6 class periods (50 minutes each) (2 class periods for gathering data, 1 class period for compiling information, 2 class periods for presentations and discussion, and 1 class period for guest speaker) Louisiana Framework ¢ Strands and Content Standards: Life Science Science as Inquiry ¢ Benchmarks: LS-M-A6 SI-M-A3 ¢ Foundation Skills: Communication (1) Problem Solving (2) Resource Access and Utilization (3) Linking and Generating Knowledge (4) Citizenship (5) Technology Strategies ¢ Guidelines: 2, 3, 4 ¢ Indicators: D, G, K Interdisciplinary Connections ¢ English/Language Arts: ELA-1-M5; ELA-4-M6; ELA-5-M2 Objectives ¢ The students will 
81
Science 
Heredity plays a major part in the development of these diseases, but other lifestyle and environmental factors may also influence the development of the disease.
By following the Food Guide Pyramid http://www.nal.usda.gov:8001/py/pmap.htm and the Dietary Guidelines http://www.usda.gov/cnpp/Pubs/DG2000/Index.htm , we are doing our best to prevent illness from occurring.
Lesson Procedures 1.
Divide the class into five groups and give each group a scrambled topic word.
Allow two to four minutes to unscramble the words.
(ex: IEANMA ­ anemia, SIOPESOTSORO ­osteoporosis, AERTH IEADESS ­ heart disease, ETYSIBO ­ obesity, EBTESAID ­ diabetes).
2.
Have the students name their unscrambled topic words.
Ask groups what the conditions have in common.
(They all can be influenced by a person's eating habits or diet.)
3.
Each group will research data for the assigned topic related to diet using the Internet web sites, encyclopedia, library books, etc. 4.
Each student will write a report about the findings, using a word processing program.
Show students how to use the copy/paste functions while writing their reports.
The teacher and students will design a rubric to score the reports, or modify the Rubric for Major Projects/Productions.
5.
Students will report their findings to the class.
Students who have family members with a diet related disease may volunteer to share how the family has helped this person.
6.
Invite a dietitian, nurse, or doctor to speak to the class about diseases that can be affected by nutrition.
7.
Design a contract for students to sign stating that, during the next week, they will eat healthful foods and fewer foods that may contribute to their chances of developing certain health problems.
The contract will include a list of three healthful foods they will eat and the number of times per week they will eat them; the number of times per week the foods will be eaten, plus a list of three unhealthful foods normally eaten and how often.
The students will note how they cut back on the unhealthful foods.
Stress
82
Food for Your Health 
8.
Each student will keep a journal of foods eaten that week.
Allow students to compare their journals with the contract previously signed.
Entries in the journal should relate to the terms of the contract.
Reproducible Materials ¢ "Rubric for Major Projects/Productions" Assessment Procedures ¢ "Rubric for Major Projects/Productions" ¢ Group work participation ¢ Contracts/Journals Exploration and Extension ¢ Students will interview a person with a diet-related disease and ask what he/she would have done differently concerning early eating habits.
¢ Students will locate a typical balanced diet for a person with one of the diet-related diseases.
Resources and Links ¢ UtahLink http://www.uen.org/utahlink/ Contact Information Louisiana Department of Education, Division of Nutrition Assistance
83
