August 31, 1997 Members of the Legislative Budget and Audit Committee: In accordance with the provisions of Title 24 of the Alaska Statutes, the attached report is submitted for your review.
DEPARTMENT OF LABOR DEPARTMENT OF NATURAL RESOURCES OIL COMPANY HIRING, PROCUREMENT AND CONTRACTING ISSUES August 31, 1997 Audit Control Number 07-4560-97 As stated in the Objectives, Scope, and Methodology section of this report we reviewed, among other things, local hire, procurement and contracting within the oil industry in the State.
In addition, we reviewed the five year employment trend of the oil industry and inquired into recent activity by the State and the oil industry on local hire, procurement and contracting.
The audit was conducted in accordance with generally accepted government auditing standards.
Fieldwork procedures utilized in the course of developing the findings and discussion presented in this report are discussed in the Objectives, Scope, and Methodology section of this report.
Randy S. Welker, CPA Legislative Auditor
TABLE
OF CONTENTS
Page
Objectives, Scope, and Methodology ........................................................................................
Organization and Function.........................................................................................................
Background Information ............................................................................................................
Auditor's Comments ..................................................................................................................
Report Conclusions ....................................................................................................................
Findings and Recommendations................................................................................................
Appendix A Resident - Hire Reporting Requirement Waived ....................................................................
Agency Response: Department of Labor .....................................................................................................
Department of Natural Resources .................................................................................
Legislative Auditor's Additional Comments ............................................................................
1 3 5 9 13 21
25
27 31 33
OBJECTIVES, Objectives
SCOPE, AND METHODOLOGY
In accordance with Title 24 of the Alaska Statutes and a special request by the Legislative Budget and Audit Committee, we conducted a review of oil industry resident hire issues administered by the Department of Labor (DOL) and the Department of Natural Resources (DNR).
The Legislative Budget and Audit Committee expressed concern for local hire, procurement and contracting within the oil industry in the State and requested that we review the oil industry's record on these subjects.
Specifically, we reviewed information on the oil industry for the past five years on local hire.
We also reviewed information provided to us by selected oil companies related to their local procurement and contracting policies.
Scope and Methodology The primary focus of our review was the historical trends and recent events on local hire in the oil industry over the period 1991 through 1995.
We limited our review of procurement and contracting activities to discussions with oil industry management and certain documents furnished by them.
A complete review was not practicable due to the proprietary nature of private companies' policies and accounting records.
During the course of our examination, we interviewed various state employees including staff within the Governor's Office, DOL and DNR.
We also had discussions with representatives of various companies within the oil industry; and interviewed members of the Joint StateIndustry Working Group on Local Hire in Alaska's Oil Fields.
In addition, we reviewed and evaluated the following: 1.
Applicable sections of state statutes and regulations; 2.
Reports from DOL's Occupational Data Base; 3.
Selected DOL Alaska Economic Trends articles; 4.
DOL Nonresidents Working in Alaska reports; 5.
Minutes of the Joint State-Industry Working Group on Local Hire in Alaska's Oil Fields; 6.
Publications from various oil industry companies; 7.
Selected Petroleum News articles; 8.
Applicable opinions of the Attorney General; 9.
Chapter 139, SLA 1996 (HB 548, Northstar Unit Oil 
Other documents and interviews as deemed pertinent.
-1-
(Intentionally left blank)
-2-
ORGANIZATION
AND FUNCTION
Title 23 of the Alaska Statutes provide, in part, "The Department of Labor shall foster and promote the welfare of the wage earners of the state, improve their working conditions and advance their opportunities for profitable employment."
This statute also provides, "The department shall aid and assist resident workers to obtain, safeguard, and protect their rightful preference to be employed in industries in the state."
The Department of Labor's (DOL) efforts to comply with the mandate in Title 23 include the coordination of three organizational units: the Commissioner's Office, the Employment Security Division and the Research and Analysis section.
The Commissioner of DOL is a member of the Joint State-Industry Working Group on Local Hire in Alaska's Oil Fields and is responsible for overall management of the department's programs.
The Employment Security Division promotes employment, economic stability, and growth; operating a no-fee labor exchange that meets the needs of employers, job seekers, and veterans.
The division operates the Employment Services program that includes; job placement, job matching and referral, vocational counseling, and job search assistance.
The Research and Analysis (R
The R
The section maintains the Occupational Data Base.
The R
A part of this analysis is contained in R
The Division of Oil and Gas, within the Department of Natural Resources, is responsible for leasing state lands for oil and gas exploration.
They monitor and audit lease operations, including oil and gas rental and royalty payments.
They also promote new opportunities for the sale of royalty oil and gas.
-3-
(Intentionally left blank)
-4-
BACKGROUND
INFORMATION
The oil industry in Alaska, due to its dynamic nature and significant economic impacts, has been the source of much discussion.
The industry has been involved in an unprecedented amount of legislation, lawsuits, and continued business negotiations with the State.
Part of the reason for this intense interest is the magnitude of both the industry's workforce and related payroll.
The Department of Labor's (DOL) 1995 Nonresidents Working in Alaska report describes the importance of oil industry jobs: These are among the highest paying, year-round jobs in Alaska and are considered a high priority for placement of Alaskan workers.
Faced with expected declines in total workers and continued shift of work to contractors with relatively high [numbers of] nonresident workers, improvements in resident hire performance will require coordination with training agencies and a strong commitment to resident hire.
Over the decade covering 1985 through 1995, DOL reports that total oil industry workers have fluctuated between a low of 11,466 and a high of 14,701, with payrolls ranging from $528,151,000 to $762,481,095.
Resident hire issues in the oil patch have a long and colorful history In recognition of the significant economic impact of the oil industry, the Legislature in the early 70s, passed an Act entitled "Local Hire Under State Leases."
The key provision of the Alaska Hire act was that: all oil and gas leases, easements or right of way permits for oil or gas pipeline purposes, utilization agreements, or any renegotiation of any of the preceding to which the state is a party contained provisions requiring the preference of qualified Alaskan residents . . .
The Alaska Hire provision was not seriously enforced until 1975, when DOL began issuing residency cards and giving preference to resident cardholders for deployment on oil pipeline jobs.
In 1976 a former commissioner of DOL issued a cease and desist order to all unions supplying pipeline workers and enjoining them to "respond to all open job calls by dispatching all qualified Alaskan residents before any non-residents are dispatched."
A lawsuit challenging the constitutionality of Alaska Hire was filed.
Eventually, the U.S. Supreme Court overturned most of the Alaska Hire provisions in 1978.
As an apparent result of the Alaska Hire provisions being overturned, interest in the issue, from state government's perspective, waned.
Though resident hire language had been incorporated into most oil and gas lease agreements beginning in 1972, no local hire monitoring or feedback to companies took place.
In 1984, a former director of the Department of Natural Resources (DNR) Oil and Gas Division waived the lease provision that required companies to file annual resident -5-
hire program reports (see Recommendation No. 1).
As a result, from 1984 through 1996, oil companies neither reported nor, to our knowledge, maintained local hire information.
Nonresidents Working in Alaska report based on data captured in Occupational Data Base (ODB)
One remnant of the local hire legislation, AS 36.10.130, requires DOL to report annually to the governor on the status of employment in the state, the effect on nonresident employment on the employment of residents in the state and the methods to increase resident hire.
Though DOL has continued to produce an annual report, the scope and detail do not completely address the effects of nonresident employment or methods to increase resident hire (see Recommendation No. 2).
DOL's analysis of information produced by its ODB comprises the bulk of this report.
The ODB contains a combination of information from DOL's computerized Unemployment Insurance electronic wage file which is matched with the Department of Revenue's (DOR) computerized Permanent Fund Dividend file.1 Employees shown on the wage file that have either received the previous year's dividend or applied for the current year dividend are considered residents.
2 Information in the ODB has been segregated by company, industry, and occupation to provide various detailed reports in the annual residential hire report.
The ODB has also been used to produce ad hoc requests for various parties.
1
The wage file contains quarterly earnings and industry information on workers covered by unemployment insurance within Alaska .
The Permanent Fund Dividend (PFD) file is a list of Alaskans who either applied for or received a PFD. 2
For purposes of this report, including all graphs and charts, we have used this definition.
-6-
Northstar oil lease revisions refocus State attention on local hire issues In 1996, the oil lease agreement for the Northstar field was renegotiated to change the State's percentage of the profit from that field.
As a part of the renegotiation, the legislature included findings and intent related to resident hire and specified reporting requirements.
See text box at right.
The Legislature described the importance of these issues in specific intent language: . . . the mutual commitments made by the parties to the lessee in these amendments to secure state residents and businesses the advantages and benefits of both expanded resident hire opportunities and additional work by in-state businesses are in the best interest of the people of the state and are considerations of paramount importance to the legislature in its decision to conditionally approve the amendments of the Northstar Unit leases.
Since the Northstar lease revision, resident hire issues have reached new levels of significance for State agencies and oil companies.
DOL has been recruited to provide supplemental resident hire information.
Oil companies, which typically form alliances3 with contractors on large projects, have reviewed, and, in some cases, revised policies that impact resident hire for alliance members.
Paragraph 41 of the Revised Northstar Unit Oil Leases EMPLOYMENT OF ALASKAN RESIDENTS.
Lessee shall comply with all valid federal, State and local laws in hiring Alaska residents and contractors and shall not discriminate against Alaska residents or contractors.
Within the constraints of law, lessee shall employ Alaska residents and contractors to the extent they are available and qualified.
Subject to the foregoing: Lessee voluntarily agrees to adopt a program to hire residents of Alaska.
Lessee shall advertise for available positions locally and use Alaska job service organizations to notify the Alaskan public.
For work in connection with this lease, lessee shall use best efforts to contract with Alaska firms and fabricate modules in Alaska, whenever feasible.
Lessee shall encourage its contractors to employ and train, when necessary, residents of Alaska.
In determining feasibility, lessee shall consider commercial, health, safety, and environmental conditions and requirements to ensure maintenance of lessee's operational standards.
Lessee shall submit annually to the director, division of oil and gas, for transmission to the Department of Labor, a report that details the specific measures lessee and its contractors and subcontractors have taken or are planning to take to recruit qualified Alaska residents for available jobs, describes on-the-job training opportunities, and describes lessee's efforts to hire Alaska firms for work in connection to this lease.
Lessee shall furnish the Department of Labor a quarterly report regarding the employment of Alaska residents on the leased area in compliance with regulations by the Commissioner of Labor.
The report must also include statistical data concerning the number of resident personnel hired within the past year for this lease.
British Petroleum's alliance for the Northstar project, for example, includes ten contractors, each designated a specific function on the project.
3
-7-
Governor and Industry form Working Group to address specific local hire issues The inclusion by DNR of local hire provisions in the Northstar lease resurrected an issue dormant since 1984, when local hire reporting requirements were waived.
One vital piece of the resident hire puzzle is the definition of "resident."
DOL had long used a match between the DOL electronic wage file and the PFD electronic file to distinguish residents from non-residents.
Oil industry officials found fault with this methodology, claiming that, for a number of reasons, it materially understated the number of Alaska residents on their payrolls.
Northstar legislation also refocused attention on resident hire reporting required by lessees and resulted in discussions about which information should be reported.
To address these and other issues, the governor and the oil industry appointed a Joint State-Industry Working Group on Local Hire in Alaska's Oil Fields (working group).
The working group consists of State agency officials appointed by the governor and oil industry representatives appointed by the industry.
The working group was charged with developing a methodology for oil companies and their contractors to voluntarily report local hire information and to set benchmarks from which to measure progress in residential hire.
As a result of the working group's efforts, a new definition of resident, which incorporates elements more acceptable to oil industry officials, has been adopted.4 The working group has also decided to set 1996 as a benchmark to measure resident hire statistics.
4
The new definition of resident developed by the working group includes employees with any one of the following: motor vehicle registration, driver's license, voter registration, or a resident fishing license.
-8-
AUDITOR'S
COMMENTS
As discussed in the Background Information section, the oil industry can be segmented into four categories as shown in the chart below.
These categories, referred to as standard industry codes (SICs), are defined by the U.S. Department of Labor and used for nationwide reporting purposes as well as for various reports within the state.
SIC 1311 Category Description Crude Petroleum and Natural Establishments primarily engaged in operating oil and gas field Gas Oil Operating Companies properties.
Such activities include exploration for crude petroleum and natural gas; drilling, completing, and equipping (Oil Operating Companies) wells; operation of separators, emulsion breakers, desilting equipment; and all other activities in the preparation of oil and gas up to the point of shipment from the producing property.
This industry also includes the production of oil through the mining and extraction of oil from oil shale and oil sands.
Drilling Oil and Gas Wells Establishments primarily engaged in drilling wells for oil or (Oil Drilling Companies) gas field operations or others on a contract fee, or similar basis.
This industry includes contractors that specialize in "spudding in," "drilling in," redrilling and redirectional drilling.
Oil and Gas Field Exploration Establishments primarily engaged in performing geophysical, Services geological, and other exploration services for oil and gas on a (Oil Exploration Companies) contract, fee, or similar basis.
Oil Field Services, Not Establishments primarily engaged in performing oil and gas Elsewhere Classified field services, not elsewhere classified, for others on a (Oil Field Service Companies) contract, fee, or similar basis, such as excavating slush pits and cellars; grading and building of foundations at well locations; well surveying; running, cutting and pulling casings, tubes, and rods; cementing wells, shooting wells; perforating well casing; acidizing and treating wells; and cleaning out, bailing, and swabbing wells.
1381
1382
1389
As is evident from the chart above, each of the four segments of the oil industry are characterized by unique types of work requiring a wide variety of skilled employees.
The differences between these segments affect the number of employees per segment and the percentage of those employees that are nonresidents.
As shown in the following graph, the segmented composition of Alaska's oil industry workforce has varied over the years, with the most significant shift in recent years being from the oil operating companies to the oil field service companies.
In 1991, oil operating company employees comprised 31% of the oil industry workforce.
By 1995, this percentage had dropped to 25%.
During the same timeframe, oil field service company employees increased from 55% of the workforce to 66%.
-9-
Oil Industry Total Workers by Segment 12,000 10,000 Number of Workers
55% 53% 34% 32% 56% 60%
66%
8,000 6,000 31% 4,000 2,000 0 1991 10% 4%
Oil Operating Companies
30% 7% 3% 1994
25% 7% 2% 1995
Oil Drilling Companies Oil Exploration Companies Oil Field Service Companies
10% 3% 1992
8% 4% 1993 Year
Source: Department of Labor's Occupational Data Base
The percentage of nonresidents employed in the oil industry also varies significantly by segment.
As shown in the graph below, from 1991 through 1995, only one of the four segments, oil exploration, shows a steady reduction in the percentage of nonresident employees.
Two of the segments, oil field service companies, and oil operating companies, show steady increases in their nonresident employment rates.
Over the five years ending in 1995, these two segments have increased their nonresident workforce by 5% and 6%, respectively.
As discussed previously, these two segments are the largest in the industry so nonresident hire rate increases in these segments significantly impact the oil industry workforce as a whole.
Oil Industry Percentage of Nonresident Workers 33% 30% 28% 25% 23% 20% 18% Oil Operating Companies Oil Drilling Companies Oil Exploration Companies Oil Field Service Companies
31% 28% 25% 21% 23% 22% 18% 16% 18% 28% 25% 25% 27% 26% 25% 30% 25% 24% 20%
Percentage
14% 15% 13% 1991
1992
1993
1994
1995
Year Source: Department of Labor's Occupational Data Base
- 10 -
Nonresident employment grows while total employment declines The oil industry as a whole reflects some of the same characteristics as its two largest components, oil operating companies and oil field service companies.
In 1992, the number of employees in the industry dropped by about 15.5% from the previous year.
Since that time, the annual total workforce has either grown only slightly or declined.
The nonresident portion of employees remaining in the industry has grown steadily since 1992 (see graph below).
Total Employees by Resident and Nonresident 18,000 16,000 14,000 12,000 10,000 8,000 6,000 4,000 2,000 0 17,276 14,593 21% 20% 23% 25% 27% 14,704 14,350 15,212
Employees
79%
80%
77%
75%
73%
1991
1992
1993 Year
1994
1995
Source: Department of Labor's Occupational Data Base
Resident
Nonresident
As discussed in the Background Information section, the working group has selected 1996 as the benchmark year from which to measure resident hire progress.
However, the relatively slow growth rate of the oil industry may hinder the ability of companies within the industry to change their nonresident employee rates.
In a letter to Governor Knowles discussing local hire issues, one company summarizes this situation as it relates to the current year: ". . .
1997 is projected to be a flat construction year.
Therefore, it is highly probable that Alaska hire percentages will go down, even if we had all the processes in place today."
Oil industry workers become residents at lower rates than total workforce About 14% of the total nonresident workforce in 1994 became residents in 1995.
The number of nonresidents becoming residents each year in the oil industry, however, has traditionally been much lower.
For example, only 8.2% of the industry workers shown as nonresidents in 1994 became residents in 1995.
The change from 1993 to 1994 was also less than 10%.
Occupational information by company not comparable between companies The Department of Labor's (DOL) electronic wage file provides additional information on the occupational composition of companies.
Each company determines occupational classification for each employee's wages reported for Unemployment Insurance.
Guidelines for the classifications are offered by the U.S. Department of Labor as Standard Occupational - 11 -
Codes.
DOL reviews the classifications for reasonableness in the aggregate, but specific
occupations within companies are not necessarily reviewed.
The occupational composition of companies is affected by both their oil industry segment and by the companies' particular line of work.
The differences between companies at the occupational level are so significant that comparisons of companies by occupation would be unreliable.
Though such information would provide invaluable analysis in this report, due to differences in the way companies determine the occupations of their employees, we did not perform this analysis.
- 12 -
REPORT
CONCLUSIONS
As discussed in the Background Information section, state agency attention to local hire issues within the oil industry has been inconsistent.
One possible result of this inconsistency is the oil industry's increasing rate of nonresident hire through at least 1995.
However, the Northstar lease amendment discussions renewed State interest in local hire issues and has resulted in recent oil industry efforts to increase resident hire.
Lack of state enforcement of local hire requirements correlates with increase in nonresident hire As discussed in the Background Information section, actions by the Departments of Natural Resources and Labor (DNR and DOL) over the last decade, reduced the State's emphasis on the oil industry's local hire efforts.
DNR's waiver of resident reporting requirements combined with DOL's limited reporting in the annual Nonresidents Working in Alaska suggest that local hire issues have, until recently, taken a less significant role.
(See Recommendation Nos. 1 and 2).
Actions by these departments may have contributed to a reduction in the oil industry's local hire efforts.
One oil company official characterized the issue of resident hire as "not a high profile item" in recent years before 1996.
During this time, the oil companies we contacted neither maintained nor reported nonresident hire statistics for themselves or for their contractors, though some lease agreements contained continuing requirements to "hire and employ local and Alaska residents."
During the time that State and oil industry interest in the local hire issue was low, the percentage of nonresidents employed in the oil industry increased significantly.
According to DOL's 1995 Nonresidents Working in Alaska, the number of nonresidents employed between 1993 and 1995 increased by 25%.
Another way to analyze the number of nonresidents employed in the industry is to measure the annual change in nonresident employment.
To do this, we calculated percent change from year to year by analyzing only the increase or decrease of resident or nonresident employees from the previous year's workforce.
For example, in 1994, there were 3,522 nonresident workers.
In 1995, there were 4,063 nonresident workers.
The difference between these, 541, is an increase of 15.36%.5
5
The percentage, 15.36%, was calculated by dividing 541 (the number of additional workers in 1995) by 3,522 (the total number of nonresident workers in 1994.)
- 13 -
Percentage Change in Annual Resident/Nonresident Employment 15% 6% 12% -2% -18% -15% -15% -10% Decreases
3% -5%
1994/95 % Change 1993/94 % Change 1992/93 % Change 1991/92 % Change
Nonresident Resident
-20%
-5%
0%
5%
10% Increases
15%
20%
Source: Department of Labor's Occupational Data Base
In certain years since 1992, the percentage of nonresidents increased while the percentage of residents decreased.
As shown in the graph above, each year since 1992, the percentage of nonresidents employed in the oil industry has increased, while the percentage of residents has decreased or grown at a lower rate.
Complete resident hire information is not yet available for 1996, but early indications are that the trend of increasing nonresident hire continued through 1996.
Northstar reporting for contractors/subcontractors more stringent than for subsequent leases As discussed in the Background Information section, various requirements for lessees to report on resident hire activity have been incorporated into lease agreements since 1972.
Some of these agreements have included provisions for the lessee to report not only measures they have taken to improve resident hire rates, but also the related activities of their contractors and subcontractors.
The reporting requirements for certain leases, however, were waived in 1984, and, until recently, the State had received no reports from either lessees or their subcontractors.
Though lease language contained in the Northstar amendment seemed to be precedent setting, lease agreements drafted by DNR since that time have not included provisions for reporting the activities of contractors or subcontractors.
The amended Northstar lease agreement requires the lessee to: . . . submit annually to the director, division of oil and gas, for transmission to the Department of Labor, a report that details the specific measures lessee and its contractors and subcontractors have taken or are planning to take to recruit qualified Alaska residents for available jobs, describes on-the-job training opportunities, and describes lessee's efforts to hire Alaska firms for work in connection with this lease.
Lease agreements subsequent to the Northstar amendment, however, ". . . encourage lessee to hire and employ local and Alaska residents and companies, to the extent they are available and qualified, for work performed on the leased area" and, for reporting, will require the lessee only to
- 14 -
"submit, with the plans of operations, a proposal detailing the means by which the lessee will
Oil companies typically form alliances of core contractors and subcontractors for large projects.
By requiring lessees to report on the resident hire activities for their contractors and subcontractors the state implies to the lessee that the lessee will be held accountable for the results of their contractor's hiring practices.
Conversely, by not requiring this level of accountability, the state fails to benefit from the relationship between the lessee and its contractors and subcontractors.
Local hire efforts emerge from obscurity As noted in the Background Information section, discussions related to amendments to the Northstar lease once again brought local hire issues to the attention of both State and industry officials.
Both the State and the industry demonstrated this renewed interest in resident hire through formation of groups to address the various problems associated with resident hire and reporting.
The most far reaching group to date has been the Joint State-Industry Working Group on Local Hire in Alaska's Oil Fields (working group).
The working group has developed methodologies to count the percentage of nonresidents working in the industry and establishing a benchmark from which to measure improvement.
The working group has also endorsed the formation of a formal Oil Industry Business Learning Consortium at the July 9, 1997 meeting.
An ad-hoc industry-State committee formulated and recommended this action to the working group.
The consortium would include oil developers, contractors, suppliers to the industry, post-secondary educators, State agencies and labor representatives.
The purpose of the consortium is to create recruitment and job training mechanisms to meet industry and state workforce development needs.
The Northstar lease amendment, which passed the legislature in July 1996, replaced the "Employment of Alaskan Residents" lease provisions for all five previous Northstar leases, which DNR had waived in 1984.
The amendment requires quarterly and annual reports.
The quarterly reports address the employment of residents working on the leased areas.
The annual reports require that the lessee report on the measures the lessee and its contractors and subcontractors have taken to recruit qualified Alaskans, including descriptions of on-the-job training opportunities and lessee's efforts to hire Alaskan contractors.
Northstar amendment inspires industry to take measures to increase local hire The Northstar amendment has renewed interest in local hire, contracting and procurement efforts for the oil industry.
In August 1996, British Petroleum (BP) established the position of "Manager, Local Hire."
BP created this position to coordinate the companies' efforts to maximize Alaska hire and training opportunities.
In addition to naming a local hire manager, oil companies and members of project alliances have recently taken other measures to "grow the Alaskan workforce."
Various educational programs, including on-the-job training, are measures the industry has used to increase the number of available employees with the required skills.
- 15 -
In November 1996, some of the contractors in the Northstar alliance formed a relationship with the University of Alaska Anchorage (UAA) for advanced technical training for current and former employees.
UAA provided instructors and facilities for the course.
Curricula were developed with the involvement of lead superintendents in companies with specific knowledge of skills needed on North Slope projects.
The most recent program graduated 37 people with technical certificates.
Contractors have also made additional education efforts through arrangements with the Martin Luther King Career Center for employees to receive welding training.
Another major resident recruitment effort involved employees from the Ketchikan Pulp Mill.
In an effort to recruit laid off pulp mill workers, several alliance contractors visited Ketchikan at the beginning of 1997.
When certain gaps in the training backgrounds of some of these individuals were identified, the contractors began to work with the University of Alaska Southeast-Ketchikan to develop curricula ...to increase the work assimilation of these individuals that want to enhance their trade skills; with the prospects for candidacy for employment in the oil and gas industry.6 Because many of the industry efforts aimed at increasing local hire are recent, their effects are not yet assessable.
Nonetheless, in our view, these efforts demonstrate an increased interest in reducing the nonresident hire rates that have become so common to the oil industry.
Salaries vary by oil industry segment As discussed in Auditor's Comments, the DOL Unemployment Insurance (UI) electronic wage file categorizes the oil industry into four segments7 based on federal reporting standards.
Segments included in the oil industry category are operating, drilling, exploration and field service.
In a comparison of the oil industry segments by salary level, we found that wages paid to employees of oil operating companies are higher than those paid to employees of oil field service companies.
However, the oil operating segment employed only 25% of the oil industry workers in 1995, while the oil field service segment employed 66%.
As noted in the 1995 Nonresidents Working in Alaska report, there has been a shift in the oil industry workforce from oil companies to oil field service companies.
As shown in the chart on the following page, average wages paid in 1995 for each occupational series in the oil operating segment are higher than for the oil field service segment.
6
This statement is from a letter written by one of the alliance contractors to the UAS-Ketchikan President and two instructors.
7 These segments, identified as Standard Industrial Codes (SIC), are based on federal reporting standards that designate numerical categories dependent on the nature of the companies' business activities.
- 16 -
1995 Average Oil Company and Oilfield Service Company Wages $120,000 $100,000 $80,000 $60,000 $40,000 $20,000 $Precision Production Exec 
Support Service Occupations Technicians Construct 
Source: Department of Labor's Occupational Data Base
Composition, size, type of work affect oil industry companies' resident hire rates Additional analysis of resident hire statistics shows that nonresident employment percentages of individual companies in the oil industry vary significantly.
The percentage of nonresidents by company ranges from 2.86% to 90.91% for 1995.
Company size, line of work, occupations, work schedules and work locations have all been reported to impact the number of residents employed.
Larger companies may be able to provide additional resources to improve resident employment percentages.
One major employer, for example, requires their Alaska resident employees to maintain a residence in Alaska to be eligible for the cost of living allowance (COLA).
In addition, they require every Alaska resident employee to sign an annual certification affirming their residency.
This company has, over the last few years, had one of the lower nonresident percentages in their segment and in the industry.
Most companies do not have COLAs, and as a possible consequence, have higher nonresident percentages.
In 1997, another major oil industry employer adopted the requirement that employees maintain an Alaskan residence to be eligible for the resident COLA.
Other efforts that may increase the Alaska resident workforce include a one time moving allowance for employees to relocate their residences to Alaska and an annual travel allowance for employees and their dependents.
As with the COLA, larger companies with comparatively more financial flexibility are more likely to offer these benefits than their smaller counterparts.
The relative size of a company is only one area in which oil industry companies are not comparable.
The line of work for the companies and the occupations of their employees also impact the employment of residents.
Companies in the oil field service segment vary from general contractors to highly specialized firms.
Smaller companies sometimes specialize in one line of work in the oil industry.
Highly specialized companies typically require employees with advanced training and skills and are more likely to employ nonresidents.
Examples of occupations with high nonresident employment rates include engineering and precision - 17 -
production occupations, which are prominent within oil field service companies.
Both occupations have a nonresident employment percentage in excess of 40%.
These two occupations are the only two that exceed 40% for the oil industry by segment in 1995.
Work schedules and locations may also impact the number of residents employed.
Work schedules vary depending on the company and work location.
Work schedules range from one week on and one week off to four weeks on and three weeks off for employees working on the North Slope.
Employees with longer breaks between work periods have a greater potential to maintain a residence outside of Alaska due to their rotation.
Employees working shorter schedules are less likely to travel as far from the North Slope due to the shorter time periods between work and time off.
Majority of oil industry companies are "Alaska Businesses" as defined by Northstar In a survey of each of the companies listed in DOL's 1995 Occupational Data Base (ODB), we found that 81% of the oil industry companies were Alaskan corporations, sole proprietorships or partnerships.
We noted some differences between the four segments of the oil industry.
All oil operating corporations were incorporated in Alaska.
All but one oil exploration and one oil drilling company were incorporated in Alaska.
The majority of oil field service corporations were incorporated in Alaska, but this category also included a sole proprietorship, with the owner qualifying as an Alaska resident and a partnership with the partners qualifying as Alaska corporations.
All of the qualified Alaskan corporations, sole proprietorships or partnerships identified hold current Alaska business licenses.
We found that 19% of the oil industry companies could not be identified as Alaskan corporations, sole proprietorships or partnerships.
All but five companies hold current business licenses.
Chapter 139, SLA 96 In 1996, the legislature defined the phrases "Alaska contractors" and "Alaska firms" to mean a firm or contractor that (1) has held an Alaska business license for one year before performing any work in connection with the Northstar leases; (2) has maintained for one year a place of business within the state that deals in the supplies, services, or construction of the nature required for the project before performing any work in connection with the Northstar leases; and (3) is (A) a sole proprietorship and the proprietor is an Alaska resident; (B) a partnership and more than 50 percent of the partners are Alaska residents; (C) a corporation that has been incorporated in the state or is authorized to do business in the state; or (D) is a joint venture composed entirely of ventures that qualify under this paragraph.
(h) For purposes of the Employment Paragraphs, the legislature intends that the lessee's reporting obligations comply with the reporting requirements of 8 AAC 30.062 and shall include information regarding the number of nonresidents hired within the past year, and the number of Alaska contractors and non-Alaska contractors hired within the past year.
- 18 -
According to Oil Companies, centralized procurement on major projects helps ensure use of Alaska vendors Major oil companies developing new oil fields form alliances with contractors to complete large projects.
As the lead alliance member, the oil company contracts with different companies for engineering, fabrication, construction and maintenance.
Oil companies have centralized procurement for major oil development projects.
They procure the majority of the materials and supplies for their contractors and the contractors assemble the materials and supplies.
Some of the larger contractors provide their purchasing personnel to the major oil companies to assist in the procurement process.
According to an industry source, centralized procurement has increased purchases from Alaskan vendors.
Vendors have historically been unable to provide certain items.
A spokesperson for one of the oil companies summarizes the situation: Our experience has been that Alaska suppliers can compete most effectively on items for which there are uses in industries outside of the oil industry.
They are less successful providing items that are unique to the oil industry such as chemicals, special turbines and major compressor parts.
Procurement policies vary from company to company, but according to several of the larger companies they have initiated policies that may favor Alaska vendors.
These policies range from simply providing an opportunity for Alaska vendors to bid for certain contracts to developing and using an Alaska supplier network.
- 19 -
(Intentionally left blank)
- 20 -
FINDINGS Recommendation No. 1
AND RECOMMENDATIONS
The commissioner of the Department of Natural Resources (DNR) should ensure that lease provisions related to reporting on resident hire are enforced in old leases and included in new leases and permits.
Beginning in 1972, oil and gas leases have contained various provisions encouraging the lessee to hire Alaska residents and to report the results of their local hire efforts.
In 1984, the former director of the Oil and Gas Division of DNR waived the reporting requirement for some of the leases in effect at that time (see Appendix A).
Apparently these requirements were waived because the director had become convinced that lessee's reports of residential hire were duplicative of reports required under Unemployment Insurance (UI) laws.
Though some of the lease provisions included requirements for reporting on the residential hire practices of contractors and subcontractors and other information that was not duplicated in the UI reports, it appears that enforcement of all reporting requirements related to residential hire practices and statistics was suspended.
The local hire provision contained within the most recent lease agreement provided by DOG reads as follows: The lessee is encouraged to hire and employ local and Alaska residents and companies, to the extent they are available and qualified, for work performed on the leased area.
Lessees shall submit, with the plans of operations, a proposal detailing the means by which the lessee will comply with this measure.
The lessee is encouraged, in formulating this proposal, to coordinate with employment services offered by the State of Alaska and local communities and to recruit employees from local communities.
Unlike some of the earlier lease agreements, the current lease agreement neither requires nor encourages the lessee to maintain and report their own or any contractors' resident hire statistics on a regular basis.
The current lease agreement also differs from older leases by not requiring the lessee to report on measures they or their contractors have taken to improve residential hire statistics.
The oil industry is a relatively large employer in the state, accounting for more than 26% of Alaska's 100 largest private employer8 payrolls.
The oil industry is also one with a relatively high rate of nonresidential hire, which has recently been increasing on an industry wide basis.
One way to ensure that companies in the oil industry are aware of their non-residential hire rates and are taking action to improve those rates is to require resident hire reporting.
The reporting requirement is most easily incorporated into lease provisions as parties either negotiate new lease agreements or 8
DOL's August, 1997 Trends magazine contains information on Alaska's 100 largest private employers in 1996.
According to the article, oil industry employers make up 11.1% of the Trends top 100 employers.
- 21 -
revise existing leases.
These requirements should also become a part of any State permits issued for work on leased lands.
DNR's leasing and permitting processes may also allow the State to encourage local hire in other natural resources industries.
To the extent legally possible, the State should consider incorporating local hire language into all leases and permits.
AS 23.05.010 requires the Department of Labor (DOL) to "foster and promote the welfare of the wage earners of the state, improve their working conditions and advance their opportunities for profitable employment."
To assist DOL in meeting their statutory requirement to advance opportunities for profitable employment, the director of DNR's Oil and Gas Division should resume enforcement of resident hire reporting requirements in existing leases.
Additionally, future lease agreements and permits should contain requirements for each of the lessees to regularly report on residential hiring policies and statistics for not only their own company but also for their contractors and subcontractors.
Recommendation No. 2 The commissioner of the Department of Labor should improve measures to ensure that the Nonresidents Working in Alaska report provides the information required by Alaska Statute.
Alaska Statute (AS) 36.10.130 requires the commissioner of DOL to "report annually to the governor on the status of employment in the state, the effect of nonresident employment on the employment of residents in the state, and methods to increase resident hire."
DOL's R
This report has provided overall industry information on nonresidents working in Alaska and general analysis of various industries.
However, the report has only provided limited analysis on the effect of nonresident employment on the employment of residents and on proposed methods to increase resident hire.
In 1994, the Executive Branch submitted a $50,000 budget decrement to the Legislature for the R
This reduction was specifically aimed at the residential hire report program, reportedly in response to Supreme Court rulings declaring most of the state's resident hire requirements unconstitutional.
DOL staff comment that the rulings seemed to diminish the importance of resident hire statistics and the resident hire issue "dropped off the screen."
Though DOL continued to produce a resident hire report, the report was no longer specifically funded and was reduced in scope.
Recent changes in the Northstar oil lease suggest that resident hire issues are once again receiving public attention.
Large oil companies and oil field service companies represented in a working group established to improve Alaska hire in the oil industry have expressed an interest in working with the various state employment service agencies to increase local hire.
9
The report has been published each year except 1989.
- 22 -
The Nonresidents Working in Alaska report and other Occupational Data Base data could provide valuable information to assist the commissioner in achieving DOL's statutory mandate (see Recommendation No. 3.)
DOL's commissioner should ensure that the division has adequate funding to produce the report required by AS 36.10.130.
Additionally, DOL should revise the content of the report to include an analysis of the effect of nonresident employment on the employment of residents in the State, and methods to increase resident hire as required by the authorizing statute.
Recommendation No. 3 The DOL should use the statistical information from its Occupational Data Base (ODB) to analyze, monitor and provide feedback to major employers within the state and to assist with employment assistance and training efforts.
AS 23.05.010 requires the Department of Labor to "... foster and promote the welfare of the wage earners of the state, improve their working conditions and advance their opportunities for profitable employment."
In our view, this requirement would best be met through a comprehensive effort involving analysis of available employment information, contact with major employers throughout the State, and coordination with placement services provided by the Employment Services section.
The oil industry employs a high number of nonresidents and accounts for some of the highest wages paid in the state.
Unquestionably, increasing resident hire rates in this industry would help to advance Alaskan residents' opportunities for more profitable employment.
However, DOL's training and job growth efforts have not included communications with oil industry employers.
DOL's ODB contains comprehensive resident hire information by occupation and by company.
As noted in Recommendation No. 1, oil and gas leases contain various local hire reporting requirements.
Information provided by lessees used in conjunction with information from the ODB would form a valuable base from which DOL could monitor and assist companies in their progress toward resident hire goals.
DOL should analyze, monitor and provide feedback to major employers within the State who have high nonresident employee statistics.
Monitoring may include comparing individual companies' nonresident hire rates with previous years rates and industry averages to identify those companies that employ a high percentage of nonresidents.
These companies should then be contacted to discuss reasons and possible remedies for high nonresident hire rates.
The results of the resident hire analysis and feedback from private industry combined with information submitted as required by oil and gas leases could provide employment and training agencies with vital information for better directing job search and training efforts.
The Division of Employment Security and the Alaska Human Resource Investment Council (AHRIC) are examples of recipients that could utilize this information when working with private industry employers to assist in improving resident hire.
- 23 -
(Intentionally left blank)
- 24 -
November 14, 1997
Members of the Legislative Budget and Audit Committee:
We have reviewed the audit responses from the Departments of Labor (DOL) and Natural Resources (DNR).
As a result of those responses, we wish to clarify our positions on several items.
In our Report Conclusions, we discuss a correlation between lack of state enforcement of local hire requirements and an increase in nonresident hire.
We neither said, nor meant to imply, as suggested by DOL' response, that legally enforceable local hire requirements exist.
s In recognition that local hire requirements have not survived legal challenges, our Background Information section contains a lengthy discussion of Alaska Hire provisions that have been overturned by the courts.
While we recognize that there are no legally enforceable requirements for local hire, we disagree with DNR' position that no improvement in this area can be effected without s statutory authority.
In our Report Conclusions section, we note that the Northstar amendment, which includes only language encouraging local hire and requiring certain local hire reports, has inspired the oil industry to increase local hire.
DOL, in their response, appears to concur with this conclusion: " . .the Northstar amendment has had a salutary effect on industry . awareness of the importance of resident hire. . ."
In our view, the industry' increased s awareness of local hire issues is a step in the right direction.
We believe that this heightened industry awareness combined with consistent state agency attention can positively impact local hire statistics without actual local hire statutory mandates.
We do not disagree with DNR' observation that local hire reporting requirements in leases s may have limited value if not also included at the permitting phase.
Accordingly, our recommendation to DNR reads: The Commissioner of the Department of Natural Resources
Members of the Legislative Budget and Audit Committee
-2-
November 14, 1997
should ensure that lease provisions related to reporting on resident hire are enforced in old leases and included in new leases and permits.
This recommendation was not intended to imply that DNR should attempt to insert local hire provisions into leases that lack such a provision, but that leases and permits negotiated in the future should contain such a provision.
As discussed further in the recommendation, we view the incorporation of these provisions into new leases and permits as an effective method to ensure industry awareness and convey to the industry the importance of local hire issues.
In a discussion of requirements contained in the current lease form, DNR parenthetically notes that the current lease provision is not accurately quoted in our report.
As mentioned in our Findings and Recommendations section, we requested from the Division of Oil and Gas (DOG) a copy of the most recent lease agreement.
The lease agreement provided by DOG, a portion of which is attached, is quoted verbatim in our report.
DNR additionally comments that there is no consistent definition of what an Alaskan resident is.
As discussed in the Background Information section of our report, a definition of resident that is mutually acceptable to both the state and the oil industry has been negotiated through the efforts of the Governor' Joint State-Industry Working Group on Local Hire.
This s definition will be used for future measurements of local hire on Northstar projects.
DNR suggests that monitoring of compliance with local hire lease provisions should be the responsibility of the Department of Labor.
We believe, as stated in the Findings and Recommendations section of the report, that DNR should be responsible for the enforcement of resident reporting requirements contained in leases.
As the agency that drafts, negotiates and maintains leases, DNR appears to us to be the state agency best suited for this responsibility.
Pat Davidson, CPA Acting Legislative Auditor
Attachment
