F L O RI DA D EPARTM ENT O F T RANSPORT AT I O N 3.
R EVENUE I MP A C T S TRA T EGIES This chapter discusses sources and uses of funds, current transportation financing programs, anticipated funding needs for the Florida Intrastate Highway System, importance of the state fuel taxes and potential impact on the future state fuel tax revenues due to the recent technological and behavioral changes, and presents recommended strategies for addressing the long-term funding needs of the state transportation system.
3.1 I NT RODUCT ION This section of the report addresses the following topics: !"Sources !"Current t and uses of funds with regard to the State Transportation Trust Fund (STTF) ransportation financing programs and financing options under consideration by FDOT !"Transportation needs for the Florida Intrastate Highway System (FIHS) and other modes !"The importance of the state fuel taxes and potential technological and behavioral impacts on state fuel tax revenues !"Recommended strategies for long-term funding of the STTF focusing on continued expansion of the FIHS The focus of this section is on the future funding of the STTF in general with a specific focus on the funding of the FIHS.
The major issue relates to the reliance on fuel tax revenues and the technological and behavioral impacts that may arise in the future that could impact fuel use and state fuel tax revenues.
Financing strategies that represent alternatives to the fuel tax are discussed.
Ultimately, to lessen reliance on state fuel tax revenues will require new modified strategies, potentially including significant increases in toll facilities to expand the FIHS and cooperative use of intelligent transportation systems (ITS) with other states to institute effective weight-distance taxes.
3.2 S IT UA T I O N A NA L YSIS FDOT funds state transportation projects from a variety of funding sources.
The primary revenue sources are fuel taxes and registration fees.
Florida has adopted a layered approach to levying fuel taxes.
This enables local jurisdictions to impose fuel tax levies in combination with state taxes to generate funds for local projects.
The following section describes the sources and uses of funds for the current fiscal year.
3.2.1 Source of Funds The discussion regarding sources of funds was derived from the FDOT Finance and Administration Management Overview, dated July 31, 2000.
The State Fuel Tax (i.e., the fuel sales tax) is indexed to the Consumer Price Index (CPI), with rate changes effective each F IN A L R E P O RT 3.1 F L O RI DA D EPARTM ENT O F T RANSPORT AT I O N January 1.
The current rate is 9.3 cents per gallon.
For fiscal year 2000-01, net receipts for the State Transportation Trust Fund from the State Fuel Taxes are estimated at $801 million.
The State Comprehensive Enhanced Transportation System (SCETS) Tax is also indexed to the CPI and current rates vary between 2.6 cents per gallon and 5.1 cents per gallon on gasoline, based on the county's level of locally imposed fuel taxes.
The SCETS tax rate on diesel fuel is 5.1 cents per gallon.
Currently, the maximum rate of 5.1 cents per gallon for gasoline is imposed in 63 of the 67 Florida counties, the exceptions being Franklin, Hamilton, Okaloosa, and Taylor counties.
In fiscal year 2000-01 estimated net receipts are $419 million.
Proceeds of the SCETS Tax must be spent in the transportation district and, to the extent feasible, in the county from which they were collected.
The motor vehicle related charges are comprised of vehicle license fees, title fees, and initial registration fees.
In fiscal year 2000-01, the estimated net receipts are $582 million.
Another fee imposed on motorists is the Rental Car Surcharge, which is levied at $2 per day for the first thirty days that a vehicle is either rented or leased.
In fiscal year 2000-01, the STTF is estimated to receive $109 million in Rental Car Surcharges.
The Aviation Fuel Tax is imposed on fuels consumed in aviation at the rate of 6.9 cents per gallon.
In fiscal year 2000-01, the STTF will receive $57 million in Aviation Fuel Tax revenues.
The Florida Legislature passed a major transportation funding package Mobility 2000 during the 2000 legislation session, entitled Senate Bill 862.
This plan provides over $2.6 billion of additional funds for transportation over a ten-year period without raising taxes.
!"For many years, a portion of gas tax collections and motor vehicle fees has been diverted away from transportation projects to other general needs of the state.
SB 862 redirects $1.8 billion of these diverted transportation user taxes to fund transportation over a ten-year period million of "one-time" General Revenue funds generated from the State's healthy economy will be invested in transportation over a three-year period commonly referred to as GARVEE bonds may be issued for up to $325 million, that net of debt service will generate $100 to $200 million during the ten-year period.
The bonds would be repaid from Federal funds !"$605 !"Bonds, In addition to the taxes previously discussed which are distributed to the STTF, there are three state imposed highway fuel taxes that are distributed to local governments to fund transportation projects.
These taxes include the Constitutional Fuel Tax (2 cents per gallon), the County Fuel Tax (1 cent per gallon), and the Municipal Fuel Tax (1 cent per gallon).
Distributions of these taxes to local governments in fiscal year 2000-01 are $342 million.
These fuel taxes may be spent on local or state transportation projects that local officials deem necessary.
F IN A L R E P O RT 3.2 F L O RI DA D EPARTM ENT O F T RANSPORT AT I O N Appendix C contains Exhibit C-1, which provides summary details of the tax revenue sources discussed above and provides details on the funding appropriation from the Federal Highway Administration (FHW A), Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) and Federal Transit Administration (FTA) grant programs, and estimates of revenues from local option fuel taxes.
3.2.2 Uses of Funds The material addressing uses of funds was derived from the FDOT W ork Program, Finance, and Budget Process Overview, updated July 27, 2000.
The uses of funds follow a process recognizing that project identification/programming differs from execution.
FDOT operates with a commitment budget.
That is, the appropriations received from the Legislature each year are for the planned commitment of funds.
The actual disbursement (payout) of funds resulting from such commitments may occur over a period of months or years.
Florida Statutes require that the Department's programs be driven by "policies" and by "goals and objectives."
These are outlined in the Florida Transportation Plan.
The division of funds between programs in a manner that will lead to accomplishment of these policies and objectives is accomplished through the 10-year Program and Resource Plan each year.
Program levels contained in the plan are "balanced" to projections of available funding (from the Finance Plan).
The new W ork Program is formally "adopted" by the Department's Secretary each July.
Before the Department can undertake any project, that project must be part of the Adopted Work Program, which is updated annually for the ensuing five year period.
If a project is not listed in the Adopted Work Program, the Department cannot undertake it without formally processing an amendment to the Adopted W ork Program in accordance with Florida Statutes, Section 339.135.
The FDOT districts develop the Department's W ork Program, working with Metropolitan Planning Organizations (MPOs) and local governments.
Input is also received through public hearings, the Legislature, and the Governor's Office.
As a result of this input at the local level, the first three years of the five-year work program represent the state's transportation commitment to local governments.
At the local level, the program has to be consistent with the capital improvement elements of the local government comprehensive plans.
The FDOT districts identify projects and develop schedules based on project priorities within the limitations of the funds allocated to them.
The current FDOT W ork Program was adopted in July 2000.
The W ork Program contains four major categories: !"Pr F IN A L oduct, which consists of right-of-way acquisition and preparation, construction and public transportation; R E P O RT 3.3 F L O RI DA D EPARTM ENT O F T RANSPORT AT I O N !"Pr oduct Support, which consists of in-house and contract staff who perform studies, produce design plans, acquire right-of-way, inspect and manage construction work and administer public transportation plans; !"Operations and Maintenance, which consists of staff and materials to operate and maintain the State Highway System, and to collect tolls and enforce motor carrier compliance laws; !"Administration, which includes FDOT staff and consultants who perform fiscal, information systems, legal, budget, personnel, reprographics, and contract administration functions.
Exhibit C-2 in Appendix C provides full details on the FDOT W ork Program for the next five and ten year periods.
3.3 C URRENT T RA NSPORT A T ION F INA NCING P ROGRA M S The discussion of current transportation financing programs was derived from the FDOT Office of Management and Budget, Financial Planning Office, Transportation Financing, August 1999.
Florida currently has a number of financial tools available including pay-as-you-go and limited leveraging programs.
Some of these tools, which have been utilized very effectively, include Right of W ay Acquisition and Bridge Construction Bonds, GARVEE Bonds, Advanced Construction, Toll Facilities Revolving Loans, State Infrastructure Bank, and toll revenue leveraging.
Highlights include: !"Pay- as-you-go financing is currently used for 100 percent of the Federal resources and over 94 percent of State resources available for Florida's transportation needs funded through the State Transportation Trust Fund he Right of W ay Acquisition and Bridge Construction Bond program provides about $2 billion in bond funds to leverage over $18 billion in total project costs during the 14 year period from fiscal year 89/90 to fiscal year 02/03 he Advanced Construction program advances an average of $4 billion in Federal projects during the five-year work program period ver $1.4 billion in toll projects have been developed using $153 million in loans from the Toll Facilities Revolving Trust Fund $2.8 billion in total projects are being advanced through about $422 million in loans from the State Infrastructure Bank ARVEE bonds, which will be used to accelerate projects, by bonding future Federal appropriations through the FHW A categorical programs !"T !"T !"O !"About !"G The major financing mechanism for accelerating programs/projects is debt issuance.
This option has been addressed by the Division of Bond Finance, "Debt Affordability Study".
Based F IN A L R E P O RT 3.4 F L O RI DA D EPARTM ENT O F T RANSPORT AT I O N on existing debt programs, Florida's debt service ratio was projected to average 6 percent through year 2000.
If this ratio is held constant and if base case forecasts of 4.4 percent average annual growth are realized, the State's future bond capacity through 2005 would be $12.3 billion.
The projected debt issuance under the exiting bond programs over the10 years through 2005 is estimated at $9.0 billion, leaving debt capacity for new bonding at $3.3 billion.
It is important to note that this debt capacity relates to state programs for education, environment as well as transportation, implying this debt capacity if used would probably be spread among a variety of infrastructure investments that included but were not exclusive to transportation.
In addition to the programs cited above, Florida's Turnpike and various expressway and bridge authorities have developed major transportation facilities in Miami, Tampa, Orlando, Lakeland, Ft. Lauderdale, and bridges in the Panhandle near Destin and Gulf Breeze through bonding toll revenues, with backing from the State Transportation Trust Fund through operation and maintenance covenants.
3.3.1 Additional Financing Strategies FDOT has either implemented or is in the process of implementing a number of additional leveraging strategies.
Examples of additional financing strategies implemented are presented below: !"State Funded Flexible State Infrastructure Bank (SIB) !"Expansion of funding for the Toll Facilities Revolving Trust Fund !"Expansion of Advanced Construction !"Raising the cap of the Right-of-W ay and Bridge Construction Bond pr !"Expansion of the Local Government Loan Program (LFR and LRFR) Examples of additional financing strategies under consideration include: ogram !"Additional Bonding of STTF state !"Bond other state revenues in the !"Expansion of Toll Financing revenues STTF Added new stand alone facilities Fully utilizing existing toll systems bonding capacity High-Occupancy-Toll (HOT) lanes Expanding operation and maintenance subsidies for toll facilities !"Raise cap limit on issuance of GARVEE bonds !"Incentives to Maximize Local Option Taxes for Transportation !"Redirect Transportation Funds being used for Other Purposes to the STTF !"Index Local Option Fuel Tax F IN A L R E P O RT 3.5 F L O RI DA D EPARTM ENT O F T RANSPORT AT I O N !"Taxing Districts for Transportation Improvement !"Leasing of Air Space and Right-of-W ay !"Commercialization of Rest Areas !"Road Branding, through selling naming rights s Based on the information gathered, studied and presented, FDOT has either implemented or is in the process of implementing the following additional leveraging options for immediate program development: !"St ate Infrastructure Bank establishing a SIB project evaluation committee, whether interest should be charged for SIB loans, increasing the visibility of the SIB, and adding a local match component to criteria for SIB loans izing toll financing, including additional stand alone facilities, expansions supported by toll system revenues such as the Turnpike, Orlando-Orange County Expressway Authority, and Miami-Dade Expressway Authority, and Tampa-Hillsborough County Expressway Authority considering additional operation and maintenance covenants, and High Occupancy Toll lanes taking a separate study to examine the issue of public-private ventures and how to encourage additional public-private partnerships !"Maxim !"Under These financing strategies represent a mix of financing mechanisms to leverage resources to accelerate project implementation and create new revenue sources.
Financing mechanisms do not generate additional funds.
New revenue sources come from actions such as expansion of toll facilities and exercising the full option available for local jurisdictions to expand tax effort.
3.4 T RA NSPORT A T ION N EEDS Against this backdrop of an expanding work program and innovative financing initiatives through FDOT is a growing inventory of transportation needs.
The State's transportation system consists of 11,980 centerline highway miles, 6,253 bridges, 760 aviation facilities, 14 seaports, 23 bus systems, and 2,888 railway miles.
The number of highway miles, bridges, and other facilities seems large; however, the current transportation system in many areas is inadequate for the needs.
Florida is one of the fastest growing states at a time when people are increasing the vehicle miles that they are traveling each year.
Nationwide, there has been a 77 percent increase in the vehicle miles traveled, 52 percent increase in motor vehicle registration, 34 percent increase in the population, while there has only been a 2 percent increase in the road and street mileage between 1976 and 1996.
The transportation needs in Florida can be characterized in several major categories such as: F IN A L R E P O RT 3.6 F L O RI DA D EPARTM ENT O F T RANSPORT AT I O N !"I ncreased road capacity and other improvements to support population growth and demographic changes in providing mass transit alternatives improvements in transportation safety measures economic development opportunities !"Assistance !"Continued !"Enhancing The needs in Florida for improvement and expansion in highways, transit, seaports, airports, and other transportation facilities have been documented in various studies.
For example: !"Flor ida's seaports will need about $1.3 billion to accommodate anticipated growth over the next five years !"The Florida Aviation System Plan estimates that the total cost of needed improvements of airport capacity, terminals, parking and access over the next 10 years is $6 billion Additionally, the referendum passed in the latest election regarding building high-speed rails in Florida could require millions of dollars worth of investment over the next several years.
Presently, FDOT does not have any program that provides funding assistance to intercity/highspeed rail projects.
Establishing a new program that provides funding assistance to high-speed rail initiatives could potentially drain valuable financial resources away from the highway projects.
Two more detailed examples of needs include the Florida Intrastate Highway System and major transit facilities in Florida.
These needs are briefly outlined below.
Transit systems are primarily locally developed and operated, and are funded primarily through Federal grants supported with a local match.
The FDOT is a very important partner, as is the Federal government, with a strong interest in the success of each system.
The following summarizes transit needs as reported by local agencies.
A recent survey reported by FDOT in "Transportation Financing, August, 1999" of MPOs in Florida was conducted in May 1999.
Each MPO was asked to identify their transportation needs by category, as listed in their adopted long-range transportation plans (LRTPs).
The survey indicates that 44 percent of the MPOs' transportation needs over the 20-year period are in the area of public transportation, compared with 37 percent for the FIHS and 20 percent for "other arterials."
This amounts to a total documented need of $17 billion in capital and operating needs for transit over the 20-year period covered by the MPO Long Range Transportation Plan.
The Florida Intrastate Highway System is vital to interregional movement and the health of Florida's economy.
This network of roadways includes interstate highways, Florida's Turnpike system, selected expressways and major arterial roadways.
The FIHS serves high volumes of automobile and truck travel and connects the State's major airports, seaports, rail passenger F IN A L R E P O RT 3.7 F L O RI DA D EPARTM ENT O F T RANSPORT AT I O N stations and freight facilities.
Although it represents only 3 percent of Florida's public roads, it carries over 30 percent of all traffic in Florida and 70 percent of the truck traffic using the State Highway System.
The FIHS connects the top twelve economic counties in Florida, which account for about 70 percent of all non-farm industry earnings.
The FIHS serves Florida's top international airports, which together carry over 90 percent of Florida's air freight and passengers.
Likewise, the FIHS serves Florida's major deep-water ports that carry over 90 percent of Florida's waterborne trade and passengers.
This major economic activity is located along FIHS corridors providing connections to regional and interstate markets.
FIHS capacity improvements have not kept pace with Florida's growth.
Travel demand and congestion on the FIHS are increasing more than two-times faster than the Department can fund and construct lane miles to expand system capacity.
Since 1990, travel and congestion increased approximately 30 percent, while the FIHS capacity expanded approximately 13 percent.
An FDOT analysis updated in March, 2000 estimated FIHS needs of $47 billion by 2020.
During this same period, revenues available for the FIHS were estimated at $18 billion, leaving an estimated shortfall of $29 billion by 2020.
Exhibit 3-1 depicts the growth in the shortfall for funding expansion of the FIHS through year 2020.
Exhibit 3-1: Revenue Shortfalls for FIHS Funding Needs $50 .
0 $45 .
0 $40 .
0 $35 .
0 Projected Funding Needs $ in B illio n $30 .
0 $25 .
0 $20 .
0 $15 .
0 $10 .
0 $5.
0 $F Y 200 0 F Y 201 0 F Y 202 0 P r oj e c te d Fundi ng D e fi c i t Available Funding Source: FIHS Modal Plan Summary Report, June 2000 As presented above, by fiscal year 2020, the FIHS would have projected funding shortfall of $29 billion.
FDOT also has a significant role in implementing and maintaining the highway network and Strategic Intermodal Initiatives, which are not part of the FIHS.
As mentioned F IN A L R E P O RT 3.8 F L O RI DA D EPARTM ENT O F T RANSPORT AT I O N earlier, the high-speed rail referendum could potentially further magnify the funding deficit for the FIHS and the State Highway System over the next several years.
3.5 T HE I M P ORT A NCE OF S TA TE A N D F EDERA L F UEL T AX R EVENUES The STTF relies heavily on state and federal fuel tax revenue to generate funding for all modes.
Exhibit 3-2 provides estimates of the percent distribution of revenues that constitute available funding.
Exhibit 3-2: Percent Distribution of Revenues that Constitute Available Funding C u r r e n t 2 000- 0 1 Fe d e r a l 40 % State Fu e l Ta x e s 38 % Fe d e r a l 30 % Fu t u r e 20 19- 2 0 State Fu e l Ta x e s 52 % Re n ta l Ca r S u rc h a rg e 5% V e hic le Dr iv e n 17 % Re n ta l Ca r S u rc h a rg e 4% V e hic le Dr iv e n 14 % Source: Florida Consensus Estimating Conference, updated June 29,2000 As shown in the Exhibit 3-2, there is an increasing reliance upon the state fuel tax for transportation funding from year 2000-01 to year 2019-20.
By year 2019-20 over half of state transportation revenues are projected to be derived from the state fuel tax.
In the short-term and into the intermediate term this would appear to be an acceptable funding strategy since Florida indexes the state fuel tax, which combined with increasing travel volume results in inflation adjusted growth in state fuel tax revenues.
For the longer term, uncertainties exist stemming from technological and behavioral impacts that increase the risk associated with increased reliance upon state fuel tax revenues.
Any slippage in fuel tax growth would add to the shortfall for funding the FIHS and the entire state system.
3.5.1 Technological and Behavioral Impacts on State Fuel Tax Revenues Changes in fuel consumption will be dependent on the direction and pace of technological change and changes in behavior associated with technology.
The effects will be twofold.
Technological and behavioral changes will have positive and negative effects on fuel consumption and the resulting state fuel tax revenues and, correspondingly, have opposite impacts on the use of the FIHS in particular and the Florida highway system in general.
Exhibit 3-3 provides summary information on possible technology and behavior impacts on fuel tax revenue and use of the highway system.
Some of the impacts have reasonable bases for developing quantified estimates of effects on fuel consumption and revenues, e.g., vehicle efficiency and alternative fuels, while others are thought to have effects that have not been fully F IN A L R E P O RT 3.9 F L O RI DA D EPARTM ENT O F T RANSPORT AT I O N quantified, e.g., ITS applications consisting of GPS navigation, intelligent signs, and automated traffic flow.
Increased VMT and growth rate of tourism, which lead to increased fuel consumption and increased state fuel tax revenues are factored into the FDOT forecasting methodology, thus these impacts have been accounted for.
Exhibit 3-3 Technology and Behavior Impacts on Fuel Tax Revenue and Use of System Change Description Potential Effect on Fuel Tax Revenue Potential Effect on Use of Transportation System Vehicle Efficiency Technological advances that increase fuel efficiency in vehicles and hybrid vehicles Transition from gasoline to alternative fuels such as natural gas or methane W ith the advent of the Internet there is a reduced need to drive to stores to comparison shop Direct sales allows distribution of goods directly to consumer, so goods need only be in transit once W orking from home rather than the office, thereby avoiding travel during peak hours Dropping unemployment combined with growth in absolute number of jobs leads to more commuters Combining traditionally separate journeys into a single, more efficient trip Onboard computer allows driver to avoid potential trouble spots, thereby decreasing trip time Controlled speed and following distances of vehicles Alternative Fuels E-Commerce Retail E-Commerce Businessto-Business Telecommuting W ork Force Participation Trip Chaining GPS/Intelligent Signs Automated Traffic Flow The estimates of displacement of future fuel use and corresponding fuel tax revenues were derived from work conducted by the Office of Transportation Technologies (OTT), U.S. F IN A L R E P O RT 3.10 F L O RI DA D EPARTM ENT O F T RANSPORT AT I O N Department of Energy, "Quality Metrics."
Evaluations are conducted on an annual basis in the U.S. DOE Office of Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy (EE/RE) to assess the energy and environmental benefits potential of EE/RE programs that include the following: !"T echnology Utilization: Compressed Natural Gas(CNG), EPACT (Alternative fuel term used by EPA), and Clean Cities Fleet Mandates !"Fuels Development: Ethanol used in flexible-fuel vehicles, dedicated vehicles, and fuel cell vehicles; and as contained in blends and extenders !"Advanced Automotive Technologies (Light Vehicles and Class 1 and 2 Trucks): Electric Battery Vehicle R
Technologies Truck (Classes 3 8) erials !"Heavy Vehicle !"Advanced Mat Propulsion System Materials: Ceramics Light Vehicle Materials for electric, hybrid, and fuel cell vehicles Heavy Vehicle Materials Based on the fuel efficiencies and displacement of gasoline and diesel by alternative fuels that these technological applications and developments are expected to achieve between 2000 and 2020, FDOT will suffer decreases in fuel tax revenues.
The following provides estimates of fuel tax revenue losses through 2020 for the three taxes levied at the state level: !"Lost !"Lost !"Lost State Fuel Sales Tax revenue - $1,490 million SCETS Tax revenue - $840 million State Fuel Tax for Local Use - $640 million The KPMG analysis supporting these estimates of lost fuel tax revenues is provided in Appendix C. W hile the total lost fuel tax revenue may be substantial, most of the lost revenue occurs in the 2011 to 2020 time horizon.
Between 2001 and 2010 lost fuel tax revenue is estimated at $370 million, with no lost revenue forecast other than a minor amount in 2004.
The major revenue losses would be expected to occur in the longer time horizon of 2011 to 2020 where state fuel tax revenue losses could be $2.6 billion, if the technology adaptations and innovations analyzed by OTT are implemented and achieve market acceptance.
In addition to these fuel tax revenue losses, increased telecommuting will have a negative effect on fuel tax revenues through 2020.
Using data from the USDOT report, Transportation F IN A L R E P O RT 3.11 F L O RI DA D EPARTM ENT O F T RANSPORT AT I O N Implications of Telecommuting, it is expected that the number of employees that telecommute an average of two days per week will reach 1.3 million by 2020 in Florida.
These reductions in auto commuting translate to the following estimates of fuel tax revenue losses through 2020 for the three taxes levied at the state level.
!"Lost !"Lost !"Lost State Fuel Sales Tax revenue - $99 million SCETS Tax revenue - $54 million State Fuel Tax for Local Use- $43 million These potential fuel tax losses steadily increase with $60 million forecast in the 2001-2010 time frame to $136 million forecast in the 2011-2020 time frame.
Exhibit 3-4 depicts the trend in potential state fuel tax losses on a yearly basis and shows the potential cumulative losses through year 2020.
Exhibit 3-4: Potential State Fuel Tax Revenue Losses $4 50 .0 $4 00 .0 $3 ,500 .0 Lo s s R e ve nue s C u m m ul a ti v e R e v e nue s Loss ($ in m i ll io n ) C u m m u l a t i ve R e ve n u e s L o s t $3 ,000 .0 $2 ,500 .0 $2 ,000 .0 $1 ,500 .0 $1 ,000 .0 $5 00 .0 $00 01 02 03 04 05 06 07 08 09 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 R e v e nue s Loss ($ i n m i l l i on) $3 50 .0 $3 00 .0 $2 50 .0 $2 00 .0 $1 50 .0 $1 00 .0 $5 0.0 $20 20 20 20 20 20 20 20 20 20 20 20 20 20 20 20 20 20 20 20 20 Source: KPMG estimate derived from the Office of Transportation Technology, U.S. DOE," Quality Metrics" As shown in the exhibit, state fuel tax revenue losses could reach $3 billion by year 2020.
The yearly values from 2004 to 2010 were estimated using a form of an "S" curve, which estimates increments to the percent reduction at a non-uniform rate.
This accounts for time lags in the development and market acceptance of technology.
From 2011 to 2020 it was assumed that reductions in fuel use would follow a uniform pattern of equal increments on a yearly basis.
Exhibit 2020.
of $29 project F IN A L 3-5 shows the relative impact of the fuel revenue loss on estimated funding through The potential revenue loss increases the funding gap from $29B to $32B.
The shortfall billion is largely a result of programming without recognition of funding constraints.
The ed shortfalls for funding the FIHS through year 2020 are beyond the traditional resources E P O RT R 3.12 F L O RI DA D EPARTM ENT O F T RANSPORT AT I O N available for transportation programs.
Forecasted fuel tax revenues for 2000-01 developed by FDOT indicate that approximately $1.2 billion will be generated from the Highway Fuel Sales Tax and SCETS Tax.
For example, a 10 percent increase in these taxes (about 1 1/2-cents per gallon on gasoline) would generate an addition $120 million in revenue in 2000-01.
Growing that revenue stream over twenty years at a 2 percent rate results in about $2.9 billion in increased revenue for the twenty year period extending to year 2020.
The potential fuel tax revenue losses of $3 billion present a different problem.
Should these losses occur then the portion of the FIHS program for which funding is thought to be available through 2020 will be reduced by approximately 17 percent.
Exhibit 3-5: Fuel Revenue Loss Impact on Funding $25 .0 FIH S Funding N e e d s ($ in billion) $20 .0 F IHS F unding Need s E x pec t ed F u n d i n g Les s F uel Ta x S h ort fall $15 .0 $10 .0 $5.0 $F Y 2000 F Y 2010 F Y 2020 3.6 R ECOM M E NDED S TR A T E G I E S W hile the fuel tax has been and will continue to be a large revenue generator in the immediate future, other opportunities for revenue generation exist.
The funding strategies described below are intended to lessen the dependence on fuel tax revenues.
This is not intended as a policy prescription for the short and immediate terms, instead it represents some strategic directions that should be considered for long term funding of the STTF focusing on continued implementation of the FIHS. F IN A L R E P O RT 3.13 F L O RI DA D EPARTM ENT O F T RANSPORT AT I O N Recommendation 1: Evaluate the following revenue enhancement strategies as candidates for augmenting STTF revenues The evaluation should be initiated with the assessment of expanding toll facilities, as this would provide the largest potential financial contribution for expanding the FIHS, and the implementation of an Express Lane and/or HOT Lane program in highly congested urban areas.
All other revenue enhancement strategies, discussed below, should be assessed with regard to revenue potential (and cost savings) compared to the resources required for implementation.
Revenue Enhancement Strategy # 1: Expansion of Turnpike Description: Systematic expansion of toll facilities and periodic toll rate increases to compensate for inflation.
Case studies: Infrastructure Management Group (IMG) Strategic Management Assessment 
This represents additional financial capacity beyond the funding generated from transportation related taxes, and imposing user fees on toll facility users in no way diminishes the revenue from these transportation related taxes, e.g., fuel taxes, registration fees, etc.
Costs: The costs are borne by toll facility users.
Applications: The expansion of the existing Turnpike system financed through tolls would provide funding for current capital project commitments and a variety of 20-Year Transportation System Plan (TSP) projects that include expansion of lane-miles, interchanges, access ramps, and ITS applications.
Revenue potential: W ith an enhanced Turnpike system under FDOT or operated as an independent Authority, toll revenues could support a $6.5 billion capital program through 2020.
The $6.5 billion capital program reflects an increase of approximately $1.4 billion compared to the current projection under the base case (maintaining the Turnpike District under the current structure).
This investment of $6.5 billion contributes to the expansion of the FIHS.
The investment could increase the total Turnpike system from 1,701 lane miles to 2,321 lane miles, an increase of 36 percent.
Revenue Enhancement Strategy # 2: Value Pricing High Occupancy Toll (HOT) Lanes Description: HOT lanes are constructed adjacent to a free road and involve selling excess capacity that exists in a High Occupancy Vehicle (HOV) lane.
Optional fees are paid by drivers of single-occupant-vehicles (SOV) to gain access to alternative road facilities providing a superior level of service and offering time savings compared to a free facility.
F IN A L R E P O RT 3.14 F L O RI DA D EPARTM ENT O F T RANSPORT AT I O N Case studies: HOT lanes have been implemented Express lanes in Orange County and the implement in San Diego Both facilities feature variable pricing, peak travel.
On a per-mile basis, peak tolls are the country.
in California with construction of the SR-91 ation of HOTs lanes on the I-15 HOV facility which is traffic sensitive for peak and offhighest of any toll road facility in the Benefits: HOT lanes utilize the excess capacity of HOV lanes, and variable pricing controls traffic volume to maintain acceptable service levels.
The HOT lane thus serves a three-fold purpose: (1) preserving preferred travel facilities for HOVs; (2) generating additional revenue from tolls; (3) variable toll structure can serve as a Travel Demand Management tool.
An additional benefit to the HOT lane users is the segregation from truck traffic.
Costs: HOT lanes need investment similar to toll road facilities.
The concept of a HOT lane that also serves HOV traffic requires a physical separation of the HOT lanes from the adjacent free road.
Experience in California indicates that monitoring "free" and tolled traffic leads to onerous administration costs, and current policies moved the toll exemptions for HOVs.
Applications: The implementation of HOT lanes would be most effective in multi-lane urban corridors with high levels of congestion.
This would fulfill the criterion for variable tolls, where the HOT lane offered meaningful travel time-savings during peak travel.
Revenue potential: The 8-mile HOT lane facility in San Diego on I-15 generates approximately $8,000 per day in tolls based on a vehicle mix of 75 percent HOV, and 25 percent tolled vehicles.
Based on a 250 days of revenue this equates to $2,000,000 per year or $250,000 per lane mile, with an average toll of approximately $2.00.
The I-15 project cost less than $10 million to implement, largely because the two HOV lanes were in place and already separated from the mainline freeway, which consists of four lanes in each direction.
Results for Florida would be largely dependent on the highway facilities in place, which would influence implementation costs, and traffic density, which would influence the ability to impose variable tolls at high per mile rates.
Revenue Enhancement Strategy # 3: Value Pricing Express Lanes Description: Express lanes are constructed adjacent to a free road and involve selling capacity created by adding a tolled facility.
Fees are paid by drivers to gain access to alternative road facilities providing a superior level of service and offering time-savings compared to a free facility.
There is no provision for mixing HOV and SOV traffic, toll schedules are developed based on vehicle size and classification and may involve variable tolling.
Case studies: Florida currently operates a number of tolled expansion projects that provide some indication of the revenue potential for implementing express lanes.
The primary example of a facility that now is strictly an express lane facility is SR-91 in California, which discontinued free use by HOV vehicles in 1998, (HOV users, 3+ per vehicle, now receive a 50% discount).
F IN A L R E P O RT 3.15 F L O RI DA D EPARTM ENT O F T RANSPORT AT I O N Benefits: Express lanes provide additional capacity to adjacent free lanes, and variable pricing may be implemented to control traffic volume to maintain acceptable service levels and achieve revenue maximization.
An additional benefit to the Express lane users can be the segregation from truck traffic.
In comparison to HOT lanes, express lanes achieve: (1) increased revenue from charging all traffic; (2) avoid administrative and compliance costs associated with mixed HOV and SOV traffic; and (3) increase traffic diverted from free lanes through pricing strategies.
Costs: Express lanes need investment similar to toll road facilities.
The concept of express lanes requires a physical separation of the express lanes from the adjacent free road.
Applications: The implementation of express lanes would be most effective in multi-lane urban corridors with high levels of congestion.
This would fulfill the criterion for variable tolls, where the express lanes offered meaningful travel time-savings during peak travel.
Revenue potential: SR-91, which discontinued free use to HOV users in 1998, collected $20 million in tolls in 1998.
Revenue potential from this example is $1 million per lane mile, or based on use approximately $2.15 per transaction, which amounts to a toll rate $.215 per mile.
This is a variable toll facility, where toll levels are used to maintain level of service.
The capital cost of the facility was $131.8 million.
The potential for Florida is largely related to congestion on free facilities which will both create sufficient traffic density on express lanes and command toll rates per mile which are among the highest in the nation.
Revenue Enhancement Strategy # 4: Shadow Tolls Description: The concept of shadow tolls is linked to private implementation of highway facilities, whereby the shadow tolls represent revenues paid by a third party (usually a governmental entity) to an operator of a facility based on traffic volume.
The shadow tolls attempt to replicate explicit toll charges based on traffic counts along a specific facility.
Shadow tolls are usually implemented in conjunction with a public/private venture i.e., a design-buildoperate-maintain (DBOM) contract.
Case studies: Shadow toll facilities have been implemented in Canada, United Kingdom and Finland.
FDOT operates two shadow toll facilities that serve Pro Player Stadium and Broward Arena.
The FDOT applications are special purpose facilities that are used only in conjunction with events at the two stadiums.
Payments for the shadow tolls are borne by the users through the charge for parking.
Benefits: The innovative procurement structure (DBOM) shifts substantial risk to the private sector.
The fact that a private entity builds, operates, and maintains the facility adds road capacity through private investment, replacing public capital.
The procurement arrangement, which encompasses DBOM generates efficiency gains and leads to facilities that are implemented recognizing life-cycle costs.
F IN A L R E P O RT 3.16 F L O RI DA D EPARTM ENT O F T RANSPORT AT I O N Costs: The financial burden for paying the shadow tolls is shifted to the STTF rather than facility users.
Implementing a facility using shadow tolls rather than a user pay toll facility results in lost toll revenue.
A shadow toll facility may be financed to some extent through value capture funding sources generated from non-users who benefit from the transportation investment, which include the following: !"Transportation development district income !"Developer fees or recurring charges !"Land banking proceeds (in the vicinity of interchanges/access points) !"Tax increment financing !"Special tax assessments (benefit assessment district, increments to par These sources of funds are used to lessen reliance on STTF revenues.
king fees) Applications: These types of facilities could be developed in conjunction with an expanded toll road system.
The DBOM procurement and shadow toll reimbursement scheme would be implemented to develop free roads that provide the alternative to the tolled facilities.
Shadow tolls could be used as a transportation demand management strategy whereby FDOT would make payments to a toll facility for reductions in toll rates to encourage diversion of traffic from adjacent free roads that were operating over capacity.
This arrangement would distribute traffic and besides benefiting road users would delay capital expansion requirements, e.g., lane widening on free facilities.
Revenue potential: The revenue potential, based strictly on a timing issue relates to the acceleration in project implementation, which reduces the necessity of public (FDOT) investment.
Any revenue generated would be highly dependent on identifying projects in growth corridors where development potential and risk level for development projects provide the conditions for employing value capture revenue strategies.
Revenue Enhancement Strategy # 5: Naming Rights Description:
Naming rights entails the selling of the "rights" to name a public facility (e.g., toll road).
Naming rights have migrated from sports stadiums and arenas to performing arts centers.
The latest application is a shopping mall, which has been named by a credit card company.
Case studies: Naming rights deals exceed $1 billion and have expanded from major sports venues to colleges and minor league sports.
In Florida, the following table summarizes some major naming rights deals.
F IN A L R E P O RT 3.17 F L O RI DA D EPARTM ENT O F T RANSPORT AT I O N Team Miami Dolphins Tampa Bay Buccaneers Tampa Bay Devil Rays Facility Name Pro Player Stadium Houlihan's Stadium Tropicana Field Duration 10 years 5 years 30 years Est.
Value $20 million $10 million $46 million Source: Naming Rights Deals, Team Marketing Report, Inc.
Deloitte 
Benefits: A naming rights deal represents a type of contractually obligated income that provides a facility with revenue stability and predictability in debt service.
Costs: None.
Presumably any entity that purchased naming rights would assume the financial responsibility for installing signage or other media for promotion purposes.
Safety is a major issue with regard to naming rights that lead to promotional media along the roadway, which add to distractions to the road users.
Application: Naming rights could be extended to highway corridors, toll plazas, and concession areas.
Factors that influence the value of a naming rights deal to the purchaser specifically are: !"Number of impressions or exposures !"Sponsorship and cross-promotion oppor !"Tax deductible expense !"Brand exclusivity !"Public relations and community image !"Related amenities tunities Revenue potential: Naming rights could be a revenue source for defraying a modest amount of operations and maintenance expenses.
This would not be a revenue generator to support a corridor capital investment program.
The analogous data from the estimated value of naming rights for sports stadiums indicate that naming rights represent a small portion of total facility costs.
Stadium costs run into the hundreds of millions dollars, naming rights on a yearly basis are in the $1-$2 million range.
Revenue Enhancement Strategy # 6: Joint Development Resource Leveraging Description: The cost sharing or leasing of public assets with private entities for contractual payments, shared revenues or in-kind payments.
Case studies: Leasing of air space and ground rents, leasing of right-of-way.
In Florida, the Cypress Creek park-n-ride is being redeveloped as a mixed-use development project.
F IN A L R E P O RT 3.18 F L O RI DA D EPARTM ENT O F T RANSPORT AT I O N Benefits: Adaptive use of existing assets to generate direct revenue and indirect revenue (e.g., direct income from leases and property tax revenue from real estate development created on air rights).
Costs: Requires a unit within FDOT to inventory department assets, provide asset valuation, determine potential private sector applications, administer an application process, conduct negotiations, and enter into contracts.
This may require legislative authority.
Application: Right of way leases for communications and utilities have already been executed by FDOT through the Loadstar contract.
The other major potentials involve air rights and ground leases at highway access points and at fixed guideway transit stations.
These are not large revenue generating strategies.
Revenue potential: A joint development program implemented by the W ashington Metropolitan Transportation Authority (W MATA) has generated up to $7.0 million per year in revenue from air rights leases.
To place this in perspective the asset base of W MATA exceeds $10.0 billion.
Revenue Enhancement Strategy # 7: Asset Management Infrastructure Preservation Description: A broad definition of asset management involves life-cycle costing leading to asset preservation to eliminate more expensive replacement costs.
Case studies: Long-term build and maintain contracts, which contain road condition specifications.
Benefits: An infrastructure management strategy focusing on system preservation rather than routine maintenance and replacement offers substantial life-cycle cost savings.
Costs: Financial benefits are generated in the out-years of the infrastructure useful life.
Initial costs may be higher, since the objective is economy over the life of the asset, not procuring an asset strictly on the basis of low bid.
Application: Requires shifting management focus to system preservation, which places increased reliance on DBOM contractual arrangements, featuring long-term maintenance contracts that specify acceptable road conditions.
If road condition specifications are not met, the DBOM contractor is responsible for remedies leading to system preservation.
Revenue potential: Does not generate revenue.
Cost savings occur in the future, and the largest costs savings would occur beyond 2020, when preservation focus eliminates the necessity to replace infrastructure.
F IN A L R E P O RT 3.19 F L O RI DA D EPARTM ENT O F T RANSPORT AT I O N Revenue Enhancement Strategy # 8: Cash Management Description: Cash management is not a revenue enhancement strategy per se; however, efficient cash management could allow FDOT to expedite important highway projects.
FDOT is required to maintain a minimum cash balance of $50 million in accordance with Florida Statutes, Section 339.135(6)(b).
Cash management is important, because while FDOT operates under a commitment budget, actual expenditures will occur in different months and even different years beyond the legislative commitment.
Cash balances are therefore essential for the FDOT to meet its contractual obligations.
Exhibit 3-6 provides the actual and forecast of FDOT's average monthly cash balances for fiscal years 1994-95 through 2006-07.
Exhibit 3-6: Average Monthly Cash Balance (1995-2007) $500.0 $450.0 $400.0 C a sh B a la n c e s ($ in m illio n s) $350.0 $300.0 $250.0 $200.0 His t or ic al Fo r e ca st B a lanc e Requir e ment $150.0 $100.0 $50.0 $1995 1996 1997 1998 1999 2000 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005 2006 2007 S t at e F i sc al Y ear Source: Office of Financial Management, Comptroller's Office As indicated above, during the past five fiscal years, the average monthly cash balance has been approximately $366 million far exceeding Florida Statutes requirement of maintaining a minimum cash balance of $50 million.
Additionally, the cash balance is forecasted to be significantly higher than the minimum balance requirement during the next several fiscal years.
Spending down these cash balances could provide a one-time stimulus for project acceleration.
Case Studies: N.A. F IN A L R E P O RT 3.20 F L O RI DA D EPARTM ENT O F T RANSPORT AT I O N Benefits: Keeping excess cash at a minimum results in improved effectiveness with regard to delivering the FDOT program.
Excess cash can be combined with other funding sources to leverage project value.
Costs: Keeping excess cash at a minimum requires careful monitoring of projects in regard to reimbursements.
In the event FDOT experiences a cash shortfall, the Legislature can arrange a temporary transfer of funds within the State Treasury to meet temporary deficiencies (Florida Statutes, Section 218.18).
Application: Excess cash could be applied to any programmatic area under FDOT.
Revenue potential: This will not generate additional revenue.
It consists of a one-time action to spend down excess cash to achieve project acceleration and potentially leverage greater project value when combined with other funding sources.
Revenue Enhancement Strategy # 9: Weight-Distance Tax Description: The funding strategies available to FDOT, other than the major expansion of tolled facilities, do not generate sufficient revenue to counter the downside risk in future fuel tax revenues.
Nor do these strategies significantly contribute to closing the funding shortfall gap for the continued development of the FIHS through year 2020.
A major source of funding in the future is likely to be a weight-distance tax based on: !"Vehicle !"Mileag !"Peak size e traveled /off-peak facility use This type of tax can be implemented when Intelligent Transportation Systems (ITS) are in place from both the perspective of the highway infrastructure and vehicle interface technology.
Case studies: N/A Benefits: Recent advances in technology have made it possible to introduce a weight-distance tax based on vehicle size, mileage traveled and peak/off-peak facility use.
A weight-distance tax could provide additional revenues to large and economically important states, such as Florida.
Costs: Implementation of a weight-distance tax would require support and coordination from all state transportation agencies across the nation.
Additionally, compatibility of ITS applications and network would be the key requirement for such a tax to be feasible.
F IN A L R E P O RT 3.21 F L O RI DA D EPARTM ENT O F T RANSPORT AT I O N Application: Some of the evolving technology and behavior impacts are predicted to have a negative effect on gasoline (and diesel) fuel consumption, which will ultimately lead to declining fuel tax revenues.
The issue then becomes, "how do we raise revenues from behaviors that still use the highway infrastructure but have a decreased reliance on gasoline and diesel fuels?" The obvious alternatives are to tax alternative fuel vehicles directly and tax alternative fuels through some type of consumption tax, based on BTU value.
W hile these actions would have some positive impact on revenues, these demand-side responses could have adverse effects on the major public policy objectives of promoting clean air, reducing reliance on foreign sources of fuels, and fostering technological innovations and applications.
A weight-distance tax would address some of these concerns.
Revenue potential: A weight-distance tax has a potential to reducing the funding gap.
This revenue enhancement strategy should be further evaluated to determine the revenue potential.
**************************************** The project team recommends that the revenue enhancement strategies discussed above should be further evaluated based on the following issues and criteria: !"Revenue yield Timing of revenue flows Stability of revenue flows Growth potential Response to inflation acceptance !"Public Equity Incentive and distortion effects on the state and regional economies Benchmarking with other states al/Regulatory !"Leg Required enabling legislation Regulatory authorization inistrative/Institutional 3.22 !"Adm F IN A L R E P O RT F L O RI DA D EPARTM ENT O F T RANSPORT AT I O N Revenue assessment and collection mechanisms Evasion/avoidance potential Recommendation 2: Establish a threshold for supporting funding needs for the nonhighway modes through STTF Presently, the Florida Statutes requires that FDOT allocate a minimum of 15 percent of its annual budget appropriation for public transportation.
Unlike, highway funding needs, other transportation modes such as transit, rail, aviation, seaports and intermodal have dedicated revenue sources to fund their operations.
A referendum passed in the latest election regarding high-speed rail may require substantial investment, which potentially could drain needed funding away from the highway projects.
Transit systems are primarily supported by local effort and Federal new start funds.
Aviation has reliable funding sources from passenger facility charges, user fees, concessions, and parking.
Seaports have a series of user fees applied to vessels, cargo and passengers.
Intercity rail prospects for enhanced funding are closely linked to the arrangements between the Federal government and Amtrak.
W hether FDOT through the STTF has the lead or support role with regard to programming and financing projects, it is clear that the shortfalls identified in this chapter may not be funded.
The recognition of a shortfall in the planning process in no way assumes that the funding will be provided through raising existing taxes and/or user fees, or implementing new taxes and/or user fees.
The project team recommends that the STTF should be used in a support role to provide limited grant and loan programs for the non-highway modes, with an established percentage allocation for public transportation.
Financial support should provide gap funding for project implementation/acceleration.
Recommendation 3: Planning process should take into consideration expected available funding for the planned expansion of the FIHS The planning process for the FIHS is driven by the objectives to; enhance mobility, provide for safety, and further economic development.
This is a sensible planning perspective.
The planning; however, is conducted without recognition of funding constraints.
Additionally, the planning process does not identify what potential impacts the lack of funding would have on the State Highway System.
W hile it is prudent to entertain more projects than can be funded, since some projects may be delayed and thus others can be moved forward, the current practice of forecasting a shortfall far in excess of planned expenditures does not help the program planning and implementation process.
In fact may reflect poorly on FDOT with regard to a perception that the plan for the FIHS consists of a wish list of projects, with more projects placed in the shortfall category, than those that ultimately will be programmed.
The project team recommends that FDOT's planning process should take into consideration expected available funding for the planned expansion of the FIHS. F IN A L R E P O RT 3.23
