Commission on Education Finance, Equity, and Excellence Minutes September 6, 2001 The Commission on Education Finance, Equity, and Excellence held its fourth meeting of the 2001 interim on Thursday, September 6, 2001, at 1:00 p.m. in Room 130 of the Lowe House Office Building, Annapolis, Maryland.
The following members were present: Mr. Joseph F. Anderson, III Senator Michael J. Collins Delegate Norman H. Conway Secretary T. Eloise Foster Ms. Beatrice B. Gordon Delegate Sheila Hixson Senator Barbara A. Hoffman, Chair Ms. Loretta Johnson Dr. Donald Langenberg Mr. William T. Middleton Ms. Elizabeth K. Moyer Senator Robert R. Neall Ms. Carolyn Y. Perkins Ms. Marilyn Praisner Mr. Walter Sondheim, Jr.
Dr. G. William Troxler Mr. John F. Wagoner Chairman's Opening Remarks Senator Hoffman announced that Dr. Thornton had experienced a death in the family and would not be present at the meeting.
She also stated that Dr. Thornton had asked her to chair the meeting in his absence.
Senator Hoffman began the meeting by stating that the Commission's recommendations regarding ways to enhance Maryland's school finance system were still a work in progress.
She stated that no final decisions had been made about changes to the State's school finance system and that the Commission needed to spend more time exploring various options before making final decisions.
Adequacy Studies Conducted in other States Senator Hoffman then invited Mike Griffith, Policy Analyst, Education Commission of the States, to present the results of a survey of adequacy studies conducted in other states.
The results of this survey are set forth in a document entitled "A Survey of Finance Adequacy Studies."
Ms. Praisner asked whether the state share of funding had increased in other states after the completion of the adequacy studies.
Mr. Griffith stated that, in Ohio, the state share of the
Minutes September 6, 2001 Page 2 foundation increased slightly from 50% to 52%.
In Wyoming, the state provided almost all of the funding for education both before and after the adequacy studies.
Ms. Praisner asked how the adequacy studies conducted in other states compare to the adequacy studies conducted in Maryland, particularly with regard to cost and length of time needed to conduct the study.
Dr. John Augenblick, Partner, Augenblick 
However, he stated that the South Carolina study was different from A
Dr. Augenblick stated that in all of the other states that used a successful schools approach, the studies were conducted at the district level rather than the school level.
With regard to the cost of the adequacy studies, Dr. Augenblick estimated that each of the studies conducted in other states cost approximately $100,000.
The study in South Carolina took approximately six months to conduct, similar to the length of time that it took to conduct the adequacy study in Maryland.
The study in Ohio took approximately four months to complete, but A
Dr. Augenblick noted that the Ohio Supreme Court had issued an opinion on September 6, 2001, under which the successful schools approach was determined to be an appropriate method for determining adequacy of education funding.
Dr. Augenblick stated that he had not yet read the opinion, but that he believes that the court concluded that one aspect of the successful schools approach used in Ohio was invalid.
Specifically, Dr. Augenblick stated that he thinks that the court concluded that it was inappropriate to exclude the highest spending and lowest spending school districts from the study.
This was not done in the Maryland successful schools study.
He also thinks that the court concluded that a certain aspect of the new school finance system in Ohio must be implemented more quickly than the planned five-year phase-in.
Funding for Gifted and Talented Students Senator Hoffman asked Dr. Augenblick to brief the Commission on issues relating to separate funding for gifted and talented students.
Dr. Augenblick stated that, generally, there are three reasons that justify the creation of separate funding streams for particular programs: (1) the proportion of students affected varies across school districts, requiring the state to recognize the different fiscal impact in different places; (2) the cost of the program is relatively high, so even if the proportion of pupils is similar, the fiscal impact is large and needs to be recognized; and (3) there is a need to be sure that funds are spent for the program even when the proportion of pupils affected is similar across districts and the cost of the program is low.
With regard to the first rationale, Dr. Augenblick stated that it is difficult to identify and count pupils that are gifted and/or talented.
Dr. Augenblick stated that policy makers in other states have debated this issue without reaching a definitive answer.
Some feel uncomfortable using objective tests and others feel uncomfortable using subjective judgements.
As a result, policy
Minutes September 6, 2001 Page 3 makers typically reach an agreement that a specific proportion of pupils would be expected to be gifted/talented in every district -- which means all districts are assumed to have similar proportions of pupils with those special needs.
Under this circumstance, gifted/talented programs are different from programs for at-risk pupils or Limited English Proficiency Programs (LEP) where it is clear that the proportions of pupils needing services varies from place to place.
With regard to the second rationale, Dr. Augenblick stated that this is one of the justifications for creating a weight for special education even though the proportion of pupils with special education needs may be somewhat similar across districts.
He stated that when the cost of a program is much higher than the base cost, as is true with many special education programs, it makes sense to identify such costs and to allocate state aid for them in a different way than the approach used to fund base costs.
For example, the state might want to pay a different proportion of such costs than it does for base costs or it might choose not to "equalize" such costs (relative to district wealth) where base costs are equalized.
However, Dr. Augenblick stated that, as far as he knows, there is no consensus either that the costs of serving gifted/talented students are very high in comparison to base costs or that there is a reason to fund them in a different manner than is done for base costs.
With regard to the third rationale, Dr. Augenblick stated that it can be argued that this rationale applies to funding for gifted and talented students.
However, he stated that a decision to specify how much state aid should be spent by a local school district for gifted and talented students violates an underlying principle of standards-based reform, under which the state is viewed as having responsibility for specifying a set of performance objectives, providing an appropriate amount of funding, and giving districts as much flexibility as possible to spend funds in ways they determine will produce the desired results.
Dr. Augenblick stated that if the state specifies how funds should be spent, it can only hold local districts accountable for spending the funds in that particular way.
Dr. Augenblick stated that an alternative to creating a separate funding stream for gifted and talented students is to require that a local district spend some funds on gifted and talented programs.
Dr. Augenblick noted that neither A
(MAP) addressed the issue of gifted/talented students directly in the work that was done to develop a base cost figure or to determine a set of adjustments to that figure for cost pressures beyond the control of school districts.
He stated that the A
He stated that, in his opinion, participants could not distinguish costs for gifted/talented programs any more than they could specify costs for mathematics or reading programs.
The view of the panelists was that the resources they provided should be adequate to provide such essential programs and that it was not necessary, or appropriate, to identify specific personnel or materials for mathematics programs, reading programs, or gifted/talented programs.
Dr. Augenblick's comments on this topic are outlined in more detail in a memorandum to the Commission dated September 6, 2001.
Minutes September 6, 2001 Page 4 Senator Hoffman stated that she wanted to get input from the Commission on Funding and Services for Gifted and Talented Student Education in Maryland.
Dr. Troxler, who is a member of this Commission, stated that, with one caveat, Dr. Augenblick's comments were reflected in the deliberations of the Commission.
He stated that the Commission is heading towards adopting a specific recommendation regarding the adequate funding level for gifted and talented students.
He stated that the Commission's final report is expected to be released in December 2001.
Issues Relating to Enrollment Declines Senator Hoffman asked Justin Silverstein, Associate, A
Mr. Silverstein stated that declining enrollments can be a hindrance to school districts for a number of reasons.
The most important reason is that declining enrollment usually leads to lower revenues in most state funding systems.
Though this loss of revenue is due to an actual loss of students, often districts cannot make immediate adjustments to their spending.
This reflects planning that is done years in advance and financial commitments made in prior years.
If a district loses a number of students but they come from a wide range of schools and, within those schools, a wide range of classrooms, then, few, if any resources can be given up.
Even if the student losses are not spread out, a district may not be able to respond in the current school year.
Mr. Silverstein stated that other states usually deal with declining enrollments in one of two ways: (1) they hold harmless district funding from year to year; or (2) they adjust district pupil counts to limit the effect of the decreasing enrollment.
Hold harmless clauses in state funding formulas try to help districts make this transition by stabilizing funding in the short term.
The hold harmless provisions work differently in each state.
Some states insure that a district will receive as much funding in the current year than it did in the previous year.
Other states actually guarantee at least a minimal increase in state aid.
Other states put a floor on the amount any district can lose.
All of these methods help districts cope with losses in funding but some create situations where districts continue to receive funding for students who do not exist long after the time when they should have been able to make adjustments.
States that use pupil count adjustments usually do not have the problem of continued funding of students who do not exist.
Even though they use an inflated pupil count in one year to determine funding and to smooth the transition for districts, these inflated counts are phased out relatively quickly.
Some states allow a district to use the previous year pupil count if it is higher than the current year count.
The next year the district cannot use this count and will have to use a lower pupil count.
Other states, allow districts to use either the current year or a multi-year average enrollment.
This smooths the transition but makes districts use lower counts in each year if enrollment continues to decline.
Another method, is to make no adjustment up to a certain percent decrease, but not allow enrollment to decline below that level.
Mr. Silverstein stated that A
Minutes September 6, 2001 Page 5 Ms. Moyer and Dr. Langenburg noted that basing state aid on the a problem for a district that experiences a large increase in enrollment year.
They asked how other states deal with this issue.
Dr. Augenblick current enrollment counts, so growth is not really a problem.
On the declining enrollment present a real problem that states try to mitigate.
prior year's enrollment is during a particular school stated that most states use other hand, he stated that
Mr. Silverstein stated that a third method of funding, which A
Corridor funding takes into account that minor swings in pupil enrollment, either up or down, probably do not have a real fiscal impact on a district.
Instead, it only addresses enrollment fluctuations above or below a certain percent.
That is to say that there are no adjustments made for a district if the district's increase or decrease is within the set percent.
For districts whose enrollment change is above or below this percent, adjustments are made within the formula.
This method allows for the normal fluctuations that a district deals with in enrollment while still helping smooth the transition for districts with large shifts in pupils.
Senator Hoffman expressed interest in this methodology.
Mr. Silverstein ended his comments by stating that: (1) school districts do need help in dealing with the loss of revenues associated with declining enrollment if the loss is relatively large and has taken place recently; (2) though districts do need some time to adjust spending, they should be able to makes these adjustments in one or two school years; and (3) minor fluctuations in enrollment do not have a drastic impact on a local school system.
Mr. Silverstein's comments are outlined in more detail in a memorandum to the Commission dated September 6, 2001.
Things to Consider When Evaluating Alternative Approaches to Enhancing Maryland's School Finance System Senator Hoffman asked staff to outline issues that the Commission needs to consider as it reviews alternative approaches to Maryland's school finance system.
John Rohrer, Coordinator, Fiscal and Policy Analysis, Department of Legislative Services, began by stating that the Commission's primary goal at this point in time is to determine how to bridge the "gap" between the current level of education funding in Maryland and the "adequate" amount of education funding calculated under the adequacy studies.
He stated that there are a number of key issues that need to be resolved in order to determine whether any particular approach to bridging this gap is a good one.
He asked Rachel Hise, Policy Analyst, Department of Legislative Services and Mark Collins, Policy Analyst, Department of Legislative Services to discuss these key issues in more detail.
Ms. Hise and Mr. Collins outlined key issues that relate to five general subject areas: (1) magnitude of the enhanced program (i.e., how much funding is adequate?); (2) State/local share of program costs; (3) implementation of the program; (4) distribution of State funds; and (5) specific characteristics of different approaches to enhancing Maryland's school finance system.
These issues
Minutes September 6, 2001 Page 6 are outlined in a document entitled "Things to Consider When Reviewing Alternative Approaches to Enhancing Maryland's School Finance System."
With regard to the first subject area, "magnitude of the enhanced program," Ms. Hise and Mr. Collins outlined the following key issues: (1) What base - successful schools, professional judgement, or something else - should be used? (2) What weights should be used for special needs students (i.e., special education, LEP, and Free and Reduced Price Meals (FRPM) students)? (3) Should affordability be considered? If so, how? (4) Should revenue sources to support the enhanced program be considered? If so, how? Mr. Rohrer, referring to Exhibit 1 of the presentation document, noted that the gap between current funding in Maryland and adequate funding calculated under the adequacy studies seems wider than the gaps identified by Mike Griffith in other states in which adequacy studies have been conducted.
Senator Hoffman noted that "current funding" in Exhibit 1 does not include all general education funding (e.g., funding for retirement and teacher salaries).
Mr. Sondheim asked whether staff could modify the per student foundation amount ($4,124) set forth in Exhibit 1 so that the chart could compare all general education funding provided by the State to the "adequate" foundation amount calculated under the adequacy studies.
Mr. Collins stated that the current per student foundation amount set forth in Exhibit 1 includes the local share of the foundation amount.
He stated that it would be very difficult to separate out the local per student funding amount and, therefore, very difficult to respond to Mr. Sondheim's request.
With regard to the question of "affordability," Senator Hoffman stated that certain assumptions in the adequacy studies do not reflect reality (i.e., adequate facilities and technology) and, therefore, the funding amounts calculated under the studies do not reflect all of the costs of reaching adequacy in Maryland.
Mr. Rohrer noted that the adequacy figures calculated under the adequacy studies are statewide averages -- i.e., the total cost of reaching adequacy divided by the total number of students in Maryland.
However, the actual amount of funding needed to reach adequacy in particular counties will vary.
This figure will be higher in some jurisdictions and lower in others because, although the base cost per pupil is the same for each county, the total funding per student will vary because there are different populations of special needs students in each county.
Senator Hoffman noted that reaching adequacy in all counties is not a "zero sum game."
She stated that total State funding would increase as enrollment increases.
With regard to the second subject area, "State/local share of program costs," Ms. Hise and Mr. Collins outlined the following key issues: (1) What should the State and local responsibilities for funding the program be? Currently the State provides about 43% of education funding, with local governments providing 52% and the federal government providing 5%.
(2) Should local governments be required to provide any of the "implied" local appropriations to reach the total adequacy figure (beyond the foundation)? Senator Hoffman stated that Exhibit 2 of the presentation document, which compares current State funding and funding proposed by the adequacy studies for special needs populations, is consistent with testimony received by the Commission during the 2000 interim that general education funding is currently being used to provide services to special needs students.
Minutes September 6, 2001 Page 7 Ms. Hise stated that the simulations presented to the Commission at today's meeting assume a 48% State share.
This is approximately 5% higher than the current State share.
Senator Hoffman stated that staff made certain assumptions regarding State and local share of education funding in order to run simulations of different approaches to enhancing Maryland's school finance system.
She stated that these assumptions are only a starting point for discussing this issue.
Dr. Langenburg questioned whether it was possible to predict how much new federal money might be available in the coming months.
Ms. Hise stated that it is impossible to answer this question with any certainty.
However, she noted that the infusion of new federal money would not affect the federal share of total education funding if State and local funding is also increased proportionately.
Mr. Collins and Mr. Rohrer noted that the current State and local share on a county by county basis varies significantly.
Specifically, the State share of education funding varies from a low of 17% to a high of 63%.
With regard to the third subject, "implementation of program," Ms. Hise and Mr. Collins outlined the following key issues: (1) Should changes be phased in? If yes, over how many years? (2) Should the phase-in include an annual inflation factor or "catch up" with inflation after several years? Mr. Collins stated that Exhibit 5 of the presentation document shows the amount of new money that would be needed over the course of the next five years to bridge the adequacy gap after taking into consideration expected growth (above inflation) in State, local, and federal funds.
He stated that Exhibit 5 shows that there is a need for new funding of approximately $569 million over the next five years to reach adequacy, as calculated under the Successful Schools study.
Ms. Praisner stated that she had two questions relating to a potential phase-in.
She stated that she is uncertain about the appropriate duration for a phase-in.
She also stated that she is concerned with the assumption that growth in prior years will continue in future years.
Mr. Rohrer stated that, to address this concern, staff used growth rates for local funding that did not include growth in the last two fiscal years.
He also stated that the projected growth rate for federal funds is conservative.
Senator Hoffman stated that Exhibit 5 is important because it reminds the Commission that there will be some normal growth in State, local, and federal funding -- even if the growth rates cannot be known with certainty.
With regard to the fourth subject, "distribution of State funds," Ms. Hise and Mr. Collins outlined the following key issues: (1) What proportion of State funds should be wealth equalized? Currently 71% of State aid is wealth equalized.
(2) What proportion of State funds should go toward raising the foundation and what proportion should be targeted to at-risk students? (3) What proportion of State funds should be "flexible" funding (i.e., foundation) and what proportion should be restricted for certain purposes? Currently 56% of State aid is flexible funding.
With regard to the fifth subject, "specific characteristics of alternative approaches to enhancing Maryland's school finance system," Ms. Hise and Mr. Collins outlined the following key issues: (1) What general education and at-risk programs should be consolidated? (2) Should the State support full-day kindergarten? (3) What programs should be wealth equalized, other than the foundation (special education, LEP, FRPM)? (4) Should retirement be wealth equalized? Should
Minutes September 6, 2001 Page 8 retirement costs be shared by the State and local governments? (5) Should a concentration factor be used to recognize greater needs in jurisdictions with higher concentrations of at-risk students (instead of/in addition to wealth equalization)? (6) Should a regional cost adjustment be used to recognize variations of costs? If yes, should adjustments be used while a Maryland-specific index is developed? If yes, should costs be adjusted upward and downward or only upward? (7) Should a Second Tier/Guaranteed Tax Base be created to provide an incentive to jurisdictions to provide more education funding (this could be used in concert with a lower base figure to provide additional funding toward a higher adequacy figure)? With regard to issue (6), Ms. Hise stated that staff is working on developing a recommendation for a cost of living index that could by used to adjust education funding in Maryland.
Alternative Approaches to Enhancing Maryland's School Finance System Senator Hoffman asked staff to present the simulations outlined in a document entitled "Alternative Approaches to Enhancing Maryland's School Finance System."
Tina Bjarekull, Deputy Secretary, Maryland State Department of Education, outlined a base program and five variations of this base program.
These variations include: (1) retirement in the foundation program; (2) LEP funding wealth equalized; (3) concentration factor for State share of funding for students who are eligible for free and reduced price meals; (4) a cost of living adjustment; and (5) a guaranteed tax base.
Ms. Praisner stated that she had been advised by Dr. Thornton that no narrowing of options would occur at the Commission's meeting on August 23, 2001, which she did not attend.
Since some decisions were made at that meeting regarding further simulations, she stated that she wanted to be on record as voicing concern that she had received inaccurate information about the August 23 meeting and that the "train has already left the station."
Mr. Steve Brooks, Chief, Budget Division, Maryland State Department of Education, discussed a chart entitled "Funding Scenarios -- Summary of Effects on State Funding" that is set forth on pages 3 through 6 of the presentation document.
This chart outlines how current State funding programs are treated under the base model.
Mr. Brooks stated that the chart shows that ten of the general education programs that are currently "outside" the foundation program (i.e., Basic Current Expense formula) are rolled into the funding that is distributed through the foundation (e.g., funding teachers' salaries, high school assessments, class size reduction, teacher mentoring, and gifted and talented students).
Depending on the funding alternative, teachers' retirement is either separate or rolled into the foundation.
It also shows that ten of the general education programs that are currently outside the foundation program are continued as separate funding streams (e.g., funding for the Maryland Technology Academy, math/science initiatives, and the out-of-county living program).
The total amount of funding for all the general education programs is determined by multiplying the base cost per student by the number of students in the State and deducting the amount required to fund five separate functional programs (food services, debt service, education modernization initiative, school performance recognition awards, and quality teacher incentives).
Mr. Brooks stated that the chart shows that funding for public special education services and non-public placements will continue as separate streams of funding outside the foundation.
The total
Minutes September 6, 2001 Page 9 amount of funding for these programs is determined by applying the special education per pupil weight of 1.17 to the total number of special education students in the State.
With regard to at-risk funding, Mr. Brooks stated that the chart shows that 18 of the current categorical programs that target funding to at-risk students (e.g., funding for compensatory education, targeted poverty grants, teacher development, extended elementary education, magnet schools, and Baltimore City partnership funding) are consolidated into a new at-risk student program.
The chart also shows that six of the current categorical programs that are targeted to at-risk students continue as separate programs (e.g., challenge grants, school reconstitution, and the Judy Hoyer Early Child Care and Education Enhancement Program).
The total amount of funding available for programs relating to at-risk students is determined by multiplying the at-risk per pupil weight of 1.1 by the total number of at-risk students in the State.
Mr. Brooks stated that funding for LEP students continues as a separate stream of funding.
The total amount of funding for LEP students is determined by multiplying the LEP per pupil weight of 1.0 by the number of LEP students in the State.
Finally, the chart shows that six "functional programs" (e.g., food services, transportation, and debt service) are continued as separate streams of funding outside of the foundation.
All of these funding streams, except transportation, are counted against the total amount of funds available for general education.
one or funds; school county In general, Mr. Brooks stated that programs that are continued outside the foundation have more of the following characteristics: (1) the program is funded by special or reimbursable (2) it is a regional program; (3) the funding is distributed to an entity other than the local district; (4) the program relates to special needs of a unique population (e.g., the out-ofliving program).
Dr. Langenburg asked how the use of funding that is distributed through the foundation or the new at-risk formula will be monitored.
Mr. Bjarekull and Mr. Rohrer stated that this funding will be "flexible" in the sense that the local jurisdiction will be authorized to use the funding in the manner that it deems appropriate.
This is consistent with the underlying theory of the adequacy studies, that the State's role with regard to public education is to establish performance standards, ensure that sufficient funding is provided to allow students, schools, and school districts to meet these standards, and to hold schools and school districts accountable for meeting these standards.
Generally speaking, under this theory, a state should not mandate that funds be used in a particular way.
Senator Hoffman, Mr. Sondheim, Ms. Praisner, and Dr. Langenburg discussed the benefits and disadvantages of this method of allocating funds.
Senator Hoffman noted that there may be a need to establish an audit mechanism for certain programs.
Dr. Langenburg stated that he supports the shift from focus on inputs to focus on outputs.
However, he stated that this shift creates a significant public policy question that has nothing to do with what constitutes adequate funding.
Ms. Bjarekull then continued her discussion of the six alternative approaches to enhancing Maryland's school finance system that are outlined in the presentation document.
Minutes September 6, 2001 Page 10 Ms. Praisner asked Ms. Bjarekull to explain the reason for the "overlap" adjustment to the at-risk per pupil weight.
Ms. Bjarekull stated that the Commission had decided on August 23, 2001, that an adjustment of some kind needed to be made to the per pupil weights for special needs students to reflect the fact that 21% of these students fell into two or more of the special needs categories (i.e., LEP, special education, and at-risk) .
Ms. Bjarekull stated that the Commission had decided that it would be appropriate to reduce the 1.39 per pupil weight calculated by A
She stated that there are two main reasons for making this type of adjustment.
First, she noted that eligibility for free and reduced price meals is simply a proxy for students who are at-risk of not meeting the State's performance standards.
She noted that some students who are eligible for free and reduced price meals are not "at-risk" in this sense.
In contrast, there is a one-to-one correlation between the number of students who are identified as needing special education or LEP services and those who should actually be receiving the services.
Second, Ms. Bjarekull stated that research conducted by A
Ms. Perkins asked whether the at-risk students in other states with lower weights have been successful in meeting the state's performance standards.
Ms. Bjarekull stated the research conducted by A
Ms. Praisner asked if the Commission was still considering a cost of living adjustment.
Senator Hoffman stated that staff is preparing a recommendation on an appropriate cost of living adjustment and that this recommendation would be presented to the Commission on September 20, 2001.
Senator Hoffman asked all of the Commission members to take time after the meeting to consider the various alternative approaches to enhancing Maryland's school finance system.
She also stated that the Commission would not make any further decisions regarding the best approaches until after the public hearings on September 10, 2001.
Mr. Middleton asked staff to consider an option that wealth equalized the growth in current retirement funding.
Ms. Bjarekull stated that staff would include that option in the next round of simulations.
The Commission then discussed the procedures to be used at the public hearings.
The Commission agreed to modify the proposed "uniform procedures" for the public hearings to give the chair discretion to hold a hearing that was longer than two hours as necessary to allow all speakers an opportunity to testify.
The procedures should also state specifically that the Commission had not yet made final decisions about the best approach to enhancing Maryland's school finance system.
Senator Collins expressed disappointment in the location of the regional hearing for Baltimore City and Baltimore, Carroll County, Harford, and Anne Arundel counties.
Ms. Gordon asked if there was a plan to share the testimony received at each of the regional hearings with the full Commission.
Senator Hoffman stated that staff would develop a plan for accomplishing this goal.
The meeting was adjourned at approximately 4:00 p.m.
