October 2, 2003 MEMORANDUM TO: FROM: REGULATION: ACTION: Members, State Board of Social Services Maurice A. Jones, Commissioner 22 VAC 40-745-10 et seq., Assessment in Adult Care Residences Proposed Regulation
This action will amend the regulation 22 VAC 40-745-10 et seq., Assessment in Adult Care Residences.
The amended regulation brings the regulation into compliance with changes in the State Board's regulation on licensure of assisted living facilities and with the Department of Medical Assista nce Services' administrative policy for reimbursement of assisted living services.
In addition, the term "adult care residence" is replaced with "assisted living facility" throughout, including in the regulation's title.
The State Board approved a Notice of Intended Regulatory Action (NOIRA) for this action on April 16, 2003.
The NOIRA was published in The Virginia Register on June 16, 2003, and the public comment period ended on July 16, 2003.
I request that you approve the proposed regulatory package to amend 22 VAC 40745-10 et seq., Assessment in Adult Care Residences for publication in The Virginia Register subject to approval under the provisions of Executive Order Number 21 (2002).
Additionally , I request that you approve the fiscal impact analysis for distribution to local boards of social services.
If you have questions concerning this requested regulatory action, please contact our Regulatory Coordinator, Richard Martin, by telephone at 804.692.1825 or by email at lrm2@dss.state.va.us. attachment
Form: TH-02 8/03
Virginia Regulatory Town Hall
townhall.state.va.us
Proposed Regulation Agency Background Document Agency name Virginia Administrative Code (VAC) citation Regulation title Action title Document preparation date State Board of Social Services 22 VAC 40 -745 Assessment in Adult Care Residences Comply with Assisted Living Facility Regulation and DMAS Policy October 22, 2003
This information is required for executive review (www.townhall.state.va.us/dpbpages/apaintro.htm#execreview) and the Virginia Registrar of Regulations (legis.state.va.us/codecomm/register/regindex.htm ), pursuant to the Virginia Administrative Process Act (www.townhall.state.va.us/dpbpages/dpb_apa.htm ), Executive Orders 21 (2002) and 58 (1999) (www.governor.state.va.us/Press_Policy/Executive_Orders/EOHome.html), and the Virginia Register Form, Style and Procedure Manual (http://legis.state.va.us/codecomm/register/download/styl8_95.rtf).
Brief summary In a short paragraph, please summarize all substantive changes that are being proposed in this regulatory action.
This regulation provides guidelines for assessing the needs of individuals who are applying to or are residents of assisted living facilities (ALFs) (formerly called "adult care residences").
The ALF assessment using a uniform assessment instrument is a standardized approach that uses common definitions to gather sufficient information on applicants to and residents of ALFs to determine their care needs.
Assessment is the prior- authorizing mechanism for public reimbursement for ALF services.
The purpose of the proposed action is to bring the regulation into compliance with changes in the Department of Social Services' regulation on licensure of assisted living facilities and with the Department of Medical Assistance Services' administrative policy for reimbursement of assisted living services.
In addition, the term "adult care residence" will be replaced with "assisted living facility" throughout, including in the regulation's title.
Town Hall Agency Background Document
Form: TH-02
Basis Please identify the state and/or federal source of legal authority to promulgate this proposed regulation, including (1) the most relevant law and/or regulation, including Code of Virginia citation and General Assembly bill and chapter numbers, if applicable, and (2) promulgating entity, i.e., the agency, board, or person.
Describe the legal authority and the extent to which the authority is mandatory or discretionary.
The legal basis for this regulation is the Code of Virginia, §§ 63.2- 1601 and 1732.
The regulation does not exceed the scope of what the Code allows.
Purpose Please explain the need for the new or amended regulation by (1) detailing the specific reasons why this regulatory action is essential to protect the health, safety, or welfare of citizens, and (2) discussing the goals of the proposal and the problems the proposal is intended to solve.
The amended regulation is essential to the health, safety, and welfare of individuals applying to or residing in an ALF.
The purpose of the proposed action is to bring the regulation into compliance with changes in the Department of Social Services' regulation on licensure of assisted living facilities and with the Department of Medical Assistance Services' administrative policy for reimbursement of assisted living services.
In addition, the term "adult care residence" will be replaced with "assisted living facility" throughout, including in the regulation's title.
Substance Please briefly identify and explain the new substantive provisions, the substantive changes to existing sections, or both where appropriate.
(More detail about these changes is requested in the "Detail of changes" section.)
The major changes are technical in nature and not substantive, including language changes to bring the regulation into compliance with current Code language, clarifying definitions of terms, and deleting outdated terminology.
Issues Please identify the issues associated with the proposed regulatory action, including: 1) the primary advantages and disadvantages to the public, such as individual private citizens or busines ses, of implementing the new or amended provisions; 2) the primary advantages and disadvantages to the agency or the Commonwealth; and 3) other pertinent matters of interest to the regulated community, government officials, and the public.
If the regulatory action poses no disadvantages to the public or the Commonwealth, please so indicate.
2
Town Hall Agency Background Document
Form: TH-02
The advantage to making these changes is to bring the regulation into compliance with previously promulgated changes.
This helps to ensure that asses sments of applicants to and residents of ALFs are complete in a consistent manner across the state.
This regulatory action poses no disadvantages to the public or the Commonwealth.
Economic impact Please identify the anticipated economic impact of the proposed regulation.
Projected cost to the state to implement and enforce the proposed regulation, including (a) fund source / fund detail, and (b) a delineation of one -time versus on-going expenditures Projected cost of the regulation on localities
There is no additional fiscal impact to the state.
There is no additional fiscal impact to local departments as a result of this amended language.
Assisted living facilities, applicants to and residents of assisted living facilities, and local departments of social services.
There are approximately 675 assisted living facilities, close to 10,270 Auxiliary Grant residents in assisted living facilities, and 120 local departments of social services who participate in assessment and reassessment of adults in care.
Not applicable.
Description of the individuals, businesses or other entities likely to be affected by the regulation Agency's best estimate of the number of such entities that will be affected
Projected cost of the regulation for affected individuals, businesses, or other entities
Alternatives Please describe any viable alternatives to the proposal considered and the rationale used by the agency to select the least burdensome or intrusive alternative that meets the essential purpos e of the action.
This regulation was developed with the assistance of representatives of local departments of social services and field staff, staff of the Department's Division of Licensing Programs, and staff of the Department of Medical Assistance Services.
Adult Services' philosophy is that adults should be provided the most appropriate and least restrictive level of residential care and services.
No other alternatives have been considered.
3
Town Hall Agency Background Document
Form: TH-02
Public comment Please summarize all comme nts received during public comment period following the publication of the NOIRA, and provide the agency response.
Commenter
Comment
Agency response
No public comments were received during the 30- day period following the publication of the NOIRA.
Family impact Please assess the impact of the proposed regulatory action on the institution of the family and family stability.
The proposed regulatory action has no specific impact on the institution of the family and family stability.
The regulation does promote the appropriate assessment of care needs for Virginia's vulnerable adults.
Detail of changes Please detail all changes that are being proposed and the consequences of the proposed changes.
Detail all new provisions and/or all changes to existing sections.
If the proposed regulation is intended to replace an emergency regulation, please list separately (1) all changes between the pre- emergency regulation and the proposed regulation, and (2) only changes made since the publication of the emergency regulation.
For changes to existing regulations, use this chart: Current section number Proposed new section number, if applicable Current requirement Proposed change and rationale
22 VAC 40745- 10 (Changes to definitions are maintained throughout the regulation.)
The terms "adult care residences" or "ACR's" are used.
The terms "assisted living facilities" or ALF's are used.
The change complies with previous Code changes.
4
Town Hall Agency Background Document
Form: TH-02
Code was re ferenced as § 63.1.
22 VAC 40745- 20
22 VAC 40745- 30 22 VAC 40745- 40
Code reference was changed to 63.2 per the recodification changes effective October 1, 2002.
Clarified definition of "applicant" to mean someone who is planning to reside in an ALF and added definition of "resident" to mean someone who lives in an ALF .
Referred to Deleted references to intensive assisted "intensive assisted living level of care per Centers for living.
" Medicare and Medicaid (CMS) nonrenewal of this waiver.
Referred to Clarified definitions of "qualified "assessor," "qualified assessor" and "case manager.
" Deleted assessor" and "case definition of "assessor" for clarity.
manager."
"Q ualified assessor" is used to specify entities who may assess applicants to and residents of ALFs.
"Case manager" is used when referring to Medicaidfunded targeted case management.
Added Code references for Departments of Rehabilitative Services and Corrections.
Defined "significant change" as it relates to when there is a change in the resident's condition.
Clarified language when a resident is to be assessed.
Clarified language regarding who may assess both a public pay and a private pay resident and added Department of Corrections, Community Release Units, to list of assessors for public pay.
Some localities were reluctant to go into correctional facilities to assess inmates who need ALF placement.
Corrections staff have been trained in the use of the uniform assessment instrument.
Defined what is meant by "short" and "full" uniform assessment instrument.
Clarified role of the ALF in discharge planning and who is to be notified.
Included that the ALF must notify the eligibility worker and the qualified assessor within 10 days of a change in the resident's status, including death.
5
Town Hall Agency Background Document
Form: TH-02 Added section on how DMAS and DSS are to handle the finding of an inappropriate determination of level of care during a review.
Clarified who may perform the annual reassessment and change in level of care.
Specified that community services board (CSB) staff are to complete assessments, reassessments, and changes in level of care for CSB clients who reside in an ALF.
22 VAC 40745- 50 22 VAC 40745- 90
6
Proposed Regulation Fiscal Analysis Pursuant to § 63.2-217 Agency Name: VAC Chapter Number:
State Board of Social Services
22 VAC 40- 745- 10 et seq.
Regulation Title: Assessment in Adult Care Residences Action Title: Comply with ALF Regulation and DMAS Policy Date:
September 5, 2003 Summary
The purpose of the proposed action is to bring the regulation into compliance with changes in the Department of Social Services' regulation on licensure of assisted living facilities and with the Department of Medical Assistance Services' administrative policy for reimbursement of assisted living services.
In addition, the term "adult care residence" will be replaced with "assisted living facility" throughout, including in the regulation's title.
Projected Costs to Local Boards of Social Services There are no projected costs to local boards of social services by amending this regulation.
Projected Savings to Local Board of Social Services There are no projected savings to local boards of social services by ame nding this regulation.
Source of Funds for Local Boards to Implement or Comply with Regulation Not applicable.
Fiscal Impact There is no additional fiscal impact to local departments as a result of this amended language.
Approval Pursuant to § 63.2- 217 of the Code of Virginia, this fiscal analysis was approved by the State Board of Social Services on October 22, 2003.
__________________________________ Chairman State Board of Social Services
1
Date/Time Filed with Registrar of Regulations VA.R.
Document Number:
R____ - _______
Date of Publication in Virginia Register:
Commonwealth of Virginia
Transmittal Sheet: PROPOSED ACTION ON REGULATIONS Regulatory Coordinator: Richard Martin E- mail: lrm2@email1.dss.state.va.us Telephone: (804) 692- 1825 Promulgating Agency: State Board of Social Services Regulatory Action Title (if applicable): Comply with ALF Regulation and DMAS Policy VAC No. (e.g., 4 VAC 20-490)
Name of Chapter
(e.g., Regulations Pertaining to Sharks)
§§ affected: Amended: 10 et seq.
Added: Repealed:
22 VAC 40- 745- 10 et seq.
Assessment in Adult Care Residences
Statutory Authority: Code of Virginia, §§ 63.2- 1601 and 1732.
Public Hearing Dates and Times, if any: N/A Public comments may be submitted until: Agency Contact for Further Information: Name: Marjorie Marker Title: Family Services Specialist Address: VA Dept. of Social Services, 730 E. Broad St., 2nd Fl., Richmond, VA 23219 Telephone: (804) 692- 1262 Fax: (804 ) 786- 8372 Toll Free: 1E- mail: maj2@dss.state.va.us NOIRA appeared in Virginia Register in: Vol. 19 Issue 20 [or] none required Emergency action appeared in Virginia Register in: Vol.
Issue [or] none required Is this a REPROPOSED action? Yes No Proposed action appeared in Virginia Register in: Vol.
Forms: Yes No Issue No
Documents Incorporated By Reference: Yes
Transmittal By Authorized Officer: This regulatory action is being adopted in accordance with the Administrative Process Act.
[or] This regulatory action is exempt from the Administrative Process Act pursuant to § of the Code of Virginia (letter from legal counsel attached).
Name of Authorized Officer: Richard Martin, Regulatory Coordinator Signature of Authorized Officer: Telephone: (804) 692- 1825 E-Mail: lrm2@email1.dss.state.va.us Date Submitted:
Revised 7/02
Virginia Code Commission - Registrar of Regulations - 910 Capitol St., 2nd Fl. - Richmond, VA 23219
Form RR03
Date/Time Filed with Registrar of Regulations VA.R.
Document Number:
R____ - _______
Date of Publication in Virginia Register:
Commonwealth of Virginia
NOTICE OF PUBLIC COMMENT PERIOD The promulgating agency identified below is accepting public comments on the following rulemaking action pursuant to § 2.2- 4007 of the Code of Virginia.
Regulatory Coordinator: Richard Martin Telephone: (804) 692- 1825 E- mail: lrm2@email1.dss.state.va.us Promulgating Agency: State Board of Social Services Chapters affected: VAC No.: 22 VAC 40 - 745 10 et seq.
Chapter Title: Assessment in Adult Care Residences Agency intends to: adopt new regulations amend existing regulations repeal existing regulations
Regulatory Action Title (if applicable): Comply with ALF Regulation and DMAS Policy Date and time of public hearing(s): N/A Location of public hearing: [OR] The agency does not intend to hold a public hearing on the proposed action.
The purpose of the proposed action is to establish general standards for the assessment of applicants to and residents of assisted living facilities.
It should be noted that "adult care residences" are now called "assisted living facilities."
Through the assessment process, public funds can be more appropriately utilized by ensuring that individuals receive the level of care and services that they need.
Statutory Authority: Code of Virginia, §§ 63.2- 1601 and 1732.
Public comments may be submitted until to .
Agency Contact for Further Information: Name: Marjorie Marker Title: Family Services Specialist Address: VA Dept. of Social Services Telephone: (804) 692- 1262 Fax: (804 ) 786- 8372 Toll Free: 1E- mail: maj2@dss.state.va.us
-
Revised 3/02
Virginia Code Commission - Registrar of Regulations - 910 Capitol St ., 2nd Fl. - Richmond, VA 23219
Form RR02
STATE BOARD OF SOCIAL SERVICES
Page 1 of 24
ASSESSMENT IN ADULT CARE RESIDENCES ASSISTED LIVING FACILITIES
CHAPTER 745 ASSESSMENT IN ADULT CARE RESIDENCES ASSISTED LIVING FACILITIES Part I. Definitions .
22VAC40-745-10.
Definitions.
The following words and terms, when used in this chapter, shall have the following meanings, unless the context clearly indicate s otherwise: "Activities of daily living (ADLs)" means bathing, dressing, toileting, transferring, bowel control, bladder control, and eating/feeding.
A person's degree of independence in performing these activities is a part of determining appropriate level of care and services.
"Adult care residence (ACR)" means any place, establishment, or institution, public or private, operated or maintained for the maintenance or care of four or more adults who are aged, infirm, or disabled and who are cared for in a primarily residential setting, except (i) a facility or portion of a facility licensed by the State Board of Health or the Department of Mental Health, Mental Retardation and Substance Abuse Services, but including any portion of such facility not so licensed, and (ii) the home or residence of an individual who cares for or maintains only persons related to him by blood or marriage, and (iii) a facility or any portion of a facility serving infirm or disabled persons between the ages of 18 and 21, or 22 if enrolled in an educational program for the handicapped pursuant
STATE BOARD OF SOCIAL SERVICES
Page 2 of 24
ASSESSMENT IN ADULT CARE RESIDENCES ASSISTED LIVING FACILITIES
to §22.1 -214 of the Code of Virginia, when such facility is licensed by the Virginia Department of Social Services (DSS) as a child -caring institution under Chapter 10 (§63.1 -195 et seq.) of Title 63.1 of the Code of Virginia, but including any portion of the facility not so licensed.
Included in this definition are any two or more places, establishments, or institutions owned or operated by a single entity and providing maintenance or care to a combined total of four or more aged, infirm or disabled adults.
"Applicant" means an adult currently residing or planning to reside in an adult care residence assisted living facility.
"Assessment" means a standardized approach using common definitions to gather sufficient information about applicants to and residents of adult care residences assisted living facilities to determine the need for appropriate level of care and services.
"Assessor" means the entity specified in this regulation as qualified to perform assessments and authorize service in an adult care residence.
"Assisted living" means a level of service provided by an adult care residence assisted living facility for adults who may have physical or mental impairments and require at least moderate assistance with the activities of daily living.
Moderate assistance means dependency in two or more of the activities of daily living.
Included in this level of service are individuals who are dependent in behavior pattern (i.e., abusive, aggressive, disruptive).
Within assisted living,
STATE BOARD OF SOCIAL SERVICES
Page 3 of 24
ASSESSMENT IN ADULT CARE RESIDENCES ASSISTED LIVING FACILITIES
there are two payment levels for recipients of an auxiliary grant: regular assisted living and intensive assisted living as defined in regulations promulgated by the Department of Medical Assistance Services.
"Assisted living facility (ALF)" means any congregate residential setting that provides or coordinates personal and health care services, 24- hour supervision, and assistance (scheduled and unscheduled) for the maintenance or care of four or more adults who are a ged, infirm or disabled and who are cared for in a primarily residential setting, except (i) a facility or portion of a facility licensed by the State Board of Health or the Department of Mental Health, Mental Retardation and Substance Abuse Services, but including any portion of such facility not so licensed; (ii) the home or residence of an individual who cares for or maintains only persons related to him by blood or marriage; (iii) a facility or portion of a facility serving infirm or disabled persons between the ages of 18 and 21, or 22 if enrolled in an educational program for the handicapped pursuant to § 22.1 -214, when such facility is licensed by the Department as a children's residential facility under Chapter 17 (§ 63.2 -1700 et seq.) of this title, but including any portion of the facility not so licensed; and (iv) any housing project for persons 62 years of age or older or the disabled that provides no more than basic coordination of care services and is funded by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development, by the U.S. Department of Agriculture, or by the Virginia Housing Development Authority.
Included in this definition are any
STATE BOARD OF SOCIAL SERVICES
Page 4 of 24
ASSESSMENT IN ADULT CARE RESIDENCES ASSISTED LIVING FACILITIES
two or more places, establishments or institutions owned or operated by a single entity and providing maintenance or care to a combined total of four or more aged, infirm or disabled adults.
Maintenance or care means the protection, general supervision and oversight of the physical and mental well-being of an aged, infirm or disabled individual.
"Auxiliary Grants Program" means a state and locally funded assistance program to supplement income of a Supplemental S ecurity Income (SSI) recipient or adult who would be eligible for SSI except for excess income, who resides in an adult care residence assisted living facility with an approved rate.
"Case management" means multiple functions designed to link individuals to appropriate services.
Case management may include a variety of common components such as initial screening of need, comprehensive assessment of needs, development and implementation of a plan of care, service monitoring, and follow- up.
"Case management agency" means a public human service agency which employs or contracts for case management.
"Case manager" means an employee of a public human service agency who is qualified and designated to develop and coordinate plans of care.
"Community-based waive r services" means a service program administered by the Department of Medical Assistance Services under a waiver approved by the United States Secretary of Health and Human Services.
STATE BOARD OF SOCIAL SERVICES
Page 5 of 24
ASSESSMENT IN ADULT CARE RESIDENCES ASSISTED LIVING FACILITIES
"Consultation" means the process of seeking and receiving information and guidance from appropriate human service agencies and other professionals when assessment data indicate certain social, physical and mental health conditions.
"Department" or "DSS" means the Virginia Department of Social Services.
"Dependent" means, for activities of daily living (ADLs) and instrumental activities of daily living (IADLs), the individual needs the assistance of another person or needs the assistance of another person and equipment or device to safely complete the activity.
For medication administration, dependent means the individual needs to have medications administered or monitored by another person or professional staff.
For behavior pattern, dependent means the person's behavior is aggressive, abusive, or disruptive.
"Discharge" means the movement of a resident out of the adult care residence assisted living facility.
"Emergency placement" means the temporary status of an individual in an adult care residence assisted living facility when the person's health and safety would be jeopardized by not permitting entry into the facility until requirements for admission have been met.
An emergency placement shall occur only when the emergency is documented and approved by a Virginia adult protective services worker or case manager for public pay individuals or by an independent physician or a Virginia adult protective services worker for private pay individuals.
STATE BOARD OF SOCIAL SERVICES
Page 6 of 24
ASSESSMENT IN ADULT CARE RESIDENCES ASSISTED LIVING FACILITIES
"Facility" means an assisted living facility.
"Independent physician" means a physician who is chosen by the resident of the adult care residence assisted living facility and who has no financial interest in the adult care residence assisted living facility, directly or indirectly, as an owner, officer, or employee or as an independent contractor with the residence facility.
"Instrum ental activities of daily living (IADLs)" means meal preparation, housekeeping, laundry, and money management.
A person's degree of independence in performing these activities is a part of determining appropriate level of care and services.
"Maximum physical assistance" means that an individual has a rating of total dependence in four or more of the seven activities of daily living as documented on the uniform assessment instrument.
An individual who can participate in any way with the performance of the a ctivity is not considered to be totally dependent.
"Medication administration" means the degree of assistance required to take medications and is a part of determining the need for appropriate level of care and services.
"Private pay" means that a resident of an adult care facility assisted living facility is not eligible for benefits under the Auxiliary Grants Program.
"Public human service agency" means an agency established or authorized by the General Assembly under Chapters 2 and 3 (§§63.1 -31 63.2 -203 et seq. and
STATE BOARD OF SOCIAL SERVICES
Page 7 of 24
ASSESSMENT IN ADULT CARE RESIDENCES ASSISTED LIVING FACILITIES
63.1 -38 63.2 -300 et seq.) of Title 63.1 63.2 , Chapter 24 (§2.1 -371 2.2 -700 et seq.) of Title 2.1 2.2 , Chapters 1 and 10 (§§37.1 -1 et seq. and 37.1 -194 et seq.) of Title 37.1, or Article 5 (§32.1 -30 et seq.) of Chapter 1 of Title 32.1 , Chapte r 1 of Title 51.5 (§§ 51.5 -1 and 51.5 -2), or Title 53.1, Chapter 2 (§§ 53.1 -21 and 53.1 -60), of the Code of Virginia, or hospitals operated by the state under Chapters 6.1 and 9 (§§23-50.4 et seq. and 23-62 et seq.) of Title 23 of the Code of Virginia and supported wholly or principally by public funds, including but not limited to funds provided expressly for the purposes of case management.
"Public pay" means that a resident of an adult care facility assisted living facility is eligible for benefits under the Auxiliary Grants Program.
"Qualified assessor" means an entity contracting with the Department of Medical Assistance Services (DMAS) to perform nursing facility preadmission screening or to complete the uniform assessment instrument for a home- and communitybased waiver program, including an independent physician contracting with DMAS to complete the uniform assessment instrument for residents of adult care residences, or any hospital which has contracted with DMAS to perform nursing facility preadmission screenings individual who is authorized to perform an assessment, reassessment, or change in level of care for an applicant to or resident of an assisted living facility.
For public pay individuals, a qualified assessor is an employee of a public human services agency trained in the completion of the uniform assessment instrument.
For private pay individuals, a
STATE BOARD OF SOCIAL SERVICES
Page 8 of 24
ASSESSMENT IN ADULT CARE RESIDENCES ASSISTED LIVING FACILITIES
qualified assessor is staff of the assisted living facility or an independent private physician trained in the completion of the uniform assessment instrument.
"Residence" means an adult care residence .
"Resident" means an individual who resides in an assisted living facility.
"Residential living" means a level of service provided by an adult care residence assisted living facility for adults who may have physical or mental impairments and require only minimal assistance with the activities of daily living.
Minimal assistance means dependency in only one activity of daily living or dependency in one or more of the selected instrumental activi ties of daily living.
Included in this level of service are individuals who are dependent in medication administration as documented on the uniform assessment instrument.
This definition includes independent living facilities that voluntarily become licens ed. "Significant change" means a change in a resident's condition that is expected to last longer than 30 days.
It does not include short -term changes that resolve with or without intervention, a short -term acute illness or episodic event, or a well esta blished, predictive, cyclic pattern of clinical signs and symptoms associated with a previously diagnosed condition where an appropriate course of treatment is in progress.
"Targeted case management" means the provision of ongoing case management services by an employee of a public human services agency contracting with the Department of Medical Assistance Services to an auxiliary grant Auxiliary Grant
STATE BOARD OF SOCIAL SERVICES
Page 9 of 24
ASSESSMENT IN ADULT CARE RESIDENCES ASSISTED LIVING FACILITIES
resident of an adult care residence assisted living facility who meets the criteria set forth in 12VAC30-50-410 et seq.
"Total dependence" means the individual is entirely unable to participate in the performance of an activity of daily living.
"Uniform assessment instrument" means the department-designated assessment form.
There is an alternate version of t he uniform assessment instrument which may be used for private pay residents; social and financial information which is not relevant because of the resident's payment status is not included on this version.
"User's Manual: Virginia Uniform Assessment Instrument" means the department-designated handbook containing common definitions and procedures for completing the department-designated assessment form.
"Virginia Department of Medical Assistance Services (DMAS)" means the single state agency designated to administer the Medical Assistance Program in Virginia.
Part II.
Assessment Services.
22VAC40-745-20.
Persons to be assessed.
A. Effective February 1, 1996, all All residents of and applicants of to ACRs assisted living facilities must be assessed using the uniform assessment
STATE BOARD OF SOCIAL SERVICES
Page 10 of 24
ASSESSMENT IN ADULT CARE RESIDENCES ASSISTED LIVING FACILITIES
instrument prior to admission, at least annually, and whenever there is a significant change in the resident's condition that appears to be permanent.
B. Unless a private pay resident requests the uniform assessment instrument be completed by a case manager or other qualified assessor, qualified For private pay individuals, q ualified staff of the ACR assisted living facility or an independent private physician may complete the uniform assessment instrument for private pay individuals.
Qualified staff of the ACR assisted living facility is an employee of the facility with documented training by completion of a state approved course on in the completion of the uniform assessment instrument for either public or private pay assessments.
The administrator or the administrator's designated representative must approve and sign the completed uniform assessment instrument for private pay individuals .
A private pay individual may request the assessment be completed by a qualified public human services agency assessor.
When a case manager public human services agency assessor completes the UAI uniform assessment instrument for a private pay individual, the case management agency may determine and charge a fee for private pay applicants and residents; the fee may not exceed the fee paid by DMAS for public pay applicants and residents.
C.
For public pay individuals, a uniform assessment instrument shall be completed by a case manager or other qualified assessor to determine the need for residential or assisted living services.
The assessor is qualified to complete
STATE BOARD OF SOCIAL SERVICES
Page 11 of 24
ASSESSMENT IN ADULT CARE RESIDENCES ASSISTED LIVING FACILITIES
the assessment if he has completed a state -approved training course on the state -designated uniform assessment i nstrument.
Public human services agency assessors who routinely complete, as part of their job descriptions, uniform assessment instruments for applicants to or residents of assisted living facilities prior to January 1, 2004, may be deemed to be qualified assessors without the completion of the training course.
Qualified assessors that may authorize assisted living facility services for public pay individuals are employees of: i) local departments of social services; ii) area agencies on aging; iii) centers for independent living; iv) community services boards; v) local depar tments of health; vi) State facilities operated by the Department of Mental Health, Mental Retardation and Substance Abuse Services, vii) acute -care hospitals, and viii) Department of Corrections Community Release Units ; and an independent physician contracting with DMAS. D.
The ACR assisted living facility must coordinate with the assessor to ensure that the uniform assessment instrument is completed as required.
22VAC40-745-30.
Determination of services to be provided.
A.
The assessment shall be conducted with the department-designated uniform assessment instrument which sets forth a resident's care needs.
The uniform assessment instrument is designed to be a comprehensive, accurate, standardized, and reproducible assessment of individuals seeking or receiving long -term care services.
The uniform assessment instrument is comprised of a
STATE BOARD OF SOCIAL SERVICES
Page 12 of 24
ASSESSMENT IN ADULT CARE RESIDENCES ASSISTED LIVING FACILITIES
short assessment and a full assessment.
The short assessment is designed to briefly assess the individual's need for appropriate level of care and services and to determi ne if a full assessment is needed.
The uniform assessment instrument shall contain the following items: Full name of the individual; social security number; current address; date of birth; sex; marital status; racial/ethnic background; education; method fo r communication of needs; primary caregiver or emergency contact or both; usual living arrangements; problems with physical environmental; use of current formal services; annual income; sources of income; legal representatives; benefits or entitlements received; types of health insurance; performance on functional status which includes ADLs, continence, ambulation and IADLs; physician information; admissions to hospitals, nursing facilities or adult care residences for medical or rehabilitation reasons; advance directives; diagnoses and medication profile; sensory functioning; joint motion; presence of fractures/dislocations; missing limbs or paralysis/paresis; nutrition; smoking history; use of rehabilitation therapies; presence of pressure ulcers; need for special medical procedures; need for ongoing medical/nursing needs; orientation; memory and judgment; behavior pattern; life stressors; emotional status; social history which includes activities, religious involvement; contact with family and friends; hospitalization for emotional problems; use of alcohol or drugs; assessment of caregivers; and an assessment summary.
STATE BOARD OF SOCIAL SERVICES
Page 13 of 24
ASSESSMENT IN ADULT CARE RESIDENCES ASSISTED LIVING FACILITIES
B. Sections of the uniform assessment instrument which must be completed are as follows: 1.
The assessment for private pay individuals shall include the following portions of the uniform assessment instrument: name of the individual; social security number; current address; birthdate; sex; marital status; performance on functional status, which includes ADLs, continence, ambulation, IADLs, medication administration, and behavior pattern.
In lieu of completing selected parts of the department-designated uniform assessment instrument, the alternate uniform assessment instrument developed for private pay applicants and residents may be used.
2.
For public pay individuals, the short form of the uniform assessment instrument shall be completed.
The short form consists of sections related to identification and background; functional status; medication administration; and behavior pattern.
If, upon assessment, it is determined that the individual is dependent in at least two activities of daily living or is dependent in behavior, then the full assessment must be completed.
C.
The uniform assessment instrument shall be completed within 90 days prior to the date of admission to the ACR assisted living facility.
If there has been a change in the individual's condition since the completion of the uniform assessment instrument which would affect the admission to an ACR assisted
STATE BOARD OF SOCIAL SERVICES
Page 14 of 24
ASSESSMENT IN ADULT CARE RESIDENCES ASSISTED LIVING FACILITIES
living facility, a new uni form assessment instrument shall be completed as specified in 22VAC40-745-20.
2.
When a resident moves to an ACR assisted living facility from another ACR assisted living facility, a new uniform assessment instrument is not required except that a new uniform assessment instrument shall be completed whenever there is a significant change in the resident's condition that appears to warrant a change in the resident's approved level of care or the assessment was completed more than 12 months ago.
3.
In emerge ncy placements, the uniform assessment instrument must be completed within seven working days from the date of placement.
An emergency placement shall occur only when the emergency is documented and approved by a Virginia adult protective services worker or case manager for public pay individuals or by a Virginia adult protective services worker or independent physician for private pay individuals.
D.
The uniform assessment instrument shall be completed at least once every 12 months annually on all residents of ACRs assisted living facilities.
Uniform assessment instruments shall be completed as needed whenever there is a significant change in the resident's condition that appears to warrant a change in the resident's approved level of care.
All uniform assessment instruments shall be completed as required in subsection A of this section by 22VAC40-745-20.
STATE BOARD OF SOCIAL SERVICES
Page 15 of 24
ASSESSMENT IN ADULT CARE RESIDENCES ASSISTED LIVING FACILITIES
E.
At the request of the ACR assisted living facility, the resident's representative, the resident's physician, DSS, or the local department of social services, an independent assessment using the uniform assessment instrument shall be completed to determine whether the resident's care needs are being met in the current placement.
An independent assessment is an assessment that is completed by an entity other than the original assessor.
The ACR assisted living facility shall assist the resident in obtaining the independent assessment as requested.
If the request is for a private pay resident, and the independent assessment confirms that the resident's placement is appropriate, then the entity requesting the independent assessment shall be responsible for payment of the assessment, if applicable.
F.
The assessor shall consult with other appropriate human service professionals as needed to complete the assessment.
G. DMAS shall reimburse for completion of assessments and authorization of ACR assisted living facility placement for public pay applicants and residents pursuant to this section.
22VAC40-745-40.
Discharge.
Discharge is the process that ends the stay in an ACR assisted living facility.
Staff of the ACR assisted living facility must plan for post -discharge services when the resident is returned to a home-based placement , or a nursing facility, or other placement.
ACR Assisted living facility staff shall notify the local
STATE BOARD OF SOCIAL SERVICES
Page 16 of 24
ASSESSMENT IN ADULT CARE RESIDENCES ASSISTED LIVING FACILITIES
department of social services financial eligibility worker in the jurisdiction responsible for authorizing the auxiliary grant Auxiliary Grant and the public human agency assessor of the date and place of discharge and case management, if applicable as well as when a resident dies.
The assisted living facility must make these notifications within 10 days of the change in the resident's status .
22VAC40-745-50.
Authorization of services to be provided.
A.
The assessor is responsible fo r authorizing the individual for the appropriate level of care for admission to and continued stay in an ACR assisted living facility.
B.
The ACR assisted living facility must be knowledgeable of the criteria for level of care in an ACR assisted living facility and is responsible for discharge of the resident whenever a resident does not meet the criteria for level of care in an ACR assisted living facility upon admission or at any later time.
C.
The appropriate level of care must be documented on the uniform assessment instrument, completed in a manner consistent with the definitions of activities of daily living and directions provided in the User's Manual: Virginia Uniform Assessment Instrument.
D.
During an inspection or review, staff from either the Department , DMAS, or the local department of social services may initiate a change in level of care for
STATE BOARD OF SOCIAL SERVICES
Page 17 of 24
ASSESSMENT IN ADULT CARE RESIDENCES ASSISTED LIVING FACILITIES
any assisted living facility resident for whom it is determined that the resident's uniform assessment instrument is not reflective of the resident's current status .
22VAC40-745-60.
Criteria for residential living.
Individuals meet the criteria for residential living as documented on the uniform assessment instrument when at least one of the following describes their functional capacity: 1.
Rated d ependent in only one of seven ADLs (i.e., bathing, dressing, toileting, transferring, bowel function, bladder function, and eating/feeding).
2.
Rated dependent in one or more of four selected IADLs (i.e., meal preparation, housekeeping, laundry, and money management).
3.
Rated dependent in medication administration.
22VAC40-745-70.
Criteria for assisted living.
Individuals meet the criteria for assisted living as documented on the uniform assessment instrument when at least one of the following describes their capacity: 1.
Rated dependent in two or more of seven ADLs. 2.
Rated dependent in behavior pattern (i.e., abusive, aggressive, and disruptive).
22VAC40-745-80.
Rating of levels of care on the uniform assessment instrument.
A.
The rating of functional dependencies on the uniform assessment instrument must be based on the individual's ability to function in a community environment.
STATE BOARD OF SOCIAL SERVICES
Page 18 of 24
ASSESSMENT IN ADULT CARE RESIDENCES ASSISTED LIVING FACILITIES
B.
The following abbreviations shall mean: D = dependent; and TD = totally dependent.
Mechanical help means equipment or a device or both are used; human help includes supervision and physical assistance.
Asterisks (*) denote dependence in a particular function.
1.
Activities of daily living.
a.
Bathing.
(1) Without help (2) Mechanical help only (3) Human help only* (D) (4) Mechanical help and human help* (D) (5) Is performed by others* (TD) b. Dressing.
(1) Without help (2) Mechanical help only (3) Human help only* (D) (4) Mechanical help and human help* (D) (5) Is performed by others* (TD) (6) Is not perfo rmed* (TD) c. Toileting.
(1) Without help (2) Mechanical help only
STATE BOARD OF SOCIAL SERVICES
Page 19 of 24
ASSESSMENT IN ADULT CARE RESIDENCES ASSISTED LIVING FACILITIES
(3) Human help only* (D) (4) Mechanical help and human help* (D) (5) Performed by others* (TD) (6) Is not performed* (TD) d. Transferring.
(1) Without help (2) Mechanical help only (3) Human help only* (D) (4) Mechanical help and human help* (D) (5) Is performed by others* (TD) (6) Is not performed* (TD) e. Bowel function.
(1) Continent (2) Incontinent less than weekly (3) Ostomy self-care (4) Incontinent weekly or more* (D) (5) Ostomy not self -care* (TD) f. Bladder function.
(1) Continent (2) Incontinent less than weekly (3) External device, indwelling catheter, ostomy, self -care
STATE BOARD OF SOCIAL SERVICES
Page 20 of 24
ASSESSMENT IN ADULT CARE RESIDENCES ASSISTED LIVING FACILITIES
(4) Incontinent weekly or more* (D) (5) External device, not self-care* (TD) (6) Indwe lling catheter, not self-care* (TD) (7) Ostomy, not self-care* (TD) g. Eating/feeding.
(1) Without help (2) Mechanical help only (3) Human help only* (D) (4) Mechanical help and human help* (D) (5) Performed by others (includes spoon fed, syringe/tube fed, fed by IV)* (TD) 2.
Behavior pattern.
a.
Appropriate b. Wandering/passive less than weekly c. Wandering/passive weekly or more d. Abusive/aggressive/disruptive less than weekly* (D) e. Abusive/aggressive/disruptive weekly or more* (D) 3.
Ins trumental activities of daily living.
a.
Meal preparation.
(1) No help needed (2) Needs help* (D) b. Housekeeping.
STATE BOARD OF SOCIAL SERVICES
Page 21 of 24
ASSESSMENT IN ADULT CARE RESIDENCES ASSISTED LIVING FACILITIES
(1) No help needed (2) Needs help* (D) c. Laundry.
(1) No help needed (2) Needs help* (D) d. Money management.
(1) No help needed (2) Needs help* (D) 4.
Medication administration.
a.
Without assistance b. Administered/monitored by lay person* (D) c. Administered/monitored by professional staff* (D) 22VAC40-745-90.
Actions to be taken upon completion of the uniform assessment instrument.
A.
Public pay individuals.
1.
Upon completion of the uniform assessment instrument for admission, changes in the individual's approved level of care , a significant change in the resident's condition, or for the 12 -month assessment annual reassessment, the case manager or a qualified assessor shall forward to the local department of social services financial eligibility worker in the appropriate agency of jurisdiction, in the format specified by the department, the effective date of admission or
STATE BOARD OF SOCIAL SERVICES
Page 22 of 24
ASSESSMENT IN ADULT CARE RESIDENCES ASSISTED LIVING FACILITIES
change in level of care.
Qualified assessors that may perform the annual reassessment or a change in level of care for public pay individuals are employees of: i) local departments of social services; ii) area agencies on aging; iii) centers for independ ent living; iv) community services boards; and v) local departments of health, or an independent physician contracting with DMAS to complete the uniform assessment instrument.
2.
A copy of the The completed uniform assessment instrument, a copy of the referral to the financial eligibility worker, and other relevant data shall be maintained in the ACR assisted living facility resident's record.
3.
The 12-month assessment annual reassessment shall be completed by the qualified assessor conducting the initi al assessment.
If the original assessor is neither willing nor able to complete the assessment and another assessor is not available, the local department of social services where the resident resides following placement in an ACR assisted living facility shall be the assessor.
4.
Clients of a community services board shall be assessed and reassessed by staff of the community services board.
B.
For private pay residents, the ACR assisted living facility shall ensure that assessments for all residents at a dmission and at subsequent intervals are completed as required in this chapter.
The ACR assisted living facility shall maintain in the resident's record a copy of the resident's uniform assessment instrument and other relevant data.
STATE BOARD OF SOCIAL SERVICES
Page 23 of 24
ASSESSMENT IN ADULT CARE RESIDENCES ASSISTED LIVING FACILITIES
22VAC40-745-100.
Targeted case management for auxiliary grant Auxiliary Grant recipients.
A. Targeted case management shall be limited to those residents who have multiple needs across multiple providers and this coordination is beyond the scope of the ACR assisted living facility.
It shall be the responsibility of the assessor who identifies the individual's need for residential or assisted living in an ACR assisted living facility to assess the need for targeted case management services as defined in 12VAC30-50-410 et seq. B.
A case management agency must have signed an agreement with DMAS to be reimbursed for the provision of targeted case management services to auxiliary grant Auxiliary Grant recipients.
C.
The local department of social services where the adult resides, following placement in an ACR assisted living facility, shall be the case management agency when there is no other qualified case management provider willing or able to provide case management services.
D.
A qualified case manager must possess a combinatio n of relevant work experience in human services or health care and relevant education which indicates that the individual possesses the knowledge, skills, and abilities at entry level as defined in 12VAC30-50-410 et seq.
This must be documented on the case manager's job application form or supporting documentation or observable in the job or promotion interview.
When the provider agency is a local department
STATE BOARD OF SOCIAL SERVICES
Page 24 of 24
ASSESSMENT IN ADULT CARE RESIDENCES ASSISTED LIVING FACILITIES
of social services, case managers shall meet the qualifications for social work/social work supervisor classification as specified in 22VAC40-670-10 et seq. Part III Resident Appeals 22VAC40-745-110.
Resident appeals.
Assessors shall advise orally and in writing all applicants to and residents of ACRs assisted living facilities for which assessment o r targeted case management services or both are provided of the right to appeal the outcome of the assessment, the 12-month assessment annual reassessment, or determination of level of care.
Applicants for auxiliary grants Auxiliary Grants who are denied a uxiliary grants an Auxiliary Grant because the assessor determines that they do not require the minimum level of services offered in the residential care level have the right to file an appeal with the Department of Social Services under § 63.1 -116 63.2 -517 of the Code of Virginia.
A determination that the individual does not meet the criteria to receive assisted living services and intensive assisted living services is an action which is appealable to DMAS.
DOCUMENTS INCORPORATED BY REFERENCE User's Manual: Virginia Uniform Assessment Instrument
