TABLE OF CONTENTS INTRODUCTION CHAPTER 1.
DEFINITIONS CHAPTER 2.
AUTHORIZATION FOR TRAVEL General Provisions Exceptions to Travel Regulations Employee Authorization for Travel CHAPTER 3.
REIMBURSEMENT OF MEAL EXPENSES Meal Expens es Associated with Overnight Travel within Georgia (General Rule) Meal Expenses Associated with Overnight Travel within High Cost Areas in Georgia Meal Expenses Associated with Overnight Travel outside Georgia Reimbursement of Meals Not Associated with Overnight Travel Meal Expenses Incurred while Taking Leave Required Documentation of Meal Expenses CHAPTER 4.
LODGING EXPENSES General Provisions Responsibilities of Employee Reimbursement of Lodging Expenses for Over night Travel outside Georgia Lodging Associated with a Meeting or Seminar Authorization for Lodging within the 30 Mile Radius Sharing Lodging Taxes Associated with Lodging Expenses County and Municipal Excise Tax Not Applicable to State and Local Government Lodging Expenses Incurred while Taking Leave Required Documentation of Lodging Expenses CHAPTER 5.
TRAVEL BY STATE-OWNED OR PERSONAL VEHICLES General Provisions Use of Agency- Owned or DOAS Vehicles Mileage Reimbursement Rate for Use of Personal Vehicles Prohibited Mileage Reimbursement Reimbursement for Parking Fees and Tolls Required Documentation of Mileage, Parking, and Toll Expenses CHAPTER 6.
TRAVEL BY RENTED OR PUBLIC TRANSPOR TATION General Provisions Commercial Air Transportation Upgrades to Non- Coach Travel Indemnification Received due to Travel Inconveniences Imposed by Airlines Rental of Motor Vehicles Travel by Railroad State of Georgia ­ Statewide Travel Regulations 1.1 2.1 2.1 2.1 3.1 3.2 3.3 3.3 3.4 3.4 4.1 4.1 4.1 4.2 4.2 4.2 4.3 4.3 4.4 4.4 5.1 5.1 5.1 5.1 5.2 5.2 6.1 6.1 6.2 6.2 6.3 6.3
Travel by Mass Transportation, Taxi, or Airport Vans Reimbursement for Baggage Handling Services Required Documentation of Expenses CHAPTER 7.
TRAVEL BY PRIVATE AIRCRAFT General Provisions CHAPTER 8.
MISCELLANEOUS TRAVEL EXPENSES Telephone/Telegraph/FAX Expenses Stationery/Supplies/Postage Expenses Registration Fees Unallowable Expenses CHAPTER 9.
CORPORATE CHARGE CARDS AND TRAVEL ADVANCES General Provisions Purpose of Travel Advances Corporate Charge Cards Authority to Advance Cash for Travel Approval of Cash Advances for Travel Amount of Cash Advance Employee and Agency Accountability of Funds Advanced Recovery of Cash Advances Made for Specific Trips Recovery of Cash Advances for Continuous Travel CHAPTER 10.
REIMBURSEMENT PROCEDURES Required Documentation of Travel Expenses Frequency of Reimbursement Responsibility of Agency CHAPTER 11.
EXCEPTIONS TO TRAVEL REGULATIONS General Provisions Procedures for Requesting Travel Exceptions Approval/Denial of Travel Exceptions CHAPTER 12.
COMPENSATORY TIME General Provisions CHAPTER 13.
ACCOUNTING ISSUES General Information Accounting for Cash Advances Accounting for Travel Expenses Inc urred on Behalf of Another Agency APPENDIX A. STATEWIDE TRAVEL FORMS Employee Travel Expense Statement Exemption Form for Local Hotel/Motel Excise Tax Travel Advance Authorization Form State of Georgia ­ Statewide Travel Regulations
6.3 6.4 6.4 7.1 8.1 8.1 8.1 8.1 9.1 9.1 9.1 9.2 9.2 9.2 9.3 9.3 9.3 10.1 10.2 10.2 11.1 11.1 11.1 12.1 13.1 13.1 13.1
State of Georgia ­ Statewide Travel Regulations
STATEWIDE TRAVEL REGULATIONS Introduction
The following travel regulations have been developed by the Department of Audits and Accounts and the Office of Planning and Budget based on the authority of Senate Resolution 101, passed into law during the 1979 legislative session.
This resolution authorizes the Department of Audits and Accounts and the Office of Planning and Budget to review the travel regulations at least annually and to revise them as necessary.
This resolution also directs state agencies, boards, and commissions to adhere to the following trave l regulations unless granted an exception.
The Department of Audits and Accounts and the Office of Planning and Budget have established travel regulations to: · · Outline what constitutes reasonable and necessary travel expenses; and Provide uniformity among the various departments of State government.
These regulations, however, also allow for flexibility, when unusual travel circumstances arise.
This document provides provisions for intrastate as well as out - of- state travel.
In addition, procedures for requesting exceptions to travel regulations and policies concerning reimbursement and travel advances are addressed.
The travel regulations outlined in this document are effective as of July 1, 1995.
Beginning with this release, updates to this docume nt will be distributed to agencies only when changes are made to the travel regulations.
The following page can be used to document future updates to the travel regulations, the section(s) affected, and the effective dates.
Effective June 1, 1997, the Statewide Travel Regulations became available on the Internet.
You may access the regulations from the following address: http://www2.state.ga.us/Departments/AUDIT/m
Any unresolved questions may be forwarded to the Department of Audits and Accounts at (404) 656- 2006.
Or, you may e- mail your questions to the Travel Regulations Section of the Department of Audits at travel@audits.state.ga.us.
Please note that our web site also includes a listing of Frequently Asked Questions and is available to all state employees as a reference.
State of Georgia ­ Statewide Travel Regulations
Updates to the Statewide Travel Regulations Chapters Updated 1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
15.
16.
Chapter 3 Chapter 3 Chapters 4, 6, 9, 10 Chapter 3 Chapters 3, 4 Chapters 3, 6 Chapters 4, 9 Chapters 1, 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, 9, 13 Introduction, Chapters 1, 4, 9, and Appendices A and B Chapters 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 9, 10, 11, and 13 Date Chapter(s) Updated August 28, 1995 March 12, 1996 June 1, 1996 July 1, 1997 July 1, 1997 January 4, 1999 August 1, 1999 July 1, 2000 July 1, 2001 September 1, 2002
State of Georgia ­ Statewide Travel Regulations
Chapter 1.
Definitions A. AGENCY means any department, board, commission, or other unit of state government that is subject to the Statewide Travel Regulations.
COMMERCIAL TRANSPORTATION means any entity that offers transportation of people or goods to the public for pay.
COUNTY AND MUNICIPAL EXCISE TAX mea ns the local taxes charged by hotel/motels for lodging.
This tax is separate from the state sales tax.
DOAS VEHICLES means the statewide vehicle motor pool that is operated by the Department of Administrative Services' Motor Vehicle Services Division.
EMPLOYEE TRAVEL EXPENSE STATEMENT means the accounting document used to reimburse a state employee for travel expenses incurred while on official business.
FEDERAL PER DIEM RATE means the maximum reimbursements allowed to federal employees who are on trave l status.
The available rates only include locations within the continental United States.
Separate per diem limits have been established for foreign travel.
HIGH COST AREA means any area within Georgia within which meal expenses may be reimbursed at a higher amount than the limits that otherwise apply to travel within Georgia.
High cost areas are limited to the following counties: Chatham, Cobb, DeKalb, Fulton, Glynn, Gwinnett, and Richmond counties.
LODGING means a hotel, motel, inn, apartment, or similar entity that furnishes lodging to the public for pay.
MEAL EXPENSE means the cost of a meal including applicable taxes and tip.
MISCELLANEOUS TRAVEL EXPENSE means a necessary and reasonable expense incurred by a state employee while traveling on official business.
This term does not apply, however, to meals, lodging, mileage, or transportation costs.
B.
C.
D.
E.
F.
G.
H.
I. J.
State of Georgia ­ Statewide Travel Regulations
Page 1.1
K.
POINT OF DEPARTURE means the beginning location used to calculate state- use miles traveled in a personal vehicle.
For the normal work week, the po int of departure will be either the employee's residence or headquarters, whichever is nearer to the destination point.
During weekends and holidays, employees should use the actual point of departure to calculate travel mileage.
PRIVATE AIRCRAFT means a ny personally owned or leased aircraft that is not available for commercial use.
TRAVEL ADVANCE means any payment to an employee for travel expenses that will be incurred for a scheduled, future trip.
TRAVEL ADVANCE AUTHORIZATION FORM means the form used to document approval of cash advances by an agency head or his designee and to document receipt of the cash advance by the employee.
TRAVEL EXCEPTION means written authorization for travel reimbursement of expenses generally not allowable under the State wide Travel Regulations.
TRAVEL EXPENSES means meal, lodging, mileage, transportation, and miscellaneous expenses.
L.
M.
N.
O.
P.
State of Georgia ­ Statewide Travel Regulations
Page 1.2
Chapter 2.
Authorization for Travel
General Provisions Subject to the provisions outlined in these travel regulations, the Department of Audits and Accounts and the Office of Planning and Budget have authorized travel reimbursement for the following expenses: · Meals incurred during overnight lodging and for certain circumstances when there is no overnight lodging; Lodging expenses; Mileage for use of personal vehicle or aircraft; Transportation expenses, including parking and toll fees; and Certain miscellaneous expenses associated with travel.
· · · ·
The specific policies regarding the reimbursement of travel expenses, as well as expense limits and required documentation are outlined in the following chapters.
Exceptions to Travel Regulations Situations may travel expenses and the Office circumstances.
arise in the course of performing job duties that may require employees to incur that are generally not reimb ursable.
The Department of Audits and Accounts of Planning and Budget are authorized to grant one- time exceptions for unusual The procedures for requesting exceptions are outlined in Chapter 11.
Employee Authorization for Travel Employees who are required to travel for their job and are eligible for travel reimbursement should receive authorization from their department head or other designated official prior to performing the travel.
State of Georgia ­ Statewide Travel Regulations
Page 2.1
Each department should establish a written policy designating persons/positions who may authorize and approve travel.
Agencies may authorize blanket routine travel authorization for instate travel.
However, department heads or their designees should specifically authorize out - ofstate travel prior to each trip.
Employees are not required to receive prior written authorization and may use the reverse side of the travel expense statement to document authorization.
Each agency should provide its fiscal office with a list of all persons/positions authorized to approve travel expense statements.
This information is necessary for fiscal office personnel to issue reimbursement travel checks.
State of Georgia ­ Statewide Travel Regulations
Page 2.2
Chapter 3.
Reimbursement of Meal Expenses
Meal Expenses Associated with Overnight Travel within Georgia (General Rule) Employees traveling overnight may be reimbursed for the actual cost of meals, within the maximum limits established in these travel regulations.
Limits are based on the length of day that an employee is officially on travel status.
The following limits apply to meal reimbursements for all employees traveling within most areas of Georgia.
Meal limits applicable to employees traveling to high cost areas within Georgia, as defined in Chapter 1 of these travel regulations, are outlined on page 3.2.
The daily meal limits shown below may be considered as a single daily total.
Daily Maximum Allowable Expense (1) $28.00 $13.00 $21.00 $22.00 $6.00 $7.00 $15.00
Number of Meals Allowed 3 meals per day 2 meals per day
Meals Allowed breakfast/lunch/dinner breakfast/lunch breakfast/dinner lunch/dinner
1 meal per day
breakfast lunch dinner
(1) Taxes and tips are allowable expenses, however, they should be included in the total expense for the meal.
Generally, employees who travel overnight should not be reimbursed for three full meals on the day of departure or return.
The following guidelines apply to reimbursement of meal expenses for these days: · Employees may only be reimbursed for the meals purchased while officially on travel status.
(For example, if an employee departs at 3:00 p.m., the employee should not claim breakfast or lunch expenses for the day of departure.)
Employees may be reimbursed for meal expenses incurred within the 30- mile radius, provided the travel destination is more than 30 miles.
·
State of Georgia ­ Statewide Travel Regulations
Page 3.1
·
Employees who depart for an overnight trip prior to 6:30 a.m. are entitled to reimbursement for breakfast expenses, provided an expense was incurred.
Employees who return from an overnight trip later than 7:30 p.m. are entitled to reimbursement for dinner expenses, provided an expense was incurred.
·
Meal Expenses Associated with Overnight Travel within High Cost Areas in Georgia In some areas of Georgia, employees may experience high costs that cause the employee to exceed the general meal limits.
In recognition of this fact, certain areas, as defined in Chapter 1 of these travel regulations, have been designated "high cost areas."
As is true with the general meal limits on page 3.1, the daily meal limits for high cost areas may be considered as a single daily total.
When working and spending the night in lodging in the designated high cost areas, the following meal limits apply: Daily Maximum Allowable Expense (1) $36.00 $16.00 $27.00 $29.00 $7.00 $9.00 $20.00
Number of Meals Allowed 3 meals per day 2 meals per day
Meals Allowed breakfast/lunch/dinner breakfast/lunch breakfast/dinner lunch/dinner
1 meal per day
breakfast lunch dinner
(1) Taxes and tips are allowable expenses, however, they should be included in the total expense for the meal.
Employees are considered traveling in high cost areas of Georgia when their official responsibilities must be performed at a location in the high cost area.
Employees who are not both working and spending the night in lodging in a designated high cost area are subject to the general meal limits shown on page 3.1.
State of Georgia ­ Statewide Travel Regulations
Page 3.2
Meal Expenses Associated with Overnight Travel outside Georgia Employees are considered traveling outside Georgia when their official responsibilities must be performed at an out - of- state location.
Employees who are working in Georgia but spending the night in lodging in another state are not traveling outside Georgia.
Employees traveling outside Georgia should make every effort to remain within the meal limits prescribed in these travel regulations.
However, employees may be required to travel to some high cost areas that cause the employee to exceed the authorized meal expenses.
Employees who experience this situation should refer to the federal per diem rates in order to determine an appropriate meal limit.
The federal per diem rates (for locations within the continental United States) can be obtained by accessing the Statewide Travel Regulations on the Internet.
Or, you may directly access the federal per diem rates at the following address: http://policyworks.gov/org/main/mt/homepage/mtt/perdiem/travel.shtml The federal government has also established per diem rates for foreign travel.
The Internet address for this information is: http://www.state.gov/m/a/als/prdm The federal per diem rates should be used as a guide to determine appropriate meal expenses for various cities throughout the United States.
Meal expenses associated with travel to high cost out- of- state areas should be approved by the agency head or his designee prior to the trip.
Reimbursement of Meals Not Associated with Overnight Travel Employees who are required to travel for their job and do not stay overnight may be reimbursed for certain meal expenses under the following situations: · Employees acting as an official representative for their department may be reimbursed for meals that are an integral part of a scheduled, official meeting.
Reimbursement is only authorized, however, if the meeting is with persons outside the employee's department and if the meeting continues during the meal.
Employees cannot be reimbursed for meal expenses if they leave the premises of the meeting site.
Employees may be reimbursed for a noon meal not associated with overnight lodging if the meal is a scheduled part of an intra- departmental meeting or training session.
(i.e., the meeting or training session continues during lunch and the employees do not leave the premises of the meeting site.)
Reimbursement is only authorized, however, if the meeting or training was previously approved by the department head, equaled or exceeded six hours in length, and was held more than 30 miles from the employee's office.
·
State of Georgia ­ Statewide Travel Regulations
Page 3.3
Reimbursement for the meal expense may be documented by a copy of the formal written agenda.
· · Employees may be reimbursed for noon meals that are part of a required registration fee.
Employees who are more than 30 miles away from home or headquarters on a work assignment and are away for more than 13 hours may be reimbursed fo r meals, even when there is no overnight lodging.
In this situation, employees are entitled to reimbursement for the noon meal.
In addition to the noon meal, employees who depart prior to 6:30 a.m. are entitled to reimbursement for breakfast expenses, and employees who return later than 7:30 p.m. are entitled to reimbursement for dinner expenses.
Employees who are more than 30 miles away from home or headquarters on a work assignment and depart prior to 5:30 a.m. are entitled to reimbursement for breakfast expenses, even when there is no overnight lodging.
·
Employees who are reimbursed for any of these circumstances are still expected to remain within the authorized meal limits.
Meal Expenses Incurred while Taking Leave Employees who take annual leave while on travel status may not be reimbursed for meal expenses incurred during the period of leave.
Required Documentation of Meal Expenses All meal expenses must be itemized on the employee travel expense statement, indicating the date, location, and the actual cost of each meal.
Taxes and tips are also reimbursable; however, they should be included in the total meal cost subject to the authorized limits.
Receipts for meals are not required.
However, expenses that exceed the authorized general me al limits due to travel in high cost areas or out - of- state should be explained on the expense statement.
State of Georgia ­ Statewide Travel Regulations
Page 3.4
Chapter 4.
Lodging Expenses
General Provisions Employees who travel more than 30 miles (and outside the county) from their home office, residence, or headquarters may be reimbursed for lodging expenses associated with overnight travel.
Employees will be reimbursed for the actual lodging expenses, provided the expenses are reasonable.
Each agency may establish its own policy regarding the maximum reasonable rates for overnight lodging.
Responsibilities of Employee Employees traveling overnight are responsible for ensuring the most reasonable lodging rates are obtained.
To accomplish this, employees should: · Make reservations in advance, whenever practical, · Utilize minimum rate accommodations, · Avoid the "deluxe" hotels and motels, and · Obtain corporate/government rates, whenever possible.
Reimbursement of Lodging Expenses for Overnight Travel outside Georgia Lodging expenses for hote ls/motels outside Georgia may exceed the maximum reasonable rates set by an agency.
Employees traveling out- of- state should refer to the federal per diem rates to identify high cost areas of the United States, and to determine whether higher expenses are justified.
The rates published by the federal government, however, should only be used as a guide.
Lodging expenses associated with travel to high cost areas should be approved by the agency head or his designee prior to the trip.
The federal per diem rates (for locations within the continental United States) can be obtained by accessing the Statewide Travel Regulations on the Internet.
Or, you may directly access the federal per diem rates at the following address: http://policyworks.gov/org/main/mt/homepage/mtt/perdiem/travel.shtml
State of Georgia ­ Statewide Travel Regulations
Page 4.1
The federal government has also established per diem rates for foreign travel.
The Internet address for this information is: http://www.state.gov/m/a/als/prdm
Lodging Associated with a Meeting or Seminar Employees who stay at a hotel/motel that is holding a scheduled meeting or seminar may incur lodging expenses that exceed the rates generally considered reasonable.
The higher cost may be justified in order to avoid excessive transportation costs between a lower cost hotel/motel and the location of the meeting.
Authorization for Lodging within the 30 Mile Radius On occasions, agencies are required to sponsor conferences, trade shows, and other functions that require personnel to work at the event.
In many cases, the persons planning and coordinating the event reside or work less than 30 miles from the scheduled meeting site.
Agency heads are authorized to approve overnight travel for such persons who are coordinating agency sponsored events, provided the affected employees are required to begin work within 9 hours of completing the previous day's activities.
In addition to mileage, affected employees may be reimbursed for meals and lodging in accordance with the provisions of the Statewide Travel Regulations.
Agencies are required to keep records of all persons authorized for travel status under this provision.
Such records must be maintained in a central file and must include the names of all persons approved for travel under this provision, the dates of the event, the purpose of the event, the responsibilities of the individuals approved for travel status, and the written and signed authorization of the agency head.
Authorization for such travel must be done in advance of the scheduled event.
It should be noted events that occur.
activities that are apply for persons responsibilities.
that this provision only applies to conferences and other agency sponsored This provision does not authorize persons to claim travel reimbursement for part of their normal responsibilities.
In addition, this provision would not who are required to attend evening meetings as part of their normal
Sharing Lodging When employees on travel status share a room, reimbursement will be calculated, if practical, on a prorated share of the total cost.
When a state employee on travel status is accompanied by
State of Georgia ­ Statewide Travel Regulations
Page 4.2
someone who is not a state employee on travel status, the employee is entitled to reimbursement at a single room rate.
Taxes Associated with Lodging Expenses By law, hotels/motels must collect state sales/use tax at a rate of 4%.
They must also collect the 1% Marta Tax, and a variety of local sales and use taxes that cannot exceed 2% in total, where applicable.
The local sales and use taxes include: the local option sales ta x, the special purpose local option sales tax, the sales tax for educational purposes, and the homestead option sales and use tax.
In most situations, state and local employees are required to pay the taxes noted above.
The law specifies, however, that any additional excise tax that is charged on lodging is not to be collected from state and local government employees traveling on official business.
When lodging is paid directly by the state or local government, either through direct- bill or through a s tate credit card, the hotel/motel should not collect any taxes associated with the lodging expenses.
Employees should review hotel/motel receipts to ensure that taxes have been applied correctly to their lodging expenses in accordance with the state tax laws and regulations.
Employees should attempt to resolve any problems with the billing prior to checkout.
County and Municipal Excise Tax Not Applicable to State and Local Government Section 48- 13- 51 (a) (1) (C) (ii) of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated exempts Georgia state and local government officials and employees, who are traveling within the state on official business, from paying the county or municipal excise tax on lodging.
This excise tax, which may be referred to as the "Occupancy Tax," may range from 3% to as much as 8%.
This tax is not applicable to state employees when lodging is paid directly by the employee through a personal credit card, cash, or check, as well as when the lodging is paid directly by the state or local government through direct- bill or a state credit card.
Employees are required to submit a copy of the tax- exempt form when they register at a hotel/motel.
A copy of this form is provided in Appendix A.
This exemption does not apply to employees staying at an out- of- state hotel/motel.
Employees should be able to provide proper identification to document their employment as a state or local government employee.
Employees should be sure to present the tax- exempt form to the hotel at check- in.
If the hotel refuses to accept the tax- exempt form at check- in, the employee should attempt to resolve the issue with hotel management before checking out at the end of their stay.
If the matter is not
State of Georgia ­ Statewide Travel Regulations
Page 4.3
resolved by the time the employee checks out, the employee should pay the tax.
The employee should explain the payment of the tax as an unusual expense on their travel statement.
The employee's agency is authorized to reimburse the employee for the hotel/motel tax if the employee provides the agency with the following information: employee name; date(s) of lodging, name, address, telephone number of hotel, and documentation from the hotel/motel of their refusal to omit the appropriate excise tax.
The employee's agency should forward this information to the Travel Regulations Section of the Department of Audits and Accounts.
This information can be provided by telephone at (404) 656- 2006; by e- mail to travel@audits.state.ga.us or by regular mail to: 254 Washington Street, Suite 322, Atlanta, GA 30334.
Lodging Expenses Incurred while Taking Leave Employees who take annual leave while on travel status may not be reimbursed for lodging expenses incurred during the period of leave.
Required Documentation of Lodging Expenses Daily lodging expenses, including applicable taxes, must be itemized on the employee travel expense statement.
Employees requesting reimbursement for lodging expenses are required to submit receipts with their expense statement.
In addition, any e xpenses that exceed the maximum reasonable rates established by the respective agency should be explained on the travel statement.
Individuals responsible for approving travel expenses should review these explanations to determine whether the higher costs are justified and allowable.
State of Georgia ­ Statewide Travel Regulations
Page 4.4
Chapter 5.
Travel by State -Owned or Personal Vehicles General Provisions State employees are encouraged to utilize agency- owned vehicles, if available, for travel within the State of Georgia, and when appropriate for travel outside the State.
However, if agencyowned vehicles are not available, employees may choose between using DOAS or personal vehicles.
Agencies may reimburse state employees for the mileage incurred during the employee's use of a personally owned vehicle.
With the exception of tolls and parking expenses, the mileage reimbursement includes all expenses associated with the operation of a personally owned or leased vehicle.
Use of Agency-Owned or DOAS Vehicles Agencies that maintain a fleet of ve hicles should establish internal policies and procedures consistent with state fleet management policy for employees to request, utilize, and maintain the vehicles.
Employees traveling in state- owned vehicles should purchase fuel using the state contracted fuel program credit card at fuel program network fuel stations.
If the vehicle should break down while traveling, the agency responsible for maintaining the vehicle will provide for repairs and roadside assistance to the driver.
Mileage Reimbursement Rate for Use of Personal Vehicles Employees may be reimbursed for business miles traveled in a personal vehicle.
The mileage reimbursement rate is set by statute and is addressed in Section 50- 19- 7 of the Official Code of Georgia Annotated.
As of July 1, 2000, employees will be reimbursed $.28 for each state- use mile traveled in a personal vehicle.
The actual reimbursement is calculated by multiplying the number of state- use miles by the legally authorized mileage rate.
Employees may be reimbursed for the mileage destination.
During the normal workweek, the residence or headquarters, whichever is nearer holidays, employees should use the actual point incurred from the point of departure to the travel point of departure will be either the employee's to the destination point.
During weekends and of departure to calculate travel mileage.
Prohibited Mileage Reimbursements Employees are not entitled to mileage reimbursement for: · travel between their place of residence and their official headquarters, or State of Georgia ­ Statewide Travel Regulations Page 5.1
·
personal mileage incurred while on travel status.
Reimbursement for Parking Fees and Tolls Agencies may also reimburse employees who incur parking and toll expenses while on official travel for the agency.
These expenses are reimbursable for travel in both state- owned and personal vehicles.
While there are no maximum limits for parking, employees are encouraged to utilize low- cost, long- term parking to minimize the cost.
Required Documentation of Mileage, Parking, and Toll Expenses All requests for reimbursement of mileage, parking, and toll charges must be documented on the employee travel expense statement.
Employees traveling by personal vehicles and requesting reimbursement must record the actual odometer readings on the expense statement .
Personal mileage is then excluded to determine the actual state- use miles.
Employees should claim mileage based on the most direct route from the point of departure to the destination.
Deviations from the most direct route (i.e., due to field visits, picking up passengers, etc.) should be explained on the travel expense statement.
Requests for reimbursement of parking fees and tolls paid should also be recorded on the travel expense statement.
Employees are expected to obtain receipts for these exp enses.
If it is not possible to obtain a receipt, then a written explanation should be included on the expense statement.
Employees who share a state- owned or personal vehicle with another employee and do not claim reimbursement for mileage should indica te the name of the person they rode with and the dates of the trips on the travel expense statement.
Instances in which employees utilize state- owned aircraft should also be noted on the travel expense statement.
State of Georgia ­ Statewide Travel Regulations
Page 5.2
Chapter 6.
Travel by Rented or Public Transportation
General Provisions State employees are encouraged to travel by state- owned or personal vehicles when feasible.
However, when commercial transportation is necessary, employees may be reimbursed for the expenses incurred.
Employees will be reimbursed for actual expenses incurred, provided the appropriate steps were taken to obtain the lowest possible fare or cost.
Travel by rented or public transportation must be approved by agency personnel prior to the date of travel.
When considering such a request, agency personnel should consider the distance to be traveled, the travel time, and the cost.
Commercial Air Transportation State agencies may reimburse employees for expenses incurred for air travel, provided these expenses were approved prior to the date of travel.
Employees who require air travel should obtain the lowest available airfare to a specified destination, which may include the use of the Internet, a travel agency, or the State airfare contract.
The State Purchasing O ffice of the Department of Administrative Services has contracted with airlines for various travel destinations.
Employees should refer to the statewide contract when making travel arrangements.
Airfares included in this contract may be accessed on the Internet.
You may access this information through the Statewide Travel Regulations.
Or, you may access the information directly through the following address: http://www2.state.ga.us/departments/doas/procure/contracts/contract_frame.html Many travel agencies now charge small fees for issuing tickets.
These fees, if reasonable, are part of the cost of travel.
Employees may, therefore, be reimbursed for such costs.
Travel agenc ies used for making travel arrangements should not be related to the employee making, authorizing, or approving the arrangements.
The travel agencies should also not be related to the employee actually traveling.
A "related" party would include any membe rs of the employee's family or any organizations in which the employee or his/her family members have a financial interest.
The purpose for not using such travel agencies is to maintain the State's integrity in financial matters.
It is important that the actions of all State agencies be above reproach.
State of Georgia ­ Statewide Travel Regulations
Page 6.1
It should be noted that employees are not required to use the statewide contract when lower fares can be obtained through another airline.
The contracted airline should, however, be offered the opportunit y to meet the lower fare.
Employees are also not required to use the statewide contract if the contracted flight is not non- stop and the contracted flight would cause the employee undue hardship or would conflict with the employee's schedule.
In general, it is the State's policy that state officials or employees traveling by commercial air carrier travel in the most cost- effective manner and utilize the lowest possible coach fares.
Officials or employees traveling by commercial air carrier will not be re imbursed for the portion of non- coach (first class, business class, etc.) airfare that exceeds the cost of the lowest, available fare on the same flight unless: · · There is no other space available on the needed flight; A licensed medical practitioner certifies that because of a person's mental or physical condition, specific air travel arrangements are required; or The Commissioner of Public Safety certifies that specific air travel arrangements are necessary for security reasons.
·
Upgrades to Non-Coach Travel State officials or employees may, at any time, use personal frequent flyer miles or similar programs to upgrade to non- coach travel.
In addition, nothing in this policy shall preclude a state official or employee from personally paying for an upgrade to non- coach travel.
For purposes of conducting official state business, state officials or employees may negotiate or arrange for upgrades to non- coach travel with individual commercial carriers if: · · The flight is international and over five hours in duration; and The carrier agrees not to charge any additional cost to the state.
Indemnification Received Due to Travel Inconveniences Imposed by Airlines Occasions may arise when airlines overbook, change, delay or cancel flights, thereby imposing tra vel inconveniences on their passengers.
In these instances, airlines often offer the impacted passengers indemnification for these inconveniences.
Examples of indemnification that may be offered by an airline include vouchers for meals or lodging, upgrades to non- coach travel, and
State of Georgia ­ Statewide Travel Regulations
Page 6.2
credits toward future flight costs.
State employees are authorized to accept such indemnification if the travel inconvenience was imposed by the airline and there is no additional cost to the state.
Rental of Motor Vehicles The use of commercially leased vehicles will be left to the discretion of agency personnel responsible for authorizing travel.
Employees requiring the use of commercially leased vehicles may obtain their vehicles through the state contracted rental agenc y according to the conditions of the statewide contract issued by the State Purchasing Office of the Department of Administrative Services.
This contract is available on the Internet.
You may access it through the Statewide Travel Regulations.
Or, you may access it directly at the following address: http://www2.state.ga.us/departments/doas/procure/contracts/contract_frame.html Employees are also encouraged to contact travel agencies to identify the lowest available rates.
Employees who are able to obtain lower rates through other companies should use these other companies to rent their vehicles.
Travel by Railroad State agencies may reimburse employees for the actual cost of rail transportation, provided the appropriate personnel authorized the travel expense in advance.
Employees traveling by rail are encouraged to obtain the lowest possible fare.
There is not a statewide contract for transportation by rail.
Travel by Mass Transportation, Taxi, or Airport Vans Employees officially on travel status may be reimbursed for necessary costs of transportation by bus, taxi, or airport vans for the following situations: · Between the individual's departure point and the common carrier's departure point; · Between the common carrier's arrival point and the individual's lodging or meeting place; and · Between the lodging and meeting places if at different locations.
It is expected that airport vans will be utilized when available, when arrival or departure is during daylight hours, and when they are the lowest cost alternative.
State of Georgia ­ Statewide Travel Regulations
Page 6.3
Reimbursement for Baggage Handling Services Employees may be reimbursed for expenses associated with baggage handling services (porterage) when an expense is actually incurred in moving luggage into or out of lodging places and common carriers.
Required Documentation of Expenses All travel by rented or public transportation must be recorded on the employee travel expense statement.
Employees requesting reimbursement must submit receipts for travel by commercial air carrier or railroad and for the cost of rented vehicles.
Although receipts are recommended, employees are not required to submit receipts for travel by mass transportat ion, taxi, or airport vans.
However, a point- to- point explanation is required for each item reimbursed.
All transportation expenses should be itemized on the employee travel expense statement.
State of Georgia ­ Statewide Travel Regulations
Page 6.4
Chapter 7.
Travel by Private Aircraft
General Provisions Employees may be reimbursed for the use of a private aircraft.
Reimbursement will be at the same rate as mileage reimbursement for travel in a personal vehicle.
As of July 1, 2000, this rate is $.28 per state- use mile.
Reimbursement is made for the most direct route from the employee's residence or headquarters to the destination point(s), whichever is nearer.
Employees utilizing private aircraft should document the expense on the employee travel expense statement.
State of Georgia ­ Statewide Travel Regulations
Page 7.1
Chapter 8.
Miscellaneous Tr avel Expenses
Telephone/Telegraph/FAX Expenses Employees may be reimbursed for expenses incurred for work related telephone, telegraph, and FAX messages.
Employees must document these claims on the travel expense statement, and indicate the location from which each call was made, the person contacted, and the reason for the communication.
Personal calls made while on travel status are not reimbursable.
Stationery/Supplies/Postage Expenses Reimbursement for stationery, supplies, stenographic, or duplicating services may be reimbursed, provided the expense is directly associated with a work related project and the cost is reasonable.
In addition, work related postage expenses may be reimbursed.
Employees requesting reimbursement for these expenses must document actual expenses on the travel statement and explain the purpose for these expenses.
Receipts/invoices should accompany the travel expense statement.
Registration Fees Registration fees required for participation in workshops, seminars, or conferences that an employee is directed and/or authorized to attend will be allowed when supported by a paid receipt or a copy of the check showing payment.
Any part of a registration fee applicable to meals will be reported as a meal expense, and not as a registration fee, if the costs can be separately identified.
Unallowable Expenses The following expenses are not reimbursable unless specific legal authority has been established: · Laundry · Valet services · Theater · Entertainment · Alcoholic beverages
State of Georgia ­ Statewide Travel Regulations
Page 8.1
Chapter 9.
Corporate Charge Cards and Travel Advances
General Provisions OCGA 45- 7- 25 and 47- 7- 26 authorize the payment of travel advances to employees of all state agencies, commissions, and authorities.
State law also charges the Director of the Office of Planning and Budget with the responsibility for developing the necessary rules, regulations, and procedures to govern travel advances and to provide for proper and timely accounting of state funds advanced to employees once the employees have returned from travel status.
The Office of Planning and Budget issued the OPB Policy Memorandum No. 1 (Revision 2) in 1989 to address travel advances.
The information provided in this chapter summarizes this policy statement.
In general, each agency is authorized to set specific policies and procedures regarding travel advances, provided the policies and procedures do not conflict with any regulations addressed in the remainder of this chapter.
Purpose of Travel Advances The purpose of travel advances is to minimize the financial burden on employees while traveling on behalf of the State.
This objective can be accomplished either by the issuance of corporate charge cards or by cash advances to the employees.
Corporate Charge Cards Corporate charge cards may be issued to eligible employees upon approval by the agency head or his designee and the company issuing the corporate charge card.
Corporate charge cards are beneficial because they: · Reduce the employee's and the agency's cash flow by minimizing the need for cash advances; · Reduce the frequency of reimbursements for travel expenses; · Require no annual membership fee or finance charges if paid within the terms of the agreement; · Provide emergency cash to the employee; · Eliminate the need for the agenc y to direct pay airline tickets, travel agencies, and car rental agencies; · Provide guarantee for hotel rooms and other services requiring a deposit; and State of Georgia ­ Statewide Travel Regulations Page 9.1
·
Provide the agency with various financial reports regarding employee travel expenses.
Corporate charge cards are issued directly to the employee, and the employee pays all expenses charged to the corporate charge card.
Therefore, there is no liability to the State or an agency, even if the employee defaults.
Employees who are issued corporate charge cards are authorized to use the charge cards for business purposes only.
Authority to Advance Cash for Travel Since corporate charge cards are now available to employees, state agencies should minimize the use of cash advances.
However, agency personnel should still consider issuing cash advances for the following circumstances: · For justifiable reason(s), the employee has not received a corporate charge card; · For employees who generally do not travel and are making a one time trip; or · For special exceptions approved by the agency head.
The head of each agency, or his designee, is authorized to advance state funds to employees traveling on behalf of the State.
Funds may be advanced for anticipated subsistence (meals and lodging), as well as for mileage and other transportation costs which are reimbursable under these travel regulations.
Travel advances are not required by state law or by these regulations, but are left to the discretion of each agency head.
Approval of Cash Advances for Travel Agency he ads, or their designee, are required to specifically authorize each cash advance made to an employee.
The written authorization for a cash advance should be included on the travel advance authorization form (see Appendix A).
This form should also be signed by the employee to document that the cash advance was received.
Amount of Cash Advance Each agency may establish its own policies regarding cash advance limits.
Agencies should consider the nature and probable duration of the travel when determining cash advance limits.
The amount of a cash advance shall be related to the estimated cost of travel, as outlined on the travel authorization form, but shall be held to a minimum and allowed only when the agency head determines that an advance is warranted.
State of Georgia ­ Statewide Travel Regulations
Page 9.2
Employee and Agency Accountability of Funds Advanced Each employee receiving a cash advance shall sign and date the travel advance authorization form acknowledging receipt of the funds.
All employees are fully responsible for funds advanced to them and shall account for the funds in accordance with the Statewide Travel Regulations.
Employees are liable for any advanced funds that are lost or stolen.
Neither state law nor these regulations, however, in any way relieve the agency head from the respo nsibility of accounting for all funds expended for travel purposes.
Recovery of Cash Advances Made for Specific Trips When the actual travel expenditures reported on the travel expense statement exceed the amount of the cash advance, the employee shall be reimbursed for the additional travel costs incurred.
Cash advances for specific trips shall be recovered under the following three circumstances: · When the actual travel expenditures reported on the travel expense statement are less than the amount of the cash advance, the employee shall reimburse the agency for the difference.
This reimbursement shall be made at the same time that the travel expense statement is submitted; In the event of cancellation or indefinite postponement of authorized trave l, any cash advances which were made shall be refunded immediately; and Outstanding travel advances should be recovered from terminating employees.
Each agency head shall establish procedures to ensure that terminating employees do not have outstanding cash advances and have turned in their corporate charge cards.
·
·
Recovery of Cash Advances for Continuous Travel For cases in which an employee is in a continuous travel status and has been given a blanket routine travel authorization, the full recovery of any cash advance is not required until the employee is removed from continuous travel status.
Both the employee and his agency head shall be responsible for ensuring that the cash advance does not exceed the expected travel expenses for one pay period.
Travel expenses incurred during each pay period shall be reported on the travel expense statement and submitted at the end of the period.
Any reimbursement of funds to the employee must not increase the outstanding cash advance above the authorized amount.
State of Georgia ­ Statewide Travel Regulations Page 9.3
Chapter 10.
Reimbursement Procedures
Required Documentation of Travel Expenses Employees requesting reimbursement for travel expenses are required to submit their claim to authorized personnel on the employee travel expense statement.
A copy of the standard travel expense statement is included in Appendix A. Agencies are authorized to make revisions to the standard form.
However, all revisions must be approved by the Department of Audits and Accounts and the Office of Planning and Budget.
Requests for reimbursement should include the following information: · Itemized expenses for authorized meals, lodging, mileage, transportation, and miscellaneous expenses.
The types of expenses which are authorized and the allowable limits are discussed in chapters three through eight; Explanation of any expenses which exceed the established limits and of any unusual expenses; Explanation of the purpose for the trip; and Description of the type(s) of transportation used.
·
· ·
Employees are required to sign their travel expense statement, attesting that the information presented on the form is accurate.
Employees who provide false information are subject to criminal penalty of a felony for false statements, which is subject to punishment by fine of not more than $1,000 or by imprisonment for not less than one nor more than five years.
Employees are also required to submit receipts for the following expenses: · Lodging, · Airline or Railroad Fares, · Rental of Motor Vehicles, · Supplies, and · Registration Fees.
Receipts for parking, tollway, mass transit/taxi/airport vans, and communications expenses are recommended.
However, if receipts are not available, employees are required to include an explanation of the expense on the travel expense statement.
Receipts for meals are not required.
State of Georgia ­ Statewide Travel Regulations Page 10.1
Frequency of Reimbursement Agencies should reimburse employees for travel expenses at least semi- monthly.
If an agency elects to reimburse on a monthly basis, the agency should have a provision to immediately reimburse any claim that exceeds $200.
Otherwise, the agency should allow the employee the right to obtain a travel advance if requested by the employee.
Responsibility of Agency Each agency head should designate a person (or persons) responsible for examining and approving claims for reimbursement under these travel regulations.
Claims should be reviewed to ensure they are reasonable, accurate, and only cover expenses that were actually incurred by the employee.
Claims that exceed the established limits should be reviewed more closely to ensure the explanations are sufficient to justify the higher expenses.
Employees should not assume that all expenses that exceed the authorized limits and are explained on the travel expense statement will be automatically approved.
The accounting review process for approving travel expense statements will be left to the discretion of each agency.
State of Georgia ­ Statewide Travel Regulations
Page 10.2
Chapter 11.
Exceptions to Travel Regulations
General Provisions Sometimes unusual circumstances may arise that require employees to incur travel expenses that are not reimbursable under the current travel regulations.
When this occurs, the agency head or his designee may request an exception to the travel regulations, for the purpose of reimbursement.
Agencies should not consider approved exceptions to be a blanket waiver of the travel regulations.
Exceptions are only granted for an individual or individuals participating in a scheduled event, and are only allowable for the specified dates of the event.
Agencies are encouraged t request exceptions for unusual travel circumstances, as needed.
o Agencies that deviate from the travel regulations, without receiving written authorization, could be cited in the annual audit reports issued by the Department of Audits and Accounts.
Procedures for Requesting Travel Exceptions Agencies requesting travel exceptions should submit their request in writing to the Department of Audits and Accounts.
All written requests must be from the agency head or his designee and must be submitted prior to the expected travel date.
All written requests should include: · · · · The name(s) of An explanation An explanation The anticipated the person(s) for which the exception is requested, of the purpose of the trip, of the types of expenses to be incurred, and travel dates.
Approval/Denial of Travel Exceptions The Department of Audits and Accounts and the Office of Planning and Budget are responsible for approving or denying all requests for travel exceptions.
Written documentation will be submitted to the agency indicating whether the request was approved or denied.
State of Georgia ­ Statewide Travel Regulations
Page 11.1
Chapter 12.
Compensatory Time
General Provisions Compensatory time awarded for personal hours spent traveling should be granted according to the Office of Planning and Budget/Merit System policy and any departmental policy established under that framework.
State of Georgia ­ Statewide Travel Regulations
Page 12.1
Chapter 13.
Accounting Issues
General Information In accounting for travel- related expenses, state agencies should follow the procedures outlined in the State of Georgia Accounting Procedures Manual published by the Department of Audits and Accounts.
This manual may be downloaded from the Department of Audits and Accounts' web site at: http://www2.state.ga.us/Departments/AUDIT/ppd/apmanual.html As noted in the Accounting Procedures Manual, expenses incurred for meals, lodging, mileage, or transportation costs should be recorded in the agency's accounting records as travel expense.
Reimbursements for miscellaneous travel expenses discussed in Chapter 8 of the Statewide Travel Regulations should not be recorded as travel, but should be recorded in the appropriate expense account.
For example, reimbursement for business telephone calls should be treated as telecommunications expense.
In addition, registration fees reimbursed to employees should be recorded in the same manner as registration fees paid directly by the agency.
Accounting for Cash Advances Outstanding funds advanced for travel shall be accounted for as "accounts receivable" on departmental balance sheets.
Eit her account 125003 (accounts receivable - travel advances continuous) or account 125004 (accounts receivable - travel advances - one trip) should be used, as appropriate.
A subsidiary record shall be maintained for each employee who receives a cash adva nce.
These subsidiary records shall be periodically adjusted for all travel expense statements and reimbursements.
Accounting for Travel Expenses Incurred on Behalf of Another Agency Periodically, an employee of one state organization may, in performing specific duties for another state organization, incur travel expenses as a direct result of performing such duties.
The state organization making payment of such employee travel should record these expenses in account 640208 (employee travel between state organizations) and subsequently submit a listing of such expenses to the Department of Audits and Accounts for inclusion in the annual Personal Services, Travel Expense and Reimbursed Expenses Compilation Report.
State of Georgia ­ Statewide Travel Regulations
Page 13.1
APPENDIX A
Appendix A includes a copy of all standard forms associated with state travel.
The forms included in this appendix are the: · · · Employee Travel Expense Statement Exemption Form for Local Hotel/Motel Excise Tax Travel Advance Authorization Form
STATE OF GEORGIA EMPLOYEE TRAVEL EXPENSE STATEMENT (Please type or print) DEPARTMENT NAME SOCIAL SECURITY NUMBER Depart DATE Time Arrival Time Location BUSINESS PHONE BREAKFAST Amount TITLE RESIDENCE (Street) LUNCH Location Amount DINNER Location Amount Total HEADQUARTERS (City) (City)
For period from (County) (County) MEALS - DAILY TOTALS Overage Allowed
thru (State)
(St) LODGING Location
(ZIP Code)
Amount
TOTALS FOR EACH CATEGORY
"I do solemnly swear, under criminal penalty of a felony for false statements subject to punishment by fine of not more than $1,000 or by imprisonment for not less than one nor more than five years, that the above statements are true and I have incurred the described expenses and the state use mileage in the discharge of my official duties for the state."
STATE USE MILEAGE
__________
MILES AT ____________
CENTS PER MILE
(Must be supported by automobile mileage record on back) TOTAL MEALS (Amount allowed) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
TOTAL LODGING (Attach lodging receipts) . . . . .
.. . . . . . . . .
.. . . . . . . .
OTHER TRAVEL EXPENSES (Detailed on back) . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Signature Approved Approved
Date COMMERCIAL TRANSPORTATION (Detailed on back) . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Date MISCELLANEOUS EXPENSES (Detailed on back) . . . .
.. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Date TOTAL APPROVED EXPENDITURES $
ACCOUNTING USE ONLY VENDOR ID ACCOUNT 640001 640002 640003 640004 640005
TERMS AMOUNT
ORGANIZATION NO DESCRIPTION TRAVEL-MILEAGE TRAVEL-MEALS TRAVEL-LODGING TRAVEL-OTHER
PAYMENT HANDLING
VOUCHER ID
TRAVEL-COMMERCIAL TRANSPORTATION MISCELLANEOUS EXPENSES
TOTAL
AUTOMOBILE MILEAGE RECORD STARTING DATE ORIGIN - - POINTS VISITED DESTINATION MILEAGE ENDING MILEAGE TOTAL MILEAGE PERSONAL MILEAGE STATE USE MILEAGE
TOTAL AMOUNTS PERSONAL CAR Ga.
Tag No.
I. D. No.
DEPARTMENT CAR I. D. No.
DOAS CAR
OTHER TYPE TRANSPORTATION STATE AIRCRAFT ( ) DATE DATE
State Use Miles
Total Miles
Total Miles
COMMERCIAL AIRCRAFT ( )
EXPLAIN ANY EXPENSES THAT ARE UNUSUAL OR EXCEED ESTABLISHED LIMITS:
OTHER (SPECIFY) ( )
DATE
PURPOSE OF TRIP:
EXPLAIN TELEPHONE CHARGES:
DATE
COMMERCIAL TRANSPORTATION COMMON CARRIER, TAXI, LIMOUSINE
AMOUNT
DATE
TRAVEL - OTHER TIPS, PARKING
AMOUNT
DATE
MISCELLANEOUS EXPENSES
AMOUNT
COMMERCIAL TRANSPORTATION TOTAL Enter each total in appropriate line of expense section on front side.
TRAVEL-OTHER TOTAL
MISCELLANEOUS TOTAL
If transportation was shared, indicate date, origin/destination, mode and name of person traveled with:
DATE
ORIGIN/DESTINATION
MODE OF TRAVEL
PERSON TRAVELED WITH
ATTENTION: GEORGIA HOTEL AND MOTEL OPERATORS
On April 2, 1987, Act Number 621 amending Official Code of Georgia Annotated Section 48-13-51 became effective.
This Act provides that Georgia State or local government officials or employees traveling on official business should not be charged county or municipal excise tax on lodging.
Sales tax is not exempted under the current sales tax law, since the payment of hotel/motel bills by an employee is not considered to be payment made directly by a State agency from appropriated funds.
Upon verification of the identity of the State official or employee identified below, Georgia hotel and motel operators should not charge the individual for any county or municipal lodging excise tax.
Sales tax, however, should continue to be charged.
A copy of this certification should be maintained with your tax records to document the individual's status as a state official or employee traveling on official business.
If you have any questions, please contact the accounting or fiscal office of the Department or agency employing the individual identified below.
STATE OF GEORGIA CERTIFICATE OF EXEMPTION OF LOCAL HOTEL/MOTEL EXCISE TAX
CERTIFICATION This is to certify that the lodging obtained on the date(s) identified below was required in the discharge of my official duties for the State and qualifies for exemption of the local hotel/motel excise tax under Official Code of Georgia Annotated Chapter 48-13 (as amended by Act 621, Georgia Laws 1987).
Signature of Official or Employee P R I N T OR T Y P E Name of Official or Employee Title of Official of Employee Agency Represented Accounting/Fiscal Office Contact_________________________________Phone No.
_______________ Date(s) of Lodging Date
TRAVEL CASH ADVANCE AUTHORIZATION EMPLOYEE NAME SOCIAL SECURITY NUMBER ORG NUMBER TITLE AUTHORIZED BY: (Supervisor)
TRAVEL INFORMATION 1.
TYPE OF TRAVEL (Check One) [ ] SINGLE TRIP IN STATE [ ]
PURPOSE OF TRAVEL 3.
DATE OF TRAVEL 4.
DESTINATION(S) 5.
METHOD OF TRAVEL (Check as applicable) [ ] PRIVATE CAR [ ]
AUTHORIZATION 1.
The described travel is authorized [ ] YES Approved by: (Supervisor) 2.
Previous travel advance repaid [ ] YES [
RECEIPT ACKNOWLEDGEMENT [ ] NO (Date) ]
If NO, amount of outstanding advance $ (Employee Signature) Verified by: (Accounting Section) (Date) (Date)
ACCOUNTING SECTION ONLY
3.
Travel advance in the amount of $ _______________________ Posted By hereby authorized by: (Agency Fiscal Officer) Ref No.
(Date) Date
