STAFF BULLETIN VOLUME XVII, NO. 4 APRIL 2001
S
OLDIERS IN
GREY: C
ONFEDERATE
M
EMORIAL
DAY
AT
F
ORT
F
ISHER
Fort Fisher is pleased to announce that noted singer, songwriter, and storyteller Stan Clardy will perform his award-winning, one-man play Soldiers In Gray, A Musical Journey for the Confederate Memorial Day service on Thursday, May 10, 2001.
Mr. Clardy describes the one-hour show as "the story of a soldier's life before, during, and after the War Between the States, 1861-1865 . . . a fictional character whose story is based on written facts and personal letters of people who endured this fight for the South, starting with the thunder of the threatened South and ending with discovering a treasure--a heritage treasure."
Though decidedly Southern, the performance is intended for a general audience and geared for the entire family, presenting history in a thoughtful, evenhanded, and non-divisive manner.
A recipient of the Zebulon Vance Award and the Jefferson Davis Historical Gold Medal, Stan has performed the play numerous times for various schools, festivals, civic meetings, and reenactments.
A member of the Sons of Confederate Veterans, Clardy has also been instrumental in restoration and erection of various Confederate monuments and markers.
Stan has been reviewed and written about in several newspapers and periodicals, including the Charlotte Observer, Mooresville Tribune, and Carolina Confederate.
The Statesville Record and Landmark wrote: "The one-hour musical play given by Clardy is the nearest you will come to hearing your own ancestor talk.
. . ."
Mr. Clardy, a Georgian now residing in Statesville, first became interested in the War Between the States after performing period songs at a memorial service in Georgia in 1989.
"That really gave me the bug, because I was around these reenactors all day," Clardy explained.
The experience inspired him to write "Soldiers in Gray," the title song of his Musical Journey.
Other songs followed, culminating in a musical repertoire of patriotism, humor, romance, and history that would eventually comprise the play.
"This play is from the heart.
. . ." says Mr. Clardy.
"A lot of times we look at history as if it were black-and-white pictures in a book.
But by using the words of people who were there, I can help people understand what the people who were there were feeling and what they were thinking.
. . .
It's a way of making history come alive."
CD's and cassettes of Soldiers in Gray, a Musical Journey are available in the Fort Fisher gift shop.
The free performance will be held at 7:00 p.m. in front of the Confederate monument at Battle Acre at Fort Fisher.
For details, call (910) 458-5538.
(Ray Flowers)
Published periodically by North Carolina Historic Sites, a program of the Division of Archives and History, N.C.
Department of Cultural Resources for section personnel.
The section's home office is at 1 532 N. Wilmington Street, Raleigh, N.C. 27604.
(919)733-7862.
James R. McPherson, Administrator.
VOLUME XVII, NO. 4
APRIL 2001
CORNERSTONE The state budget crisis continues as we enter the busy spring season at state historic sites.
As we approach the season of school groups and reawakening grass, I want to commend all of you for going the extra mile to continue delivering such a high level of performance.
Despite curtailed spending and the job freeze, you have found ways to keep the sites running.
It has required extra work, longer days, and the sacrifice of much staff development and training.
Our support groups with their limited resources have helped in some cases, for which we are most grateful.
We cannot continue to operate at these reduced funding levels for long without making strategic cuts in the public services and programs we offer at our twenty-two sites.
For the present, I thank you for your extra work and professional attitude in these difficult times.
Many folks gathered on the evening of March 14 at Bentonville Battleground for a bittersweet occasion--the dedication of the new site orientation program to our friend and co-worker, Rick Jackson.
Before his untimely death in late 1999, Rick worked hard to complete the script for the Bentonville program.
David Latham, Jim Willard, and Virgil Smithers completed the production and installation of the program.
On March 14 we gathered with Martha Jackson; Rick's father, mother, brother, and other family members; and community friends to honor Rick and preview the program he had helped create.
For as long as it is shown to site visitors, the program will be a tribute to the talent of a fine AV producer and individual.
We also were saddened this month by the death of Bobby Johnson, longtime member of the Bentonville staff.
Bobby had a passion for maintaining the Bentonville grounds to military standards.
His contributions to special events were considerable as well.
Bentonville will miss Bobby for his work, and we all will miss Bobby's friendship.
We extend our sympathy to Bobby's wife, Tina, and his entire family.
Keep up your spirits in these tough times! I hope to see you soon.
(Jim McPherson)
AYCOCK B
LUE
R
IBBON
V
OLUNTEERS
C
HARLES AND
M
ARGARET
B
ALLARD
Charles and Margaret Ballard live in Pine Level, in a restored nineteenth-century house.
Charles is an engineer and will soon retire.
The Ballards have two children and two grandchildren.
When they began volunteering at Aycock in 1996, their love of history was apparent.
Both th are reenactors with the 27 N.C. and fit right in with our programs.
They have helped out with Living History Wednesdays, Farm Heritage Days, and Christmas Candlelight Tours where they serve hot cider.
Mr. Ballard has shelled and ground corn and given talks at the site smokehouse about preserving and curing meat.
Martha dresses in "widow's weeds" and gives tours of the cemetery.
Charles recently joined her during our fortieth anniversary celebration as a widower.
Both talked about mourning and burial practices in the nineteenth century.
The Ballards brought valuable experience with them and continue to make significant contributions to the site.
They have a keen sense of what is appropriate dress for the mid-nineteenth century.
They have a wealth of knowledge about the period as well as many years of experience relating history to the public.
We are truly fortunate to have them interested in our site.
No wonder they were chosen as our Blue Ribbon Volunteers for 2001.
(Charlotte Brow) 2
VOLUME XVII, NO. 4
APRIL 2001
K
ENNECOTT
R
IDGEWAY
M
INE
C
LOSES AND
AIDS R
EED
Modern miners at Kennecott Ridgeway near Columbia, South Carolina, poured their last gold bar, and daily operation ceased on December 3, 1999.
The date was just six days short of ten years of operation, during which the mine produced 1 1/2 million ounces of gold (more than the official historical production of both Carolinas) and 906,500 ounces of silver.
The mine, the last of four modern gold mines in the state, began a lengthy reclamation process at the 2,300-acre site.
Today all that remains of about 240 workers is a skeleton crew to monitor the final reclamation, which has been intense over the last 14 months and will continue for years.
Kennecott has devoted $30 million to the project to ensure that everything is done to high standards.
Two large open mining pits will be filled with displaced material and water.
The lakes, about 90 acres each, will open as clean freshwater lakes for recreation within fifteen years.
Ridgeway Gold Mine also came through with the largest gift to Reed--a very sizeable and impressive drill rig.
David Drill rig donated by Salisbury, former general manager, donated one of Ridgeway's Ridgeway Gold Mine drill rigs to Reed before he left for a new challenge overseas.
The model C40KH rig is now permanently located in the field adjacent to the visitor center.
This imposing piece of modern equipment has a width of 13 feet 9 inches and is 37 feet in length.
The mast when raised is 38 feet 4 inches high.
The entire unit weighs 59,500 pounds.
We truly appreciate this generous gift that will always display the positive relationship Reed had with a modern mine.
(John Dysart)
FORT FISHER LISTED
AS
E
NDANGERED
S
ITE
The Civil War Preservation Trust, the nation's largest battlefield preservation organization with some 32,000 members, has named Fort Fisher to its national list of the ten most-endangered Civil War battle sites.
The battlefields were chosen on the basis of geographic location, military importance, and the immediacy of current threats.
Trust members, including a number of historians and preservationists, participated in the selection.
Among the other nine most endangered sites are Gettysburg in Pennsylvania, Harpers Ferry in West Virginia, and the Wilderness in Virginia.
Development is a key threat to many of the battlefields and other sites.
The main threat to Fort Fisher is, of course, nature in the form of erosion of the fort by wind and water.
Since 1865 erosion and hurricanes have already destroyed 90 percent of the original fortress.
Construction of a 3,000-foot granite seaside revetment completed in 1996 has greatly aided in preservation of the shoreline and fort behind the structure.
The revetment, and the principal remains of the fort, survived Hurricanes Fran and Bertha, although substantial repairs to the new structure were necessary after the storms.
In February site staff began restoring the remains of the original earthen mounds of the landface between U.S. 421 and the ocean to their Civil War height of some thirty feet.
3
VOLUME XVII, NO. 4
APRIL 2001
FORMER P
IEDMONT
P
ILOT
V
ISITS
NCTM
R
EED
GOLD M
INE IN
FULL B
LOOM
In celebration of Black History Month and in conjunction with the opening of the Piedmont Sets the Pace exhibit, Capt. Bill Wilkerson spoke about his years as a pilot for Piedmont Airlines and being one of the first minority pilots for the airline industry.
Captain Wilkerson had an early fascination with flying.
His interest began at age seven, while reading a "how-to" book, The Book of Universal Knowledge.
In it he found basic instructions on flying.
From then on, Wilkerson's interest grew into a determined ambition to become a pilot.
Wilkerson received his pilot's license at sixteen, even before his driver's license.
After graduating from the University of Tennessee, Wilkerson joined the U.S. Air Force.
Shortly thereafter he received private, commercial, and instructor flying ratings.
In 1974 Wilkerson was hired by Piedmont, the third minority pilot at the airline.
Wilkerson has fond memories of Piedmont Airlines.
He stated that Piedmont was a very innovative company, always implementing the newest technology into its planes.
He also said that, more than its technological advances, Piedmont was an airline for the people.
Wilkerson stated that the firm treated everyone fairly and ethically, a practice he attributed to airline president Tom Davis's efforts at encouraging a pleasant airline both to work for and to fly.
Wilkerson is currently a pilot for US Airways in the training department for the Boeing 757/767 and flies internationally and domestically.
As Wilkerson says, "I love flying, but I'm not sure what's more fascinating--piloting an aircraft or the view that you are able to see.
Both are extraordinary."
(Jemi Johnson)
Jennifer Halstead and Lee Garner have been hard at work creating new flowerbeds at Reed Gold Mine.
Both Lee and Jennifer are avid gardeners and love working with plants and flowers.
They even hope to develop a small greenhouse on site to cut the cost of buying flowers.
The flowers do a lot to add to the natural beauty of Reed without taking away the sense of an industrial site.
Pansies and mums were planted for fall color, and the pansies are again vibrant this spring.
A small herb bed added more variety to the winter foliage.
Tulips and daffodils were planted among the pansies for the spring months.
Lee has done a superb job on a rock wall bordering one of the flower beds.
The wall blends with the rock foundation of the visitor center.
All of the rocks were retrieved from the bed of Little Meadow Creek.
Both resident gardeners are full of ideas for future flower projects.
Their plan is to enhance the natural beauty of the landscape and make the site more attractive for visitors.
The staff has received positive feedback from guests about the well-maintained grounds.
(Jennifer Halstead)
4
VOLUME XVII, NO. 4
APRIL 2001
H
ISTORIC
S
ITES
S
TAFF
LEND A H
AND AT
R
OANOKE ISLAND
Ray Flowers and Leland Smith clown around at the Roanoke Adventure Museum at the Festival Park.
This uniform has yet to be approved by the costume committee.
Historic Sites employees Leland Smith (Fisher), Ray Flowers (Fisher), and Andrew Duppstadt (CSS Neuse) participated in the Civil War Weekend at Roanoke Island Festival Park in Manteo, February 16-18.
They fired Fort Fisher's 12-pounder for spectators and interpreted Civil War artillery for visitors.
This was the second year the park held the program, which commemorates the Battle of Roanoke Island during Gen. Ambrose Burnside's campaign in coastal North Carolina in early 1862.
There were over one thousand visitors at the event on Saturday, and many listed the artillery demonstration as their favorite aspect of the program on visitor evaluation forms.
A number of reenactment units were present, including the Tidewater Maritime Living History Association from Virginia (providing all of the naval interpretation), Confederate infantry from Maryland, and Federal infantry from Connecticut.
Hats off to the event's organizer and coordinator, Chris Woodson, for a fine program! (Andrew Duppstadt) OUNTY
ALAMANCE C
C
ELEBRATES
P
ATRIOT'S
D
AY
Inclement weather forced the organizers of Alamance County's fifth annual Patriot's Day celebration to move the scheduled commemorative activities from the Battle of Clapp's Mill Memorial Site to the Alamance Battleground visitor center on Sunday, March 4.
This annual event is held to commemorate local Revolutionary War conflicts known as Pyle's Massacre (February 23, 1781), the Battle of Clapp's Mill (March 2, 1781), and the Battle of Lindley's Mill (September 13, 1781).
The afternoon ceremony featured guest speakers and special wreath presentations.
Dr. Sam Powell, an Alamance County commissioner, and Mr. Robert (Bob) Vogel, superintendent of Guilford Courthouse National Military Park, spoke to the sixty-five people in attendance.
State Sen. Hugh Webster and his wife, it should be noted, were among those attending.
Representatives from the North Carolina Society of the Sons of the American Revolution (SAR), the Alamance Battleground and Nathanael Greene Chapters of the SAR, and the Battle of Alamance Chapter of the Daughters of the American Revolution (DAR) presented wreaths.
Music for the affair was presented by the Guilford Fife and Drums, a group with ties to the aforementioned national military park.
Following the formal program, members of the local chapter of the DAR provided light refreshments to those present.
Everyone seemed pleased with the facilities and the public response.
Planners of the event would like to see it expanded in the future to draw more interest.
We at Alamance were honored to have this opportunity to increase our contribution to an important effort.
(Bryan Dalton)
5
VOLUME XVII, NO. 4
APRIL 2001
H
ISTORIC
HALIFAX ATTENDS INAUGURAL PARADE IN RALEIGH
EXHIBIT AT EDENTON WINS FIRST PLACE IN STATE DAR COMPETITION Harking back to the October issue of the Staff Bulletin, an article appeared then headlined "Edenton Celebrates Constitution Week."
Ann Byrum of the site staff served as chairperson of the Edenton Tea Party Chapter, Daughters of the American Revolution (DAR) for celebration of the event.
Ann designed and executed a display which was set up in the Historic Edenton visitor center.
A narrative description of the exhibit, supplemented by photographs, was submitted to the state association of the DAR for consideration in competition with the work of other chapters.
Ms. Beth Taylor, regent of the local chapter, recently informed Ann that her entry won the blue ribbon and accompanying certificate for first place among North Carolina chapters.
The award was presented at a luncheon during the state DAR meeting in Pinehurst on February 12.
Historic Edenton State Historic Site was happy to provide its facilities and work with the Edenton Tea Party th Chapter in commemorating the 213 anniversary of such a hallowed and revered document as the Constitution of the United States.
During the week of September 17-23, 2000, 829 individual visitors and members of student groups viewed the display.
We congratulate Ann on her original display and on the statewide accolade it has achieved.
The entry will now be placed in a nationwide competition to be held later this year.
(William B. Strong)
Once again Historic Halifax has contributed to history in the making.
On Saturday, January 6, 2001, Historic Halifax employees and volunteers joined other citizens of the state to be a part of a historic day.
A short proclamation was read by Historic Halifax town crier Wrenn Phillips of Scotland Neck.
Banner carriers were Keirsten Jones and Deidre Stephenson of the Halifax County Boys' and Girls' Club.
Hank Brown, a Historic Halifax volunteer, th represented the 6 North Carolina Regiment and Historic Halifax.
Gloria Edwards, Steven Green, and temporary staff members Kristal Chapman and Willie Murphy also participated in the parade.
All these participants enjoyed the day, and the site thanks the Halifax County Tourism Development Association for its support.
J. R. Ayash and Matt Yarborough from the North Carolina Transportation Museum also appeared in the parade driving the museum's 1935 Ford Highway Patrol roadster.
(Gloria Edwards)
6
VOLUME XVII, NO. 4
APRIL 2001
LOOKING FOR A N
EW
D
ESK
One of the newest additions coming to Aycock Birthplace is a teacher's desk.
The one currently residing in the schoolhouse is left over from the days when the building also served as an auditorium.
That desk was not chosen for its historical accuracy but to facilitate a slide show presentation.
With the approach of the centennial of Governor Aycock's inauguration, the push for a correct interpretation of the schoolhouse became greater.
I was given the task of researching a teacher's desk, which turned out to be a little more difficult than I originally had thought.
Charlotte suggested using a lot of the historic photographs that we had on hand.
Most of them showed desks that were of similar style and taste.
They were simple tables, usually with a tablecloth or something similar on top.
Though this information was helpful, we still had no hard evidence of a specific teacher's desk from eastern North Carolina.
We made several trips to nearby restored schoolhouses hoping to find a desk but had no luck.
Then we had a break.
A relatively new employee at Historic Sites, curator of education Ed Morris, came to the rescue.
His great aunt was a teacher in Wilson County during the turn of the century.
He had her old desk.
While the ravages of time had taken their toll on the desk, it provided us with a concrete example of a teacher's desk from Eastern North Carolina.
With a teacher's desk as a template, Charlotte and I took some measurements of the desk that can be seen in a 1918 picture.
The measurements are approximate due to having blown up the picture to better see the desk.
After the measurements were taken, Charlotte talked with Clare Bass, head of collections at Historic Sites, on the feasibility of having a reproduction desk made.
Clare took measurements of Ed's desk and by combining both sets of measurements decided to build a correct teacher's desk.
After several companies were contacted, it was decided that we would ask the section's craftsmen if they could build it for us.
Hopefully before the spring rush, the schoolhouse will have a new and more correct teacher's desk.
(John Joyner)
YOU'RE IN OUR THOUGHTS · · · · Bobby Johnson (Bentonville) passed away.
Charlotte Brow's (Aycock) father-in-law passed away.
Archie Smith's (Town Creek) mother is in the hospital.
Rick Knapp's (Home Office) wife underwent surgery.
7
