Child Health Literature Review No matter what is used to treat colic, it will resolve on its own in time! "Infant colic is a diagnosis of exclusion.
When nothing can be found physically wrong with the irritable infant, the assigned diagnosis is often colic.
However, there is little agreement as to what exactly colic is, what causes it, or how it should be treated.
The reported incidence varies from 1.5% to 11.9% of all infants having colic.
Several definitions of colic have been used in clinical trials.
These range from the very specific of paroxysms of irritability, fussing, or crying lasting for a total of more than three hours a day and occurring on more than three days of any one week, to the crying that a parent brings to the attention of the health care provider because it is problematic for the family.
Obviously, newborns have to cry some time each day to communicate with their caregivers.
At age 6 weeks, healthy infants cry almost 3 hours a day, with crying and fussing more prevalent in the evening.
By age 12 weeks, crying time decreases to 1 hour per day; self-soothing measures, such as finger sucking, increase by this age.
Three or more hours per day is the duration at which crying is commonly said to qualify as colicky, and 3 months is the age at which colic is typically said to resolve.
In clinical practice, physicians find it reasonable to define colic as any inconsolable crying in a healthy infant for which there is no physical explanation.
Crying is the main symptom, which may or may not be worse at night.
Proposed causes include: innate problems in the infant's neurologic system, GI tract, or temperament; allergies; or the parenting style of the mother and/or father.
It is unusual for colic to last beyond 3-4 months without some improvement; when this occurs, an alternative diagnosis should be suspected.
One consideration to
Summer 2003
treatment options is to Texas De pa rt m e nt of He al t h switch directly P u bl ic H e a l t h R e gio n 1 to a hydrolyzed casein or whey formula.
There has been debate as to switching to a soybased formula first, because some ~Clinical tip ~ infants who cannot tolerate a milkbased formula also cannot tolerate a For a convenient refsoy-based formula, going directly to a erence tool that does hydrolyzed formula.
A 2-3 week trial is suggested, but many parents report not take up any extra improvement in 24 hours.
Hydrolyzed room in your pocket, formula is very expensive, and the use your little pinkie decision to switch is a big one.
It has finger.
The average been postulated that high-iron formudistance from the culas cause infant discomfort as well, but iron-fortified formula is an unlikely ticle to the fingertip cause of colic or any GI abnormality.
on the pinkie is about It is recommended that all infants one centimeter, makbirth to age 12 months be on an ironing it useful for estifortified formula.
It is also recommating measurements mended that fruit juices not be used until after 6 months of or explaining sizes to age."
(Consultant for Pedatricians, a patient (Clinician ReJune 2003) view, February 2003)
Police arrest a child or adolescent for a violent crime every 5 minutes! Homicide is the second leading cause of death among adolescents, and the leading cause of death among African-American adolescents.
Children are not born violent.
Violence breeds violence.
Children who are exposed to violence, and those who are victims of violence, can become violent.
Although is it not unusual for children to exhibit some aggressive behaviors, it is socially unacceptable.
Children still need limits.
Children need attention and they manage to get it even if it means becoming disruptive or obnoxious.
Children should be taught to recognize their own angry feelings, express anger nonviolently, communicate anger in a positive way, calm themselves, problem solve, remove themselves from angry situations, and avoid becoming a victim of someone else's anger.
People of color comprise 1/3 of all U.S. citizens.
Prejudice, discrimination, and hatred continues to lead to violence.
Parents can battle prejudice by fostering tolerance and an appreciation of the differences among people.
Teens should be taught to choose wisely their battles by compromising minor issues such as hairstyles and pierced ears, and holding firm to the major issues such as shoplifting, and alcohol or drug use.
(Advance for Nurse Practitioners, February, 2003)
More benefits linked to breastfeeding "A more recent study has found that full-term babies born small, weighing less than 6 pounds, who are breastfed for their first 6 months reach normal size faster than babies given formula, and score 11 points higher on IQ tests taken at age 5.
These findings broaden the scope of earlier findings, which had shown that breastfeeding helped preterm or normal-sized infants' brain development.
Findings suggest that, whenever possible, exclusive breastfeeding for the first 24 weeks of life is the method of choice to enhance children's brain development."
(Nurse Practitioner World News, March 2002)
Neonates, vitamin D, and the risk of diabetes "Neonates who receive 2,000 IU of vitamin D daily appear to be less susceptible to type 1 diabetes when they get older.
An epidemiologic study of over 10,000 Finnish children found that those taking in the recommended amount of the vitamin were about 78% less prone to the autoimmune disorder than children receiving lesser amounts.
The link between vitamin D and type 1 diabetes is not all that surprising, given other studies that show that vitamin D plays an important role in immune response and may provide a measure of protection against multiple sclerosis, another autoimmune disease.
While these findings may not apply to newborns who get adequate amounts of vitamin D-fortified infant formula, children who are breastfed may be at greater risk, since human milk does not have enough of the vitamin to meet their needs.
Researchers caution, however, that the results may have limited applications for children born in the US, because the population studied was in northern Finland, which receives a very limited amount of sunshine.
Note: infant exposure to sunlight is often not recognized by the parent as a source of vitamin intake.
(Contemporary OB/GYN, January 2002)
Seeking a link between ADHD medication and drug abuse "A comparison of subjects who had and had not been treated with stimulants in childhood, and of subjects who had been on therapy for less than and more than a year, revealed no significant difference between the frequency of ever having tried cigarettes, alcohol, marijuana, hashish, heroin, or unprescribed stimulants, sedatives, or tranquilizers.
Patients treated with stimulants during adolescence and those with a history of severe ADHD symptoms and behavioral problems were at increased risk of ever using cocaine.
Use of stimulant therapy for longer than one year served to be protective against abuse of hallucinogens.
Investigators found `compelling evidence' to suggest that stimulant therapy in childhood significantly decreased risk of drug and alcohol use in adolescence and, to a lesser degree, adulthood.
The authors speculate that these medications may reduce the incidence of drug abuse risk factors, such as poor self-esteem and the inability to succeed academically and occupationally, which are also symptoms of ADHD."
(Clinician Reviews, February 2003)
When silence is not golden "Many physicians and clinics do not inform patients of their laboratory test results unless there are abnormalities.
But the `no news is good news' approach, though cost effective and efficient, is unacceptable to most patients.
According to a 2002 study, 70% of patients interviewed find this practice unacceptable.
Even more striking, 91% of the patients considered being notifed of normal results as important to very important."
(Women's Health in Primary Care, December, 2002)
Life is not measured by the number of breaths we take, but by the moments that take our breath away.
~George Carlin~
Perplexed by pediatric proteinuria ­ when to refer? "The first priority is to make sure the proteinuria found by dipstick analysis is real.
Obtaining a 24hour urine is best, but inconvenient for most.
In clinical practice a spot urine test for the protein:creatine (Pr:Cr) ratio is usually administered instead.
According to the American Academy of Pedatrics, it is important to have the child void before going to bed and remain recumbent until just before obtaining the specimen.
If the urinalysis is normal and the urine Pr:Cr ratio on the first morning urine sample is 
However, if there are other abnormalities in the UA, and/or the first morning urine Pr:Cr ratio is 
(The Clinical Advisor, June 2003)
Page 2
Child Health Literature Review
