[clearpixel.gif] [clearpixel.gif]
In a written statement he discussed the crisis faced by California oil and gas producers due to plummeting crude oil prices.
Jobs are at risk.
We need some stability so low oil prices caused by the Asian economic slowdown and other factors do not cost us resources in the long run.
Companies are shutting wells, cutting back on services and new investment.
Kern County oil has represented as much as 80% of Californias on-shore oil production.
To keep those heavy oil resources viable, producers need assistance coping with extraordinary price pressures, Thomas said.
In his testimony, Thomas promoted his two bills.
H.R. 423, introduced by Thomas, would allow a 5-year net operating carryback for losses attributable to operating mineral interest of oil and gas producers.
Producers could reduce their taxes by carrying back deducting net operating losses from their regular and alternative minimum taxes during the past five years.
H.R. 53, cosponsored by Thomas, would give producers a tax credit of up to $3 per barrel for oil produced from marginal wells during low price periods.
The credit would be available for heavy oil which industry defines as being 20 API gravity or less.
Credits earned could be carried back 10 years to determine tax liability.
The credit would be phased out as national oil prices increase from $14 to $17.
Heavy oil is the backbone of the oil industry in California.
When prices drop drastically these producers need our support.
These bills provides much needed relief for this sometimes-volatile industry, concluded Thomas.
A copy of Thomas testimony follows:
Statement of the Honorable BILL THOMAS Senate Committee on Energy and Natural Resources January 28, 1999
Mr. Chairman, I appreciate having the chance to share my concerns about the California oil industry and my constituents in California's 21st District.
Kern County produces 213 million barrels per year accounting for 75% of Californias onshore production.
Indeed, were Kern County a separate state, it would rank fourth in the country in production of oil behind Texas, Alaska, and Louisiana.
There are over 1 billion recoverable barrels remaining in the ground in Kern County.
My constituents have been especially hard hit by the collapse of crude oil prices since our oil is heavier and thus costs more to produce and sells for less in the marketplace.
So, earlier this month when West Texas Intermediate crude sold for $13.50 per barrel, Kern County oil sold for $7.00 per barrel.
The result is that in Kern County between 1997 and mid-1998, the number of wells in production has fallen 8% while the number of shut-in wells has risen a staggering 25%.
According to the Interstate Oil and Gas Compact Commission, there were 11,000 oil and gas exploration and production jobs lost nationwide in 1998; Kern County lost 1,700 of these.
To ensure future production of domestic oil and for the health of Americas economy, we must not forget that the cost of energy is an input into virtually everything else we buy, and low energy costs are contributing to our current low inflation, strong economic environment.
Remove domestic oil producers even temporarily and we are more dependent upon foreign producers of oil.
Those of us who remember being at the mercy of such foreign producers C the long gas lines, the outrageous heating bills, and the recession resulting in part from inflated energy costs C will appreciate the need to protect our domestic oil supply.
Kern oil producers, like many others in California, are in an especially vulnerable position.
The management of heavy oil fields is not like other resources or even other oil fields.
Heavy oil is very thick and viscous and can not be pumped out of the ground unless steam is used to heat the oil in the reservoir and thus make it more fluid.
One can not simply Aturn off the key@of a heavy crude oil well and wait until prices rise.
A heavy crude oil field can only operate after a huge amount of time and money is invested to heat the field with steam.
For example, the four major Kern County oil fields have required over $5 billion in the past 30 years to make these fields operational.
What we need is some stability so low oil prices caused by the Asian economic slowdown and other factors do not cost us resources in the long run.
Oil producers are shutting in wells, cutting back on services and new investment.
Jobs are at risk.
To keep those heavy oil resources viable, producers need assistance coping with extraordinary pressures.
The Clinton Administration recently announced that it would give tax relief to the American steel industry because steel producers are suffering from huge levels of imported steel, resulting in the loss of 10,000 jobs.
Farmers, too, receive such tax benefits.
Well, the oil industry has lost 11,000 jobs nationally since 1997.
They need help so that we, as consumers, will have resources available in the future.
I encourage the Committee to consider two pieces of legislation to aid this industry.
H.R. 423 is a bill I introduced to allow a 5-year net operating Acarry-back @ for losses attributable to operating mineral interest of oil and gas producers.
Oil producers could reduce their taxes by Acarrying-back@ deducting net operating losses from their regular and alternative minimum taxes during the past five years.
H.R. 53 is a bill sponsored by my colleague Wes Watkins to allow a tax credit of up to $3 per barrel of oil produced from marginal wells during low price periods.
The credit would be available for heavy oil until national oil prices increase from $14 to $17, and credits earned could be carried back 10 years to determine tax liability.
tnddot2
