NEW DOCUMENTS SHED LIGHT ON KHMER ROUGE GENOCIDE by Paul Malamud [thinblue.gif] Before war criminals can be brought to account, evidence must be gathered and made available to the public and to legal experts.
In this article, USIA staff writer Paul Malamud writes about Yale University's Cambodian Genocide Program, which is using modern communications and computer technology to bring to light the crimes of the Pol Pot regime of the 1970s.
The opinions expressed in this article do not necessarily represent the views of the U.S. Government.
In 1975, following decades of chaos and war in Southeast Asia, the Khmer Rouge, a Marxist guerrilla group, took over Cambodia and ruled the country for four years.
The new leaders began to exterminate large numbers of Cambodian civilians in a bizarre attempt to create an ideologically "perfect" society.
People of all ages and ethnic groups were tortured and killed.
By 1979 when the Pol Pot regime was finally ousted, between one and a half and two million people had been tortured, murdered, or worked or starved to death.
Two decades later, the genocide committed by the Pol Pot regime has resurfaced -- in the form of thousands of documents, photographs, and other evidence that is being collected and put into a computer database at Yale University in New Haven, Connecticut.
Portions of this computerized database will soon be available on the Internet and CD-ROM -- and may serve as the basis for future war crimes tribunals.
The newly assembled database will soon be made available to the people of Cambodia, and to researchers around the world.
It will enable them to identify both victims and war criminals -- and may help bring the latter group to judgment.
Asked what historical evidence leads to the conclusion of genocide, Professor Ben Kiernan, the head of Yale's Cambodian Genocide Program, said "the large percentage of the population that died within a short period of time, or were killed -- about twenty to twenty-five percent of the population in four years," which amounts to about 1.7 million people.
"What strikes me most, "Kiernan said in an interview,"is the way the violence escalated over time, and continued to accelerate long after the regime was in stable control of the political and military and economic aspects of the country's life."
In spite of total control "the regime then continued to go after increasingly broad categories of people; not only ethnic minorities, but specific political or religious groups in the Khmer majority.
The peasants of the country also suffered in large numbers as well as city people."
The first mandate of Yale's Cambodian Genocide Program is to assemble a massive computerized database containing primary and secondary source material pertaining to the years of Khmer Rouge rule in Cambodia -- a task made forbidding by the vast amount of data that continues to pour in.
The second mandate is to train Cambodians themselves in modern international criminal law; the third is to prepare new, in-depth histories of what went on at the time, including studies of the Khmer Rouge chain of command.
Ultimately, according to Kiernan, all this data will be deposited in Cambodia itself -- at the Documentation Center of Cambodia -- so the families of victims can do their own research.
In addition, he says, portions of the data, including photographs of anonymous victims, will be made available on the Internet, in the hope that survivors can provide the names of these unidentified victims.
In 1994, the U.S. Congress enacted the Cambodian Genocide Justice Act, which provided for the establishment of a U.S. Department of State Office of Cambodian Genocide Investigations.
The law required this office to contract with private "individuals and organizations" to make preparations to bring the perpetrators of this genocide to justice.
After competitive bidding, Yale University was selected to begin the work, and established Yale's Cambodian Genocide Program, co-sponsored by the Yale Center for International and Area Studies and by the Yale Law School's Orville H. Schell, Jr., Center for International Human Rights.
Asked why it is worth the attempt to expose the crimes of Pol Pot and his followers at this date, Kiernan said: "Apart from the desire of the Cambodian people for justice, I think there is an international interest, a long-term interest of the rest of the world, in having these crimes accounted for; a signal sent to anyone considering doing something similar that they will be brought to account too."
The databases, according to Yale University, will include computerized maps of prison sites and victim graveyards; a database of the Cambodian elite of the time, many of whom were killed; a database of the Khmer Rouge leadership; thousands of photographs of victims before their execution; archives of original documents of the Pol Pot regime; and a comprehensive bibliography.
Two American legal scholars, Jason Abrams and Steven Ratner, have completed a U.S. State Department-funded study concluding that the Khmer Rouge regime was indeed guilty of crimes against humanity, and suggesting various kinds of commissions or tribunals.
Kiernan said he felt "fairly confident that some legal or quasi-legal body will be established to provide some form of accountability for what happened in the Khmer Rouge period."
The Abrams and Ratner report concludes "there is a prima facie case that genocide, crimes against humanity and war crimes were all committed by the Khmer Rouge."
The report, according to Kiernan, "recommends certain preferred options for redress," including "a truth commission or a commission of inquiry which would not involve convictions or sentences for people -- especially in absentia -- but such forums could lead to a more formal legal process later."
Kiernan said that Abrams and Ratner have recommended to the State Department "that the prosecutions or investigations or judgments should be restricted to the top leadership responsible for national policy (in those days); and to individuals at a lower level who are responsible for heinous crimes such as mass murders or running extermination centers."
Kiernan also noted "the recent strong commitment by the King of Cambodia, Norodom Sihanouk, who in the last couple of months has made several statements in favor of a tribunal" and the fact that "the first and the second Cambodian prime ministers both strongly support the Cambodian Genocide Program here at Yale."
Random brutality followed the Khmer Rouge takeover, Kiernan explained, but "the spontaneity that had been evident in the brutality in the first year or two was quickly overshadowed by the increasing centralized planning of the killing."
An example: "By 1978, there was an evacuation of the entire Eastern zone (of Cambodia) -- pretty much the same way Phnom Penh had been evacuated four years before.
"Hundreds and hundreds of thousands of peasants were shipped out of the East of the country and sent to the Northwest and they were given a uniform which consisted often of blue clothing, including a blue checkered scarf with an unusual blue color, and they had to wear these.
"They were not informed, but they soon found out that this was a sign that they were marked for discrimination and slaughter.
That is what happened to hundreds of thousands of them."
So much new material has come in the past six months, Kiernan says, his group will be hard-pressed even to catalogue it.
However, he says, the program is well under way and should enable "the Documentation Center of Cambodia to continue and to function autonomously.
It will enable Cambodians to conduct their own research and investigate their history themselves in 1997 and for an indefinite period after that.
"What we hope to achieve by putting these 5,000 or so photographs of victims on the Internet," he emphasized, "is to have them identified by people who know them.
We hope that people will be able to key in the names of the persons they recognize in a blank field which will be available in the database, so the information can be collected and made available to others -- for example, information about who was arrested and taken to the Tuol Sleng (torture center) and disappeared -- and 20,000 people did.
"We also wish to be able to provide assistance to any tribunal or truth commission that might be established.
We would hope to do that from the United States as well as from Cambodia.
"In the Cambodian genocide," Kiernan has concluded, "the majority of the victims were Khmer -- of the majority ethnic group -- but the ethnic minorities suffered in much greater numbers proportionately.
"The fuel of that regime," he notes, "was not only ideological but racial.
The accusation most often leveled against targets who were from the ethnic majority was that they were, for instance, 'Khmer bodies with Vietnamese minds.'
"The racialist discourse was decisive -- it was an important factor of the ideology of the regime.
They were also power-hungry.
They were never satisfied, even with total political, military, and economic power.
They didn't want anybody to have any freedom.
It was perhaps history's strongest example of such a regime in such a short time -- ambitious not only to abolish money, abolish cities, as well as kill such large numbers of people.
I think this was fueled by an ideological belief that it was possible to run a society that is completely controlled from the top down.
They assumed that, and I think they were proved wrong."
----------
Professor Kiernan's latest book on the topic, The Pol Pot Regime, has just been published by Yale University Press.
[thinblue.gif]
Issues of Democracy, USIA Electronic Journals, Vol. 1, No. 3, May 1996
Sorry, you need a JavaScript capable browser to get the best from this page
