The Perl 5 Module List Maintained by Tim Bunce and Andreas König 
The Perl 4 concept of packages has been extended in Perl 5 and a new standardised form of reusable software component has been defined: the Module.
Perl 5 Modules typically conform to certain guidelines which make them easier to use, reuse, integrate and extend.
This list has two key aims:
* FOR DEVELOPERS: To change duplication of effort into cooperation.
* FOR USERS: To quickly locate existing software which can be reused.
This list includes the Perl 5 standard modules, other completed modules, work-in-progress modules and would-be-nice-to-have ideas for modules.
It also includes guidelines for those wishing to create new modules including how to name them.
Where Are The Modules Kept?
Most, but not all, of the modules can be found within CPAN, the Comprehensive Perl Archive Network of mirrored FTP sites.
Within the CPAN scheme the modules described in this list can be found in the modules/ directory below the CPAN root directory.
CPAN is a worlswide network of mirrors and you can find your closest mirror in the file http://www.cpan.org/SITES.html
NOTE: If you can't find what you want, or wish to check that what you've found is the latest version, or wonder why a module mentioned in this list is not on CPAN, you should contact the person associated with the module (and not the maintainers of the archives or this list).
Contact details are given at the start of Part 4.
Playing Your Part
Perl is a huge collaborative effort.
Everyone who uses perl is benefiting from the contributions of many hundreds, maybe thousands, of people.
How much time has perl saved you since you started using it?
Do you have any modules you could share with others? For example, you may have some perl4 scripts from which generally useful, and reusable, modules could be extracted.
There may be many people who would find your work very useful.
Please play your part and contribute to the Perl community where you can.
[ end of sermon :-]
Help save the world! Please submit new entries and updates to us so we can keep this list up-to-date.
Send the new or corrected entry by email to modules@perl.org .
Please do not send code to this address.
Instead upload your module, once registered, to the PAUSE site for forwarding on to CPAN.
See section 2, especially 2.6 and 2.11.
How To Get a More Recent Copy of the List
This Module List is fed into CPAN on a semi-regular basis.
Its relative path within a CPAN mirror is in modules/00modlist.long.html .
Editorial Information and Copyright
This document is Copyright (c) 1997-2000 by Tim Bunce and Andreas König.
All rights reserved.
Permission to distribute this document, in full or part, via electronic means (emailed, posted or archived) or printed copy is granted providing that no charges are involved, reasonable attempt is made to use the most current version, and all credits and copyright notices are retained.
Requests for other distribution rights, including incorporation in commercial products, such as books, magazine articles, or CD-ROMs should be made to Tim.Bunce@pobox.com and andreas.koenig@anima.de .
Disclaimer: The content of this document is simply a collection of information gathered from many sources with little or no checking.
There are NO warranties with regard to this information or its use.
A little background information...
I (Tim) created the Module List in August 1994 and maintained it manually till April 1996.
By that time Andreas had implemented the Perl Authors Upload Server (PAUSE) and it was happily feeding modules through to the CPAN archive sites (see http://www.cpan.org/modules/04pause.html for details).
Since PAUSE held a database of module information which could be maintained by module authors it made sense for the module listing part of the Module List to be built from that database.
In April 1996 Andreas took over the automatic posting of the Module List and I now maintain the other parts of the text.
We plan to add value to the automation over time.
Part 1 - Modules: Creation, Use and Abuse
1) Perl 5 Module Terminology
Perl 5 implements a class using a package, but the presence of a package doesn't imply the presence of a class.
A package is just a namespace.
A class is a package that provides subroutines that can be used as methods.
A method is just a subroutine that expects, as its first argument, either the name of a package (for "static" methods), or a reference to something (for "virtual" methods).
A module is a file that (by convention) provides a class of the same name (sans the .pm), plus an import method in that class that can be called to fetch exported symbols.
This module may implement some of its methods by loading dynamic C or C++ objects, but that should be totally transparent to the user of the module.
Likewise, the module might set up an AUTOLOAD function to slurp in subroutine definitions on demand, but this is also transparent.
Only the .pm file is required to exist.
2) Guidelines for Module Creation
2.1 Do similar modules already exist in some form?
If so, please try to reuse the existing modules either in whole or by inheriting useful features into a new class.
If this is not practical try to get together with the module authors to work on extending or enhancing the functionality of the existing modules.
A perfect example is the plethora of packages in perl4 for dealing with command line options.
If you are writing a module to expand an already existing set of modules, please coordinate with the author of the package.
It helps if you follow the same naming scheme and module interaction scheme as the original author.
2.2 Try to design the new module to be easy to extend and reuse.
Use blessed references.
Use the two argument form of bless to bless into the class name given as the first parameter of the constructor, e.g.:
sub new { my $class = shift; return bless {}, $class; }
or even this if you'd like it to be used as either a static or a virtual method.
sub new { my $self = shift; my $class = ref($self) || $self; return bless {}, $class; }
Pass arrays as references so more parameters can be added later (it's also faster).
Convert functions into methods where appropriate.
Split large methods into smaller more flexible ones.
Inherit methods from other modules if appropriate.
Avoid class name tests like: die "Invalid" unless ref $ref eq 'FOO'.
Generally you can delete the "eq 'FOO'" part with no harm at all.
Let the objects look after themselves! If it's vital then you can use the UNIVERSAL methods isa and can.
Generally, avoid hardwired class names as far as possible.
Avoid $r-
Class ...) and $r-
Use autosplit or the SelfLoader module so little used or newly added functions won't be a burden to programs which don't use them.
Add test functions to the module after __END__ either using autosplit or by saying:
eval join('',
Does your module pass the 'empty sub-class' test? If you say "@SUBCLASS::ISA = qw(YOURCLASS);" your applications should be able to use SUBCLASS in exactly the same way as YOURCLASS.
For example, does your application still work if you change: $obj = new YOURCLASS; into: $obj = new SUBCLASS; ?
Avoid keeping any state information in your packages.
It makes it difficult for multiple other packages to use yours.
Keep state information in objects.
Always use -w. Try to "use strict;" (or "use strict qw(...);").
Remember that you can add "no strict qw(...);" to individual blocks of code which need less strictness.
Always use -w. Always use -w! Follow the guidelines in the perlstyle(1) manual.
2.3 Some simple style guidelines
The perlstyle manual supplied with perl has many helpful points.
Coding style is a matter of personal taste.
Many people evolve their style over several years as they learn what helps them write and maintain good code.
Here's one set of assorted suggestions that seem to be widely used by experienced developers:
Use underscores to separate words.
It is generally easier to read $var_names_like_this than $VarNamesLikeThis, especially for non-native speakers of English.
It's also a simple rule that works consistently with VAR_NAMES_LIKE_THIS.
Package/Module names are an exception to this rule.
Perl informally reserves lowercase module names for 'pragma' modules like integer and strict.
Other modules normally begin with a capital letter and use mixed case with no underscores (need to be short and portable).
You may find it helpful to use letter case to indicate the scope or nature of a variable.
For example:
$ALL_CAPS_HERE constants only (beware clashes with perl vars) $Some_Caps_Here package-wide global/static $no_caps_here function scope my() or local() variables
Function and method names seem to work best as all lowercase.
E.g., $obj-
You can use a leading underscore to indicate that a variable or function should not be used outside the package that defined it.
For method calls use either
$foo = new Foo $arg1, $arg2; # no parentheses $foo = Foo-
but avoid the ambiguous form
$foo = new Foo($arg1, $arg2); # Foo() looks like function call
It can be very helpful if the names of the classes that your module uses can be specified as parameters.
Consider:
$dog_class = $args{dog_class} || 'Dog'; $spot = $dog_class-
This allows the user of your module to specify an alternative class (typically a subclass of the one you would normally have used).
On how to report constructor failure, Larry said:
I tend to see it as exceptional enough that I'll throw a real Perl exception (die) if I can't construct an object.
This has a couple of advantages right off the bat.
First, you don't have to check the return value of every constructor.
Just say "$fido = new Doggie;" and presume it succeeded.
This leads to clearer code in most cases.
Second, if it does fail, you get a better diagnostic than just the undefinedness of the return value.
In fact, the exception it throws may be quite rich in "stacked" error messages, if it's rethrowing an exception caught further in.
And you can always catch the exception if it does happen using eval {}.
If, on the other hand, you expect your constructor to fail a goodly part of the time, then you shouldn't use exceptions, but you should document the interface so that people will know to check the return value.
You don't need to use defined(), since a constructor would only return a true reference or a false undef.
So good Perl style for checking a return value would simply say
$conn = new Connection $addr or die "Couldn't create Connection";
In general, make as many things meaningful in a Boolean context as you can.
This leads to straightforward code.
Never write anything like
if (do_your_thing() == OK)
in Perl.
That's just asking for logic errors and domain errors.
Just write
if (do_your_thing())
Perl is designed to help you eschew obfuscation, if that's your thing.
2.4 Select what to export.
Do NOT export method names! Do NOT export anything else by default without a good reason!
Exports pollute the namespace of the module user.
If you must export try to use @EXPORT_OK in preference to @EXPORT and avoid short or common names to reduce the risk of name clashes.
Generally anything not exported is still accessible from outside the module using the ModuleName::item_name (or $blessed_ref-
By convention you can use a leading underscore on names to informally indicate that they are 'internal' and not for public use.
(It is actually possible to get private functions by saying: my $subref = sub { ... }; 
As a general rule, if the module is trying to be object oriented then export nothing.
If it's just a collection of functions then @EXPORT_OK anything but use @EXPORT with caution.
2.5 Select a name for the module.
This name should be as descriptive, accurate and complete as possible.
Avoid any risk of ambiguity.
Always try to use two or more whole words.
Generally the name should reflect what is special about what the module does rather than how it does it.
Having 57 modules all called Sort will not make life easy for anyone (though having 23 called Sort::Quick is only marginally better :-).
Imagine someone trying to install your module alongside many others.
If in any doubt ask for suggestions in comp.lang.perl.modules or modules@perl.org .
Please use a nested module name to informally group or categorise a module, e.g., placing a sorting module into a Sort:: category.
A module should have a very good reason not to have a nested name.
Please avoid using more than one level of nesting for module names (packages or classes within modules can, of course, use any number).
Module names should begin with a capital letter.
Lowercase names are reserved for special modules such as pragmas (e.g., lib and strict).
Note that module names are not related to class hierarchies.
A module name Foo::Bar does not in any way imply that Foo::Bar inherits from Foo.
Nested names are simply used to provide some useful categorisation for humans.
The same is generally true for all package names.
Since the CPAN is huge and growing daily, it's essential that module authors choose names which lend themselves to browsing.
That means minimizing acronyms, cute names, and jargon.
Also, don't make up a new top level category unless you have a good reason; please choose an already-existing category when possible.
Send mail to modules@perl.org before you upload, so we can help you select a name.
If you insist on a name that we consider inappropriate, we won't prevent you from uploading your module -- but it'll remain in your "author" directory and won't be directly visible from CPAN/modules/by-module.
We appreciate the efforts of the contributors who have helped make the CPAN the world's largest reusable code repository.
Please help us enhance it by working with us to choose the best name possible.
If you are developing a suite of related modules/classes it's good practice to use nested classes with a common prefix as this will avoid namespace clashes.
For example: Xyz::Control, Xyz::View, Xyz::Model etc.
Use the modules in this list as a naming guide.
If adding a new module to a set, follow the original author's standards for naming modules and the interface to methods in those modules.
If developing modules for private internal or project specific use, that will never be released to the public, then you should ensure that their names will not clash with any future public module.
You can do this either by using the reserved Local::* category or by using an underscore in the top level name like Foo_Corp::*.
To be portable each component of a module name should be limited to 11 characters.
If it might be used on DOS then try to ensure each is unique in the first 8 characters.
Nested modules make this easier.
2.6 Have you got it right?
How do you know that you've made the right decisions? Have you picked an interface design that will cause problems later? Have you picked the most appropriate name? Do you have any questions?
The best way to know for sure, and pick up many helpful suggestions, is to ask someone who knows.
The comp.lang.perl.modules Usenet newsgroup is read by just about all the people who develop modules and it's generally the best place to ask first.
If you need more help then try modules@perl.org .
All you need to do is post a short summary of the module, its purpose and interfaces.
A few lines on each of the main methods is probably enough.
(If you post the whole module it might be ignored by busy people - generally the very people you want to read it!)
Don't worry about posting if you can't say when the module will be ready - just say so in the message.
It might be worth inviting others to help you, they may be able to complete it for you!
2.7 README and other Additional Files.
It's well known that software developers usually fully document the software they write.
If, however, the world is in urgent need of your software and there is not enough time to write the full documentation please at least provide a README file containing:
* A description of the module/package/extension etc.
* A copyright notice - see below.
* Prerequisites - what else you may need to have.
* How to build it - possible changes to Makefile.PL etc.
* How to install it.
* Recent changes in this release, especially incompatibilities * Changes / enhancements you plan to make in the future.
If the README file seems to be getting too large you may wish to split out some of the sections into separate files: INSTALL, Copying, ToDo etc.
2.8 Adding a Copyright Notice.
How you choose to licence your work is a personal decision.
The general mechanism is to assert your Copyright and then make a declaration of how others may copy/use/modify your work.
Perl, for example, is supplied with two types of licence: The GNU GPL and The Artistic License (see the files README, Copying and Artistic).
Larry has good reasons for NOT just using the GNU GPL.
My personal recommendation, out of respect for Larry, Perl and the perl community at large is to simply state something like:
Copyright (c) 1997 Your Name.
All rights reserved.
This program is free software; you can redistribute it and/or modify it under the same terms as Perl itself.
This statement should at least appear in the README file.
You may also wish to include it in a Copying file and your source files.
Remember to include the other words in addition to the Copyright.
2.9 Give the module a version/issue/release number.
To be fully compatible with the Exporter and MakeMaker modules you should store your module's version number in a non-my package variable called $VERSION.
This should be a valid floating point number with at least two digits after the decimal (ie hundredths, e.g, $VERSION = "0.01").
See Exporter.pm for details.
Don't use a "1.3.2" style version directly.
If you use RCS or a similar system which supports multilevel versions/branches you can use this (but put it all on one line for MakeMaker VERSION_FROM):
$VERSION = do { my @r=(q$Revision: 3.112 $=~/\d+/g); sprintf "%d."."%03d"x$#r,@r };
It may be handy to add a function or method to retrieve the number.
Use the number in announcements and archive file names when releasing the module (ModuleName-1.02.tar.gz).
See perldoc ExtUtils::MakeMaker.pm for details.
2.10 Listing Prerequisites in a Bundle module
If your module needs some others that are available on CPAN, you might consider creating a 'bundle' module that lists all the prerequisites in a standardized way.
Automatic installation software such as the CPAN.pm module can take advantage of such a listing and enable your users to install all prerequisites and your own module with one single command.
See the CPAN.pm module for details.
2.11 How to release and distribute a module.
By far the best way to release modules is to register yourself with the Perl Authors Upload Server (PAUSE).
By registering with PAUSE you will be able to easily upload (or mirror) your modules to the PAUSE server from where they will be mirrored to CPAN sites across the planet.
It's good idea to post an announcement of the availability of your module to the comp.lang.perl.announce Usenet newsgroup.
This will at least ensure very wide once-off distribution.
If not using PAUSE you should place the module into a major ftp archive and include details of it's location in your announcement.
Some notes about ftp archives: Please use a long descriptive file name which includes the version number.
Most incoming directories will not be readable/listable, i.e., you won't be able to see your file after uploading it.
Remember to send your email notification message as soon as possible after uploading else your file may get deleted automatically.
Allow time for the file to be processed and/or check the file has been processed before announcing its location.
FTP Archives for Perl Modules:
Follow the instructions and links on
http://www.cpan.org/modules/04pause.html
or upload to:
ftp://pause.kbx.de/incoming
and notify upload@pause.kbx.de .
By using the PAUSE WWW interface you can ask the Upload Server to mirror your modules from your ftp or WWW site into your own directory on CPAN.
Please remember to send us an updated entry for the Module list!
2.12 Take care when changing a released module.
Always strive to remain compatible with previous released versions (see 2.2 above) Otherwise try to add a mechanism to revert to the old behaviour if people rely on it.
Document incompatible changes.
3) Guidelines for Converting Perl 4 Library Scripts into Modules
3.1 There is no requirement to convert anything.
If it ain't broke, don't fix it! Perl 4 library scripts should continue to work with no problems.
You may need to make some minor changes (like escaping non-array @'s in double quoted strings) but there is no need to convert a .pl file into a Module for just that.
See perltrap.pod for details of all known perl4-to-perl5 issues.
3.2 Consider the implications.
All the perl applications which make use of the script will need to be changed (slightly) if the script is converted into a module.
Is it worth it unless you plan to make other changes at the same time?
3.3 Make the most of the opportunity.
If you are going to convert the script to a module you can use the opportunity to redesign the interface.
The 'Guidelines for Module Creation' above include many of the issues you should consider.
3.4 The pl2pm utility will get you started.
This utility will read *.pl files (given as parameters) and write corresponding *.pm files.
The pl2pm utilities does the following: * Adds the standard Module prologue lines * Converts package specifiers from ' to :: * Converts die(...) to croak(...)
* Several other minor changes
Being a mechanical process pl2pm is not bullet proof.
The converted code will need careful checking, especially any package statements.
Don't delete the original .pl file till the new .pm one works!
4) Guidelines for Reusing Application Code
4.1 Complete applications rarely belong in the Perl Module Library.
4.2 Many applications contain some perl code which could be reused.
Help save the world! Share your code in a form that makes it easy to reuse.
4.3 Break-out the reusable code into one or more separate module files.
4.4 Take the opportunity to reconsider and redesign the interfaces.
4.5 In some cases the 'application' can then be reduced to a small fragment of code built on top of the reusable modules.
In these cases the application could invoked as:
5) Namespace Coordination
The maintainers of the module list are not the Internic for perl namespaces.
They do neither sell namespaces nor can they establish property rights.
What they try to do is to minimize namespace clashes and maximize usablility of the CPAN archive by setting up a catalogue of modules and control the indexers.
Time permitting, they will also try to give advice for what they think is a proper usage of the namespace.
It is an important part of the namespace concept that the module list maintainers do not guarantee to you that somebody else won't use the, say, Foo::Bar namespace.
The upload area is not censored except for abuse.
People are free to upload any modules they like.
Instead, there are several levels of protection for your namespaces:
a) The most important is the module list which actually lists and proclaims your namespace.
b) The second is the indexing mechanism of the CPAN.
Modules are indexed on a first-come-first-serve basis.
The module namespace that is uploaded for the first time ever gets indexed, but not the module of the second one who tries to use the same namespace.
c) As the whole process is trying to benefit the community, all parties are subject to a wider monitoring within the community.
This is sometimes referred to as security by visibility.
d) So the next level of namespace protection is the common sense.
Your own common sense.
Help to save the world.
If you get the impression that something goes wrong with regard to namespaces, please write to modules@perl.org and let them know.
e) The perhaps most interesting namespace protection is provided by the perl symbol table itself.
A namespace Foo:: is just a package name and its relationship to a namespace Foo::Bar:: is not predetermined whatsoever.
The two namespaces can be closely or loosely related or not related at all, but what's most important, they can be writen by different authors who may work rather independently from each other.
So if you have registered any namespace, it does not mean that you own the whole namespace tree that starts there.
If you are registered as the contact for Foo::Bar, you are not necessarily also associated with Foo::Bar::Baz.
f) In a few rare cases the module list people restrict indexing of certain categories.
For example: DBI::* under the control of Tim Bunce Sun::* under the control of Sun Microsystems
Part 2 - The Perl 5 Module List
The remainder of this document is divided up into sections.
Each section deals with a particular topic and lists all known modules related to that topic.
Modules are only listed in one section so check all sections that might related to your particular needs.
All the information corresponds to the latest updates we have received.
We don't record the version number or release dates of the listed Modules.
Nor do we record the locations of these Modules.
Consult the contact, try the usual perl CPAN sites or ask in comp.lang.perl.modules.
Please do *not* ask us directly, we simply don't have the time.
Sorry.
1) Module Listing Format
Each Module listing is very short.
The main goal is to simply publish the existence of the modules, or ideas for modules, and enough contact information for you to find out more.
Each listing includes some characters which convey (approximate) basic status information.
For example:
Name DSLIP Description Info ------------- ----- -------------------------------------------- ----- Fcntl Sdcfp Defines fcntl() constants (see File::Lock) JHI
Where the 'DSLIP' characters have the following meanings:
* D - Development Stage (Note: *NO IMPLIED TIMESCALES*): * + i - Idea, listed to gain consensus or as a placeholder + c - under construction but pre-alpha (not yet released) + a/b - Alpha/Beta testing + R - Released + M - Mature (no rigorous definition) + S - Standard, supplied with Perl 5
* S - Support Level: * + m - Mailing-list + d - Developer + u - Usenet newsgroup comp.lang.perl.modules + n - None known, try comp.lang.perl.modules
* L - Language Used: * + p - Perl-only, no compiler needed, should be platform independent + c - C and perl, a C compiler will be needed + h - Hybrid, written in perl with optional C code, no compiler needed + + - C++ and perl, a C++ compiler will be needed + o - perl and another language other than C or C++
* I - Interface Style * + f - plain Functions, no references used + h - hybrid, object and function interfaces available + n - no interface at all (huh?) + r - some use of unblessed References or ties + O - Object oriented using blessed references and/or inheritance
* P - Public License * + p - Standard-Perl: user may choose between GPL and Artistic + g - GPL: GNU General Public License + l - LGPL: "GNU Lesser General Public License" (previously known as "GNU Library + General Public License") + b - BSD: The BSD License + a - Artistic license alone + o - other (but distribution allowed without restrictions)
DISCLAIMER: The status of the Public License field is there for informational purpose only and does not constitute a legal binding of any kind.
To obtain proper information about the Licencing terms of a module and its accompanying files, please refer to the distribution of the modules or contact the author as appropriate.
Please inform modules@perl.org if you encounter any mismatch between the contents of the Public License field and what the distribution actually says about it.
Where letters are missing they can usually be inferred from the others.
For example 'i' implies 'id', 'S' implies 'Su'.
The Info column gives a contact reference 'tag'.
Lookup this tag in the "Information / Contact Reference Details" section in Pert 3 of this document.
If no contact is given always try asking in comp.lang.perl.modules.
Most Modules are nested in categories such as IPC::Open2 and IPC::Open3.
These are shown as 'IPC::' on one line then each module listed below with a '::' prefix.
Ideas For Adoption
Modules listed as in the 'i' Development Stage with no contact reference are ideas without an owner.
Feel free to 'adopt' these but please let me know so that we can update the list and thus inform anyone else who might be interested.
Adoption simply means that you either hope to implement the module one day or would like to cooperate with anyone else who might be interested in implementing it.
Cooperation
Similarly, if an idea that interests you has been adopted by someone please contact them so you can share ideas.
Just because an idea has been adopted does NOT imply that it's going to be implemented.
Just because a module is listed and being implemented does NOT mean it'll get finished.
Waiting silently in the hope that the Module will appear one day is unlikely to be fruitful! Offer to help.
Cooperate.
Pool your efforts.
Go on, try it!
The same applies to modules in all states.
Most modules are developed in limited spare time.
If you're interested in a module don't just wait for it to happen, offer to help.
Module developers should feel free to announce incomplete work early.
If you're not going to be able to spend much time on something then say so.
If you invite cooperation maybe someone will implement it for you!
2) Perl Core Modules, Perl Language Extensions and Documentation Tools
Name DSLIP Description Info ------------ ----- -------------------------------------------- ---- CORE Sucf? Internal package for perl native functions P5P UNIVERSAL SucOp Internal universal base-class P5P SUPER SucO? Internal class to access superclass methods P5P DynaLoader SucO? Dynamic loader for shared libraries P5P AutoLoader SupO? Automatic function loader (using AutoSplit) P5P SelfLoader SupO? Automatic function loader (using __DATA__) P5P Exporter SupO? Implements default import method for modules P5P Carp Supf? Throw exceptions outside current package P5P Config Supf? Stores details of perl build configuration P5P English Supf? Defines English names for special variables P5P Symbol SupO? Create 'anonymous' symbol (typeglobs) refs CHIPS Opcode Supf? Disable named opcodes when compiling code P5P Taint bdpf? Utilities related to tainting PHOENIX
Perl Pragmatic Modules
constant Supf? Define compile-time constants P5P diagnostics Sdpf? For reporting perl diagnostics in full form TOMC enum cdpf? resemble enumerated types in C ZENIN integer Supf? Controls float vs. integer arithmetic P5P less Supf? Controls optimisations (yet unimplemented) P5P lib Supf? Simple way to add/delete directories in @INC P5P namespace Rdpnp Perl pragma to use like C++ namespace alias AMICHAUER overload SdpO? Overload perl operators for new data types ILYAZ sigtrap Supf? For trapping an abort and giving a traceback P5P strict Supf? Controls averments (similar to pragmas) P5P subs Supf? use subs qw(x y); is short for sub x; sub y; P5P vars Supf? predeclare variable names P5P
Experimental pragmatic modules live in the ex:: namespace
ex:: ::implements RdpO? Study in Polymorphism PDCAWLEY ::interface RdpO? Another study in polymorphism PDCAWLEY ::override Rdpf? perl pragma to override core functions CTWETEN ::caution bdpn? Same as use warnings; use strict; YVES ex::constant:: ::vars Rdph? Perl pragma to create readonly variables CTWETEN
Perl Language Extensions
Alias bdcf? Convenient access to data/code via aliases GSAR End RdpO? Generalized END {}.
ABIGAIL Error adpOp Error/exception handling in an OO-ish way UARUN NEXT RdpO? Perl5 implementation of NEXT (RFC190) DCONWAY Perl adcO? Create Perl interpreters from within Perl GSAR Protect bdpf? declare subs private or member JDUNCAN Safe SdcO? Restrict eval'd code to safe subset of ops MICB Softref bdcf? Extension for weak/soft referenced SVs ILYAZ Attribute:: ::Handlers RdpO? Simpler definition of attribute handlers ABERGMAN ::Types RdpO? Attributes that confer type on variables DCONWAY ::Memoize RdpOp Attribute interface to Memoize.pm MARCEL ::TieClasses RdpOp attribute wrappers for CPAN Tie classes MARCEL ::Abstract RdpOp implement abstract methods with attributes MARCEL ::Overload RdpOp Attribute that makes overloading easier MARCEL ::Deprecated RdpOp Mark deprecated methods KASEI ::Signature bdphp Signatures on methods and subroutines JDUNCAN Exporter:: ::Import Rdpn? Alternate symbol exporter GARROW ::Options adpO? Extends Exporter to handle use-line options YSTH ::PkgAlias adpf? Load a module into multiple namespaces JDPORTER Inline bdp?p Write Perl subroutines in other languages INGY Inline:: ::CPR adpn? C Perl Run - Embed Perl in C, ala Inline INGY ::C bdpnp Write Perl subroutines in C INGY ::CPP bdpO? Easy implementation of C++ extensions NEILW ::Python adcO? Easy implementation of Python extensions NEILW ::Tcl adcf? Write Perl subroutines in Tcl RRS ::Java amhpp Easy implementation of Java extensions PATL ::ASM adpO? Write Perl subroutines in Assembler NEILW ::Struct adpO? Bind C structures directly to Perl.
NEILW ::Files RdpO? Multiple virtual files after __END__ DCONWAY ::Guile amhhp Inline module for Guile Scheme interpreter SAMTREGAR Regexp:: ::Common RdpO? Provide commonly requested regular expr.
ABIGAIL ::Shellish RdpO? Shell-like regular expressions RBS ::Func adpf? Replace =~, !~, m//, s/// with functions NWIGER Safe:: ::Hole bdcO? Exec subs in the original package from Safe SEYN Symbol:: ::Table RdpO? OO interface to package symbols GARROW Symbol::Approx:: ::Sub Rmphp Call subroutines using approximate names DAVECROSS
The Perl Compiler
B aucO? The Perl Compiler MICB O aucO? Perl Compiler frontends MICB B:: ::Fathom bdpO? Estimate the readability of Perl code KSTAR ::Graph bdpr? Perl Compiler backend to diagram OP trees SMCCAM ::LexInfo bdcO? Show info about subroutine lexical variables DOUGM ::Size bdcO? Measure size of Perl OPs and SVs DOUGM ::TerseSize bdpO? Info about ops and their (estimated) size DOUGM
Source Code Filters
Filter::Util:: ::Exec bdcf? Interface for creation of coprocess Filters PMQS ::Call bdcf? Interface for creation of Perl Filters PMQS Filter:: ::exec bdcf? Filters script through an external command PMQS ::sh bdcf? Filters script through a shell command PMQS ::cpp bdcf? Filters script through C preprocessor PMQS ::tee bdcf? Copies to file perl source being compiled PMQS ::decrypt bdcf? Template for a perl source decryption filter PMQS ::Simple RdpO? Simplified source filtering DCONWAY ::constant idpnp constant mod working like real Pre Processor MZSANFORD ::Trigraph bdpnp Understand ANSI C trigraphs in Perl source.
KASEI PerlIO Rucnp On demand loader for PerlIO layers P5P PerlIO:: ::gzip RdcO? provide a PerlIO layer to gzip/gunzip NWCLARK
Thread support (note that these are experimental, i.e. pre-alpha)
Thread cuhO? Manipulate threads in Perl (EXPERIMENTAL) P5P Thread:: ::Group bdph? Wait()-like and grouping functions DSUGAL ::Pool bdpOp Worker pools to run Perl code asynchronously ELIZABETH ::Queue cuph? Thread-safe queues P5P ::Semaphore cuph? Thread-safe semaphores P5P ::Signal cuhh? A thread which runs signal handlers reliably P5P ::Specific cuhh? Thread-specific keys P5P ::RWLock RdpOp rwlock implementation for perl threads AFERBER ::IO i ? IO routines DSUGAL ::Object i ? OO routines DSUGAL
Module Support
Module:: ::Reload Rdpf? Reloads files in %INC based on timestamps JPRIT ::InstalledVersion bdpOp Find version number of installed module SKUD ::Use bdpnp Tracks modules loaded by a script JSMITH ::Signature cdpfp Module signature file manipulation AUTRIJUS
Documentation Tools:
Pod:: ::Diff cdpf? compare two POD files and report diff IANC ::DocBook adpO? convert POD to and from DocBook MBERENDS ::HTML cdpr? converter to HTML KJALB ::HTML2Pod RdpOp Translate HTML into POD SBURKE ::Hlp RdpO? Convert POD to formatted VMS Help text PVHP ::Index cdpr? index generator KJALB ::LaTeX bdpOp Converts pod to latex with Pod::Parser TJENNESS ::Latex cdpr? converter to LaTeX KJALB ::Lyx adpO? A pod to LyX format conversion class RICHARDJ ::MIF adpO? converter to FrameMaker MIF JNH ::Man cdpr? converter to man page KJALB ::PP adpOa A Pod pre-processor RAM ::Parser bdpO? Base class for parsing pod syntax BRADAPP ::Pdf bdpf? Converter to PDF AJFRY ::Pod cdpr? converter to canonical pod KJALB ::RTF cdpr? converter to RTF KJALB ::Rtf RdpO? Converter from POD to Rich Text Format PVHP ::Sdf cdpf? converter to SDF IANC ::Select bdpf? Print only selected sections of pod docs BRADAPP ::Simplify cdpr? Common pod parsing code KJALB ::Texinfo cdpr? converter to texinfo KJALB ::Text Supf? convert POD data to formatted ASCII text TOMC ::Usage bdpf? Print Usage messages based on your own pod BRADAPP ::XML RdpO? Generate XML from POD MSERGEANT ::Tree RdpOp Create a static syntax tree for a POD SWMCD ::Checker RdpO? Check pod documents for syntax errors BRADAPP ::POM RdpOp Pod Object Model ABW Perl6:: ::Variables RdpO? Perl 6 variable syntax for Perl 5 DCONWAY ::Interpolators bdpnp Use Perl 6 function-interpolation syntax BRENTDAX ::Parameters bdpnp Use Perl 6-style named parameters BRENTDAX Concurrent adpOp Concurrent and Remotable Objects in Perl VIPUL Acme:: ::Buffy Rdphp An encoding scheme for Buffy fans LBROCARD Acme::Morse:: ::Audible Rdpnp Audio(Morse) Programming with Perl ITRIVIZKI
3) Development Support
Name DSLIP Description Info ------------ ----- -------------------------------------------- ---- AutoSplit Supf? Splits modules into files for AutoLoader P5P Bleach RdpO? For really clean programs DCONWAY Continuus adpO? Interface to Continuus Code Management tool HENKE Coy Rdpn? Like Carp - only prettier DCONWAY FindBin adpf? Locate current script bin directory P5P Include adpO? Parse C header files for use in XS GBARR Make adpO? Makefile parsing, and 'make' replacement NI-S Perlbug RdpOp Database driven bug tracking system (mysql) RFOLEY Rcs adcf? Alternate RCS interface (see VCS::RCS) CFRETER Smirch Rdpfa For really dirty programs JNAGRA Usage bnpr? Type and range checking on subroutine args JACKS VCS ampOp Generic interface to Version Control Systems LBROCARD Benchmark Supf? Easy way to time fragments of perl code P5P Benchmark:: ::Timer RdpO? Perl code benchmarking tool ANDREWHO ExtUtils:: ::DynaGlue adcr? Methods for generating Perl extension files DOUGM ::MakeMaker SupO? Writes Makefiles for extensions MMML ::Manifest Supf? Utilities for managing MANIFEST files MMML ::Embed Sdpf? Utilities for embedding Perl in C/C++ apps DOUGM ::F77 RdpO? Facilitate use of FORTRAN from Perl/XS code KGB ::configPL adpOp configures .PL files PEASE Carp:: ::Assert adpf? Stating the obvious to let the computer know MSCHWERN ::CheckArgs Rdpf? Check subroutine argument types GARROW ::Datum adpfa Debugging And Tracing Ultimate Module SQUIRREL ClearCase idcf? Environment for ClearCase revision control BRADAPP ClearCase:: Conjury:: ::C Rdph? Generic software construction toolset JWOODYATT ::Core Rdph? Generic software construction toolset JWOODYATT ::Stage Rdph? Generic software construction toolset JWOODYATT Devel:: ::CallerItem RnpO? 'caller()' Object wrapper + useful methods JACKS ::CoreStack adpf? generate a stack dump from a core file ADESC ::Cover adchp Code coverage metrics for Perl PJCJ ::Coverage adpf? Coverage analysis for Perl code RJRAY ::DProf Rdcf? Execution profiler DMR ::DebugAPI bdpf? Interface to the Perl debug environment JHA ::DebugInit bdpf? Create a .gdbinit or similar file JASONS ::DumpStack Rnpf? Dumping of the current function stack JACKS ::Leak Rdcf? Find perl objects that are not reclaimed NI-S ::Modlist Rdpf? Collect module use information RJRAY ::PPPort bdcn? Portability aid for your XS code PMQS ::Peek adcf? Peek at internal representation of Perl data ILYAZ ::RegExp adcO? Access perl internal regex functions ILYAZ ::SearchINC Rdpnp loading Perl modules from development dirs MARCEL ::SmallProf Rdpf? Line-by-line profiler ASHTED ::StackTrace RdpOp Stacktrace object w/ info form caller() DROLSKY ::Symdump RdpO? Perl symbol table access and dumping ANDK ::TraceFuncs adpO? Trace funcs by using object destructions JOEHIL ::TraceLoad Rdpfp Traces the loading of perl source code PVERD ::TraceMethods bdpOp Perl module for tracing module calls CHROMATIC ::Constants bdpfp Resolve Constants back to their names CHROMATIC ::Messenger bdpfp Let Your Code Talk to You KOLIBRIE Perf:: Performance measurement other than benchmarks ::ARM adcf? Application Response Measurement BBACKER Sub:: ::Curry Rdpfp Cute module to curry functions DAVIDH ::Quotelike bdppp Allow to define quotelike functions RGARCIA Test Sdpf? Utilities for writing test scripts SBURKE Test:: ::Cmd RdpO? Portable test infrastructure for commands KNIGHT ::Harness Suphp Executes perl-style tests MSCHWERN ::Unit bmpOp framework for XP style unit testing ASPIERS ::Suite cdpO? Represents a collection of Test::Cases HENKE ::Case cdpO? Represent a single test case HENKE ::Mail bdpOp Test framework for email applications SKUD ::Simple bmpfp Basic utilities for writing tests MSCHWERN ::Exception Rdpfp Functions for testing exception-based code ADIE ::More RdpOp More functions for writing tests MSCHWERN ::Litmus bdpOo Submit test results to the litmus webtool ZLIPTON ::Reporter bdpOp sends test results to cpan-testers@perl.org AFOXSON ::Pod adpOp test POD files for errors and warnings BDFOY ::Manifest bdpfp configure which test files to run BDFOY VCS:: ::RCS idpf? Interface layer over RCS (See also Rcs) RJRAY ::RCE idcf? Perl layer over RCE C API RJRAY ::StarTeam bdpfp Provides an interface to StarBase's StarTeam JOEPHAYES ::PVCS i ? PVCS Version Manager (intersolv.com) BMIDD Oak bmpOp Oak Perl Compoment Tree DRUOSO Debug:: ::FaultAutoBT adhOa Automatic Backtrace Extractor on SIG Faults STAS
4) Operating System Interfaces, Hardware Drivers
Name DSLIP Description Info ------------ ----- -------------------------------------------- ---- Env Supf? Alias environment variables as perl vars P5P Errno cdpf? Constants from errno.h EACCES, ENOENT etc P5P Fcntl Sdcf? Defines fcntl() constants (see File::Lock) JHI Ioctl adcf? ioctl(2) constants JPRIT POSIX SupO? An interface to most (all?) of POSIX.1 P5P Shell Supf? Run shell commands transparently within perl P5P Async:: ::Group adpO? Deal with simultaneous asynchronous calls DDUMONT ::Process i ? class to run sub-processes DDUMONT BSD:: ::Ipfwgen bdpf? Generate ipfw(8) filters MUIR ::Resource Rdcf? getrusage(), s/getrlimit(), s/getpriority() JHI ::HostIdent i ? s/gethostname(), s/gethostid() JHI Env:: ::Path adpO? Advanced operations on path variables DSB ::Modulecmd Rdphg Interface to modulecmd from Perl ISAACSON Proc:: ::Background RdpO? OS independent background process objects BZAJAC ::ExitStatus Rdpf? Interpret and act on wait() status values ROSCH ::Forkfunc Rdpf? Simple lwall-style fork wrapper MUIR ::ProcessTable bdcO? Unix process table information DURIST ::SafePipe bdpf? popen() and `` without calling the shell ROSCH ::Short adpO? System calls with timeout option JHKIM ::Simple adpO? Fork wrapper with objects MSCHILLI ::Spawn Rdpfp Run external programs GARROW ::SyncExec Rdpf? Spawn processes but report exec() errors ROSCH ::times adpf? By-name interface to process times function TOMC ::Queue Rdpfp limits number of concurrent forked processes SALVA GTop bdcO? Perl interface to libgtop DOUGM Schedule:: See also Schedule:: in chapter 23 ::At Rdpf? OS independent interface to the at command JOSERODR ::ByClock RdpOp Return to caller at given seconds/minutes SCHAFFTER ::Cron bdpOp cron-like scheduler for perl subroutines ROLAND ::Load RdpOp Remote system load, processes, scheduling WSNYDER Quota Rdcfp Disk quota system functions, local 
Allows nested alarms JACKS ::Hostname Supf? Implements a portable hostname function P5P ::Sysconf bdpf? Defines constants for POSIX::sysconf() NI-S ::Syslog Supf? Provides same functionality as BSD syslog P5P ::CPU RdpO? Access CPU info. number, etc on Win and UNIX MZSANFORD ::Lastlog RdcO? Provide a moderately Object Oreiented Interf JSTOWE ::Utmp RdcO? Object(ish) Interface to UTMP files.
JSTOWE Sys::Hostname:: ::Long adpOa Return the hosts fully qualified name SCOTT Note: The Sys:: namespace is considered harmful as it is giving no clue about which system.
Placing additional modules into this namespace is discouraged.
Platform Specific Modules
Be:: ::Attribute Rd+f? Manipulate BeOS BFS MIME file attributes TSPIN ::Query Rd+f? Query a BeOS file system TSPIN FreeBSD:: ::SysCalls cdcf? FreeBSD-specific system calls GARY HPUX:: ::Ioscan bdpf? Perl function to handle HPUX ioscan command DDUMONT Linux:: ::AIO adcfp asynchronous I/O using linux/clone MLEHMANN ::Cpuinfo RdpO? Object Oriented Interface to /proc/cpuinfo JSTOWE ::Fuser RdpO? Determine which processes have a file open JSTOWE ::Svgalib RdcO? Object Oriented Perl interface to svgalib JSTOWE ::Pid Rdpfp Interface to Linux getpp?id functions RGARCIA Mac:: ::AppleEvents bmcO? AppleEvent manager and AEGizmos MCPL ::AssistantFrames RdpOp Easy creation of assistant dialogs GBAUER ::Components bmcO? (QuickTime) Component manager MCPL ::DtfSQL Rdcf? Perl interface to the dtF/SQL DB engine TWEGNER ::Files bmcO? File manager MCPL ::Gestalt bmcO? Gestalt manager: Environment enquiries MCPL ::Glue RmpOp Control apps with AppleScript terminology CNANDOR ::Macbinary bdpO? Decodes MacBinary files.
MIYAGAWA ::Memory bmcO? Memory manager MCPL ::MoreFiles bmcO? Further file management routines MCPL ::OSA bmcO? Open Scripting Architecture MCPL ::Processes bmcO? Process manager MCPL ::Resources bmcO? Resource manager MCPL ::Serial bdpO? Interface to Macintosh serial ports DIVERDI ::Types bmcO? (Un-)Packing of Macintosh specific types MCPL Mac::AppleEvents:: ::Simple Rmphp Simple access to Mac::AppleEvents CNANDOR Mac::Apps:: ::Anarchie RdpO? Control Anarchie 2.01+ CNANDOR ::Launch Rdpf? MacPerl module to launch / quit apps CNANDOR ::MacPGP RdpO? Control MacPGP 2.6.3 CNANDOR ::PBar RdpO? Control Progress Bar 1.0.1 CNANDOR Mac::Comm:: ::OT_PPP RdpO? Control Open Transport PPP / Remote Access CNANDOR Mac::FileSpec:: ::Unixish Mdpfp Unixish-compatability in filespecs SBURKE Mac::OSA:: ::Simple Rmphp Simple access to Mac::OSA CNANDOR MSDOS:: ::Attrib bdcf? Get/set DOS file attributes in OS/2 or Win32 CJM ::Descript bdpO? Manage 4DOS style DESCRIPT.ION files CJM ::SysCalls adcf? MSDOS interface (interrupts, port I/O) DMO MVS:: ::VBFile bdpf? Read MVS VB (variable-length) files GROMMEL OS2:: ::ExtAttr RdcO? (Tied) access to extended attributes ILYAZ ::FTP bncf? Access to ftplib interface ILYAZ ::PrfDB RdcO? (Tied) access to .INI-style databases ILYAZ ::REXX RdcO? Access to REXX DLLs and REXX runtime ILYAZ ::UPM bncf? User Profile Management ILYAZ Riscos i ? Namespace for Risc-OS (Acorn et.al.)
RISCOSML SGI:: ::SysCalls cdcf? SGI-specific system calls AMOSS ::GL adcr? SGI's Iris GL library AMOSS ::FM adcr? SGI's Font Management library AMOSS ::FAM RdcO? Interface to SGI/Irix File Access Monitor JGLICK Solaris:: ::ACL Rdchp Provides access to ACLs in Solaris IROBERTS ::Kmem idcf? Read values from the running kernel ABURLISON ::Kstat adcO? Access kernel performance statistics ABURLISON ::MIB idcO? Access STREAMS network statistics ABURLISON ::MapDev bdpf? Maps sdNN disk names to cNtNdN disk names ABURLISON ::NDD idcO? Access network device statistics ABURLISON ::Procfs adhh? Access to the Solaris /proc filesystem JNOLAN ::InstallDB bdp?? Searches for Solaris package/system info CHRISJ ::Package bdpO? Access a Solaris package pkginfo file CHRISJ ::Contents bdp?? Access a Solaris contents file CHRISJ Unix:: ::ConfigFile adpO? Abstract interfaces to Unix config files SSNODGRA ::Processors RdcOp Interface to per-processor information WSNYDER ::Syslog Rdcfa Interface to syslog functions in a C-library MHARNISCH ::UserAdmin Rdpf? Interface to Unix Account Information JZAWODNY ::Login bdph? Customizable Unix login prompt / validation NWIGER VMS:: ::Device Rdcr? Access info about any device on a VMS system DSUGAL ::Filespec Sdcf? VMS and Unix file name syntax CBAIL ::ICC bdcr? Interface to the ICC facilities in VMS 7.2+ DSUGAL ::Lock RncO? Object interface to $ENQ (VMS lock mgr) BHUGHES ::Misc Rdcr? Miscellaneous VMS utility routines DSUGAL ::Monitor Rdcr? Access VMS system performance info DSUGAL ::Persona Rdcf? Interface to the VMS Persona services DSUGAL ::Priv Rdcf? Access VMS Privileges for processes DSUGAL ::Process Rdcf? Process management on VMS DSUGAL ::Queue bdcf? Manage queues and entries DSUGAL ::System Rdcf? VMS-specific system calls DSUGAL ::User bdcr? Read access to system UAF data DSUGAL ::Mail cdcO? Perl module for accessing callable VMS mail DNORTH ::SysCalls i ? VMS-specific system calls CBAIL VMS::Fileutils:: ::Root RdpO? Evade VMS's 8 level directory restrictions CLANE ::SafeName Rdpf? Transform filenames to "VMS safe" form CLANE
Portable Digital Assistants
PDA:: ::Pilot amcO? Interface to pilot-link library KJALB ::PilotDesktop i ? Managing Pilot Desktop databases software JWIEGLEY
Hardware related modules
Hardware:: ::Simulator adpf? Simulate different pieces of hardware GSLONDON Device:: ::SerialPort bdpO? POSIX clone of Win32::SerialPort COOK ::SVGA c ? SVGA Graphic card driver SCOTTVR ::ParallelPort adpOa Low Level access to Parallel Port SCOTT Device::ISDN:: ::OCLM bd??? Perl interface to the 3com OCLM ISDN TA MERLIN AudioCD bdpO? Extension for controlling Audio CDs SDERLE AudioCD:: ::Mac bdcO? Extension for controlling Audio CDs on MacOS AJFRY
5) Networking, Device Control (modems) and InterProcess Communication
Name DSLIP Description Info ------------ ----- -------------------------------------------- ---- Socket Smcf? Defines socket-related constants GNAT Socket6 adcf? getaddrinfo/getnameinfo support module UMEMOTO Ptty adcf? Pseudo terminal interface functions NI-S Socket:: ::PassAccessRights adcf? Pass file descriptor via Unix domain socket SAMPO Net:: ::ACAP adpO? Interface to ACAP Protocol (Internet-Draft) KJOHNSON ::AIM adpO? AOL Instant Messenger TOC protocol ARYEH ::AOLIM RdpO? AOL Instant Messenger OO Interface (TOC) RWAHBY ::Bind adpOp Interface to bind daemon related files BBB ::CDDB cdpr? Interface to the CDDB (CD Database) DSTALDER ::Cmd cdpO? For command based protocols (FTP, SMTP etc) GBARR ::DHCPClient bdpOp Interface to DHCP as a client JWALGENB ::DLookup adpO? Lookup domains on Internic and 2-letter TLDs DJASMINE ::DNS RmpOp Interface to the DNS resolver CREIN ::DNSServer cnpOa Secure and Extensible Name Server BBB ::Daemon adpO? Abstract base class for portable servers JWIED ::Dnet cdcO? DECnet-specific socket usage SPIDB ::Domain adpf? Try to determine TCP domain name of system GBARR ::FTP adpf? Interface to File Transfer Protocol GBARR ::Gen RdcOp Generic support for socket usage SPIDB ::Gnutella bdpO? Gnutella network (v0.4) interface IWADE ::Goofey RdpO? Communicate with a Goofey server GOSSAMER ::HTTPTunnel adpO? Tunnel through HTTP proxies with CONNECT RWAHBY ::Hesiod bdchp Interface to Hesiod library API PAYERLE ::Hotline RdpO? Interface to the Hotline protocol JSIRACUSA ::ICAP adpO? Interface to ICAP Protocol (Internet-Draft) KJOHNSON ::ICB bdpO? ICB style chat server interface JMV ::ICQ bmpO? Client interface to ICQ messaging JMUHLICH ::ICal ampOp RFC2445 (iCalendar) protocol tools SRL ::IMAP adpO? Interface to IMAP Protocol (RFC2060) KJOHNSON ::IMIP impO? RFC2447 tools for event scheduling SRL ::IRC cdpO? Internet Relay Chat interface JEEK ::ITIP cmpO? RFC2446 tools for scheduling events SRL ::Ident RdpO? Performs ident (rfc1413) lookups JPC ::Inet RdcOp Internet (IP) socket usage SPIDB ::Interface adcO? ifconfig(1) implementation SRZ ::Jabber RdpOl Access to the Jabber protocol REATMON ::LDAP ampOp Interface to LDAP Protocol (RFC1777) PLDAP ::LDAPapi Rdcf? Interface to UMICH and Netscape LDAP C API CDONLEY ::LMTP RdpOp LMTP Protocol - RFC2033 LHOWARD ::MsgLink cdpO? Abstraction of "user" part for message link RAM ::NIS adcO? Interface to Sun's NIS ESM ::NISPlus adcO? Interface to Sun's NIS+ RIK ::NNTP adpO? Client interface to NNTP protocol GBARR ::Netmask RdpO? Understand and manipulate network blocks MUIR ::Netrc adpO? Support for .netrc files GBARR ::PH RdpO? CCSO Nameserver Client class GBARR ::POP3 adpO? Client interface to POP3 protocol GBARR ::Pager RdpO? Send Numeric/AlphaNumeric Pages to any pager ROOTLEVEL ::ParseWhois RmpO? Get+Parse "whois" domain data ABEROHAM ::Patricia RdcO? Patricia Trie perl module for fast IP addres PLONKA ::Pcap adcr? An interface for LBL's packet capture lib PLISTER ::Peep RdpO? Clients for Peep: The Network Auralizer STARKY ::Ping SupOp TCP, UDP, or ICMP ping BBB ::Printer RdpO? Direct to lpd printing CFUHRMAN ::SCP Rdphp Perl extension for secure copy protocol IVAN ::SFTP bdpOp Secure File Transfer Protocol client BTROTT ::SMPP cdpO? Protocol for sending SMS (to GSM or CDMA).
SAMPO ::SMS RdpOp Send SMS wireless text-messages.
ROOTLEVEL ::SMTP adpf? Interface to Simple Mail Transfer Protocol GBARR ::SNMP MdpOp Object oriented interface to SNMP DTOWN ::SNPP cdpO? Client interface to SNPP protocol DREDD ::SOCKS cdcf? TCP/IP access through firewalls using SOCKS SCOOPER ::SSH Rdphp Perl extension for secure shell IVAN ::SSL RdcO? Glue that enables LWP to access https URIs CHAMAS ::SSLeay bmhf? Secure Socket Layer (based on OpenSSL) SAMPO ::Server bdpOp Extensible (class) oriented internet server RHANDOM ::Syslog RdpOp Forwarded syslog protocol LHOWARD ::TCP RdcOp TCP-specific socket usage SPIDB ::TFTP cdpf? Interface to Trivial File Transfer Protocol GSM ::Telnet RdpO? Interact with TELNET port or other TCP ports JROGERS ::Time adpf? Obtain time from remote machines GBARR ::Traceroute bdpOo Trace routes in IPv4, v6 HAG ::UDP RdcOp UDP-specific socket usage SPIDB ::VNC i???? Interface VNC remote frame buffer protocol BRONG ::Whois RdpO? Get+parse "whois" domain data from InterNIC DHUDES ::XWhois RdpO? Whois Client Interface for Perl5.
VIPUL ::Z3950 RmcO? OO interface (ZOOM) to Yaz Z39.50 toolkit MIRK ::hostent adpf? A by-name interface for hosts functions TOMC ::netent adpf? A by-name interface for networks functions TOMC ::protoent adpf? A by-name interface for protocols functions TOMC ::servent adpf? A by-name interface for services functions TOMC ::xAP adpO? Interface to IMAP,ACAP,ICAP substrate KJOHNSON ::OSCAR bmpOp AOL Instant Messenger OSCAR protocol MATTHEWG ::CIDR Rdpfp Manipulate netblock lists in CIDR notation MRSAM ::CDDBScan bdpOp String search interface to CDDB datbase DSHULTZ ::FTPServer RdcO? Secure, extensible, configurable FTP server RWMJ ::Traceroute6 adphb Interface to IPv6 traceroute MOHACSI ::QMQP adpOp Interface to Quick Mail Queueing Protocol KOBAYASI ::ICQV5 Rnpfg Module to send and receive ICQ messages.
SNEMAROV ::ICQV5CD Rnpfg Crypt/decrypt ICQ protocol V5 packets SNEMAROV ::ICQ2000 inpfg allows send and receive ICQ messages.
SNEMAROV ::FreeDB bdhOp OOP interface to the FreeDB database DSHULTZ ::Google bdpOp Simple OOP-ish interface to the Google API ASCOPE Net::Daemon:: ::SSL RdpO? SSL extension for Net::Daemon MKUL Net::DHCP:: ::Watch bdpOp A class for monitoring a remote DHCPD server EJDRS Net::DNS:: ::SEC RdpOd DNSSEC extension to Net::DNS OLAF Net::IMAP:: ::Simple bdpO? Only implements the basic IMAP features JPAF Net::Ping:: ::External adpf? Cross-platform interface to "ping" utilities COLINM Net::SMS:: ::Genie RdpOp Send SMS messages using the Genie gateway AWRIGLEY ::Web adpOp generic module for sending SMS via web AWRIGLEY Net::SNMP:: ::Interfaces RdpOp Obtain IfTable entries via SNMP JSTOWE Net::SSH:: ::Perl bdpOp Perl client Interface to SSH BTROTT Net::Telnet:: ::Cisco RmpOp Automate telnet sessions w/ routers
WMARQ ::NPAdmin adpO? Perl API to query printers via SNMP.
BOZZIO ::BridgeQuery bdpfp Query bridge/switch for forwarding database JSHEARER Mon:: ::Client RdpO? Network monitoring client TROCKIJ ::SNMP RdpO? Network monitoring suite TROCKIJ Parallel:: ::ForkManager RdpOp A simple parallel processing fork manager DLUX ::Pvm bdcf? Interface to the PVM messaging service DLECONTE CORBA:: ::IOP::IOR adpO? Decode, munge, and re-encode CORBA IORs PHILIPA ::IDLtree Rdpf? IDL to symbol tree translator OMKELLOGG Modem:: ::VBox RdpOp Perl module for creation of voiceboxes MLEHMANN ::Vgetty bdpO? Interface to voice modems using vgetty YENYA ControlX10:: ::CM10 RmpO? Control unit for X10 modules BBIRTH ::CM17 RmpO? inexpensive RF transmit-only X10 BBIRTH RAS:: ::PortMaster RdpO? Interface to Livingston PortMaster STIGMATA ::AS5200 RdpO? Interface to Cisco AS5200 dialup server STIGMATA ::HiPerARC RdpO? Interface to 3Com TotalControl HiPerARC STIGMATA IPTables::IPv4:: ::IPQueue RdcOg IPTables userspace packet queuing JMORRIS
6) Data Types and Data Type Utilities (see also Database Interfaces)
Name DSLIP Description Info ------------ ----- -------------------------------------------- ---- Math:: ::Amoeba Rdpr? Multidimensional Function Minimisation JARW ::Approx adpO? Approximate x,y-values by a function ULPFR ::BaseCalc RdpOp Convert numbers between various bases KWILLIAMS ::BigFloat SupO? Arbitrary size floating point math package TELS ::BigInt SupO? Arbitrary size integer math package TELS ::BigInteger adc ? Arbitrary size integer as XS extension GARY ::BigRat RdpOp Arbitrary size rational numbers (fractions) TELS ::Brent Rdpr? One-dimensional Function Minimisation JARW ::CDF bdch? Cumulative Distribution Functions CALLAHAN ::Cephes adcf? Interface to St. Moshier's Cephes library RKOBES ::Complex SdpOp Complex number data type RAM ::Derivative Rdpr? 1st and 2nd order differentiation of data JARW ::Expr adpO? Parses agebraic expressions HAKANARDO ::Fortran Rdpf? Implements Fortran log10 
KASEI Array:: ::Compare RdpOp Class to compare two arrays DAVECROSS ::Heap cdpf? Manipulate array elements as a heap JMM ::IntSpan RdpO? Handling arrays using IntSpan techniques TEVERETT ::PrintCols adpf? Print elements in vertically sorted columns AKSTE ::Substr idp ? Implement array using substr() LWALL ::Vec idp ? Implement array using vec() LWALL ::Virtual idp ? Implement array using a file LWALL ::Reform RdpO? Convert an array into N-sized array of array TBONE Hash:: ::NoVivify Rdcf? Provide non-autovivifying hash functions BPOWERS Heap bdpO? Define Heap interface JMM Heap:: ::Binary bdpO? Implement Binary Heap JMM ::Binomial bdpO? Implement Binomial Heap JMM ::Fibonacci bdpO? Implement Fibonacci Heap JMM ::Elem bdpO? Heap Element interface, ISA JMM Heap::Elem:: ::Num bdpO? Numeric heap element container JMM ::NumRev bdpO? Numeric element reversed order JMM ::Str bdpO? String heap element container JMM ::StrRev bdpO? String element reversed order JMM ::Ref bdpO? Obj ref heap element container JMM ::RefRev bdpO? Obj ref element reversed order JMM Scalar:: ::Util bdcf? Scalar utilities (dualvar reftype etc) GBARR ::Properties RdpOp run-time properties on scalar variables MARCEL List:: ::Util bdcf? List utilities (eg min, max, reduce) GBARR ::Intersperse Rdpf? Intersperse / unsort / disperse a list TAYERS Bit:: ::Vector RdcOp Fast virtual arbitrary-size-machineword CPU STBEY Set:: ::Bag RdpO? Bag (multiset) class JHI ::IntRange RdhOp Set of integers (arbitrary intervals, fast) STBEY ::IntSpan RdpOp Set of integers newsrc style '1,5-9,11' etc SWMCD ::NestedGroups RdpO? Grouped data eg ACL's, city/state/country ABARCLAY ::Object bdcO? Set of Objects (smalltalkish: IdentitySet) JLLEROY ::Scalar adpO? Set of scalars (inc references) JHI ::Window RdpOp Manages an interval on the integer line SWMCD ::CheckList adph? Maintain a list of "to-do" items MIKO ::Crontab RdpOa Expand crontab(5)-style integer lists AMS ::Infinite bdpOp Infinite Set Theory module, with Date, Time FGLOCK ::CrossProduct RdpOp interact with the cartesian product of sets BDFOY Graph RdpO? Data structure and ops for directed graphs JHI Graph:: ::Kruskal Rdpfp Kruskal Algorithm for Minimal Spanning Trees STBEY ::Reader RdpO? Base class for graph file format reader NEILB ::Writer RdpO? Base class for graph file format writer NEILB Graph::Reader:: ::XML RdpO? Read a Graph from simple XML format NEILB Graph::Writer:: ::XML RdpO? Write a Graph in a simple XML format NEILB ::Dot RdpO? Write a Graph in file format used by Dot NEILB ::VCG RdpO? Write a Graph in file format used by VCG NEILB ::daVinci cdpO? Write a Graph in file format used by daVinci NEILB Decision:: ::Markov bdpO? Build/evaluate Markov models for decisions ALANSZ ::ACL adpOp Manage and Build Access Control Lists BBEAUSEJ Date:: ::Calc Rdhhp Gregorian calendar date calculations STBEY ::Convert cdpO? Conversion between Gregorian, Hebrew, more? MORTY ::Format Rdpf? Date formatter ala strftime GBARR ::Interval idpO? Lightweight normalised interval data type KTORP ::Language adpO? Multi-language date support GBARR ::Manip Rdpfp Complete date/time manipulation package SBECK ::Parse Rdpf? ASCII Date parser using regexp's GBARR ::Time idpO? Lightweight normalised datetime data type TOBIX ::ISO Rdpfp Calculate dates in the ISO calendar RBOW ::Discordian Rdpfp Calculate dates in the Discordian calendar RBOW ::DayOfWeek Rdpfp Calculate day of week for Gregorian dates RBOW ::Easter Rdpfp Calculate the date of Easter RBOW ::ICal bdpOp Class for ICal date objects RBOW ::Handler RdpOp Simple Object oriented Date Handling BBEAUSEJ ::SundayLetter cdpfp Calculates the Sunday Letters for a given ye RBOW ::Doomsday cdpfp Determine doomsday for a given year RBOW ::Simple RdpOp A simple date object KASEI ::Bahai impOp Calculate dates in the Bahai calendar RBOW ::Persian impOp Calculate dates in the Persian calendar RBOW ::Japanese impOp Calculate dates in the Japanese calendar RBOW ::Hindu impOp Calculations in the Hindu calendar RBOW ::Passover impfp Calculate date of Passover or Rosh Hashanah RBOW ::Chinese impOp Calculations in the Chinese calendar RBOW ::Ethiopic impOp Calculations in the Ethiopic calendar RBOW ::Egyptian impOp Calculations in the Egyptian calendar RBOW ::Gregorian bdpOp Gregorian calendar MHASCH ::Roman RdpOa Manipulating Roman-style dates HOBBIT Date::Convert:: ::French_Rev adpOp From/to French Revolutionary Calendar JFORGET Date::Japanese:: ::Era adpOp Year conversion for Japanese Era MIYAGAWA Date::Tolkien:: ::Shire RdpOp J.R.R. Tolkien's hobbit calendar TBRAUN Time:: ::Avail Rdpf? Calculate min. remaining in time interval PSANTORO ::CTime Rdpf? Format Times ala ctime(3) with many formats MUIR ::DaysInMonth Rdpf? Returns the number of days in a month MUIR ::HiRes Rdcf? High resolution time, sleep, and alarm JHI ::JulianDay Rdpf? Converts y/m/d into seconds MUIR ::Local Supf? Implements timelocal() and timegm() P5P ::Object adpO? Object Oriented time objects MSERGEANT ::ParseDate Rdpf? Parses many forms of dates and times MUIR ::Period Rdpf? Code to deal with time periods PRYAN ::Timezone Rdpf? Figures out timezone offsets MUIR ::Zone Rdpf? Timezone info and translation routines GBARR ::gmtime Supf? A by-name interface for gmtime TOMC ::localtime Supf? A by-name interface for localtime TOMC ::Seconds RdcO? API to convert seconds to other date values MSERGEANT ::Stopwatch Rdprp Tied variables that count seconds ILTZU ::Unix RdpO? Force time() to return secs since UNIX epoch NWIGER ::TAI64 bdcfp Time manipulation in the TAI64* formats SPOON Time::Piece:: ::MySQL RdpOp MySQL-specific functions for Time::Piece DROLSKY Calendar:: ::CSA adcO? interface with calenders such as Sun and CDE KJALB ::Hebrew cdpO? Hebrew calendar conversion/manipulation YSTH ::RCM i ? Russell Calendar Manager HTCHAPMAN Tie:: ::AliasHash Rdprp Hash with key aliases ACALPINI ::Array Supr? Base class for implementing tied arrays P5P ::CPHash bdpO? Case preserving but case insensitive hash CJM ::Cache Mdprp In memory size limited LRU cache CHAMAS ::CharArray Rdprp Manipulate strings as arrays of characters ILTZU ::Cycle RdpO? Cycle through a list of values via a scalar.
BDFOY ::DBI RdpO? Tie hash to a DBI handle LDS ::DB_FileLock Rdpr? Locking access to Berkeley DB 1.x.
JMV ::DB_Lock Rdprp Tie DB_File with automatic locking KWILLIAMS ::Dir adpr? Tie hash for reading directories GBARR ::Discovery Rdpr? Discover data by caching sub results SIMON ::DxHash Rdprp Keeps insertion order; allows duplicate keys KRUSCOE ::File Rdprp Tie array to lines of a file MJD ::FileLRUCache bdph? File based persistent LRU cache SNOWHARE ::Handle RdpOp Base class for implementing tied filehandles STBEY ::Hash Supr? Base class for implementing tied hashes P5P ::HashDefaults adpr? Let a hash have default values JDPORTER ::IxHash RdpO? Indexed hash (ordered array/hash composite) GSAR ::LDAP bdpr? Ties LDAP database to Perl hash TAIY ::LLHash Rdprp Fast ordered hashes via linked lists KWILLIAMS ::ListKeyedHash Rdpr? Use lists to key multi-level hashes SNOWHARE ::Mem adcO? Bind perl variables to memory addresses PMQS ::MmapArray bdcr? Ties a file to an array ANDREWF ::Multidim adpr? "tie"-like multidimensional data structures JDPORTER ::OffsetArray adpr? Tie one array to another, with index offset JDPORTER ::Persistent Rdprp Persistent data structures via tie made easy RGIERSIG ::RDBM RdpO? Tie hashes to relational databases LDS ::RangeHash Rdpha Hashes with 'low,high' ranges as keys RRWO ::RegexpHash adpha Use regular expressions as hash keys RRWO ::RndHash bdpO? choose a random key of a hash in O(1) time DFAN ::Scalar Supr? Base class for implementing tied scalars P5P ::SecureHash RdpO? Enforced encapsulation of Perl objects DCONWAY ::SentientHash bdpr? Tracks changes to nested data structures ANDREWF ::ShadowHash adpOp Merge multiple data sources into a hash RRA ::SortHash Rdpr? Provides persistent sorting for hashes CTWETEN ::StrictHash RdpO? A hash with strict-like semantics KVAIL ::SubstrHash SdpO? Very compact hash stored in a string LWALL ::TextDir Rdprp ties a hash to a directory of textfiles KWILLIAMS ::WarnGlobal adpr? Ties variables to functions, warns on use STEPHEN ::Watch bdpO? Watch variables, run code when read/written LUSOL ::GHash adcfp A smaller hash; interface to Gnome glib hash LBROCARD ::TransactHash RupOg Allows edits on a hash without disturbing it MIKEDLR ::Concurrent bdprp Retie a hash when reading/writing.
GWYN ::ShiftSplice i ? Defines shift et al in terms of splice LWALL ::Quick i ? Simple way to create ties P5P ::Toggle Rdprp a scalar flip-flops between two values BDFOY Tie::Scalar:: ::Timeout adpr? Scalar variables that time out MARCEL Tie::Cache:: ::LRU adpr? A Least-Recently Used cache MSCHWERN Tie::Hash:: ::Regex Rdprp Look up values in hashes using regexes DAVECROSS ::Stack bdpra Maintains an array of hashes like a stack MNEYLON Class:: ::Accessor bdpO? Automated accessor generation MSCHWERN ::BlackHole RdpOp treat unhandled method calls as no-op SBURKE ::Classless MdpOp Framework for classless OOP SBURKE ::Contract RdpO? Design-by-Contract OO in Perl.
GGOEBEL ::DBI adpOp Simple SQL-based object persistance TMTM ::Delegate bdpO? Easy-to-use object delegation KSTAR ::Eroot RdpO? Eternal Root - Object persistence DMR ::Fields bdph? Inspect the fields of a class MSCHWERN ::ISA Mdpfp Report the search path thru an ISA tree SBURKE ::MethodMaker MdpOp Create generic class methods FLUFFY ::Multimethods Rdpf? A multiple dispatch mechanism for Perl DCONWAY ::Mutator bdpO? Dynamic polymorphism implemented in Perl GMCCAR ::NamedParms MdpO? A named parameter accessor base class SNOWHARE ::ObjectTemplate bdpOp Optimized template builder base class JASONS ::ParamParser RdpOp Provides complex parameter list parsing DUNCAND ::ParmList MdpO? A named parameter list processor SNOWHARE ::PublicInternal adpO? Keep separate hashes of public/internal data MIKO ::Singleton bdpO? Implementation of a "Singleton" class ABW ::StructTemplate adpO? Facilitates creation of public class-data HEIKOWU ::TOM RmpO? Transportable Object Model for perl JDUNCAN ::Template Rdpr? Struct/member template builder DMR ::Translucent RdpO? Translucent (ala perltootc) method creation GED ::Tree MdpO? C++ class hierarchies 
VIPUL ::Date RdhOp a full-featured date and time class for perl DLUX ::ArrayObjects Rdphp Utility class for array based objects RBERJON ::MethodMapper RdpO? Abstract Class wrapper for AutoLoader LENZO ::MakeMethods bdpOp Generate common types of methods EVO ::Flyweight adpOp implement the flyweight pattern in OO perl DKUBB ::Prototyped bdpOp Fast prototype-based OO programming in Perl TEVERETT ::Holon RdpO? Declare hierarchical classes with one line GSLONDON ::PseudoHash bmprp Emulates Pseudo-Hash behaviour via overload AUTRIJUS ::Tangram bdpOa Automated class accessors, Tangram friendly SAMV ::Facade bdpOp Interface to one or more delegates ABW Class::DBI:: ::mysql RdpOp Extensions to Class::DBI for MySQL TMTM Class::ObjectTemplate:: ::DB bdpOp Template base class for database objects JASONS Object:: ::Info Rnpf? General info about objects (is-a, ...)
JACKS ::Transaction bdpO? Transactions on serialized HASH files MUIR Object::Realize:: ::Later MdpOp Delay construction of real data until used MARKOV POE:: Perl Object Environment ::Kernel RdpO? An event queue that dispatches events RCAPUTO ::Session RdpO? state machine running on POE::Kernel events RCAPUTO POE::Component:: ::RSS bdp?? Event based RSS interface MSTEVENS ::SubWrapper bdp?? Event based Module interface MSTEVENS ::UserBase RdpO? A component to manage user authentication JGOFF ::Pcap adhOp POE Interface to Net::Pcap FLETCH ::MPG123 RdpOb POE Component for accessing and working wit MCASHNER POE::Component::Client:: ::UserAgent bdpOp LWP and LWP::Parallel based POE web client RCAPUTO ::FTP adpOp POE FTP client MCHING POE::Component::IRC:: ::Onjoin RdpO? Provides IRC moved message 
Data Type Marshaling (converting to/from strings) and Persistent Storage
Clone idch? Recursive copy of nested objects RDF FreezeThaw bdpf? Convert arbitrary objects to/from strings ILYAZ Persistence:: ::Object adpO? Store Object definitions with Data::Dumper VIPUL Storable Smcrp Persistent data structure mechanism AMS Marshal:: ::Dispatch cdpO? Convert arbitrary objects to/from strings MUIR ::Packed cdpO? Run-length coded version of Marshal module MUIR ::Eval cdpO? Undo serialization with eval MUIR Tangram RmpO? Object persistence in relational databases JLLEROY Persistent:: ::Base bdpO? Persistent base classes (
INGY ::Compare RdpO? Compare perl data structures FTASSIN ::HexDump RdpO? Hexadecial Dumper FTASSIN ::Hexdumper Rdpfa Display binary data in multiple formats DCANTRELL ::Stash bdpf? Data structures in simple text format HRANICKY ::BinStruct bdpO? OO access to binary data structures DJHD ::MaskPrint bdpOp Allows for exact formatting of data ILYAVERL ::Serializer RdpOp Generic interface to serializer modules NEELY Data::Tabular:: ::Dumper bdpOp Automate dumping of data to XML, XSL and CSV GWYN Tree:: ::Base cdpO? Defines a basic binary search tree MSCHWERN ::Fat Rdcf? Embeddable F-Tree algorithm suite JPRIT ::Smart cdpO? Splay tree, fastest for commonly accessed ke MSCHWERN ::Ternary bdpOp Perl implementation of ternary search trees MROGASKI ::Ternary_XS adcOp XS implementation of ternary search trees LBROCARD ::Trie bdpO? An implementation of the Trie data structure AVIF ::Nary RdpO? Perl implementation of N-ary search trees FSORIANO ::DAG_Node MdpOp base class for trees SBURKE ::M ad+Od M-trees provide efficient metric searches MLEHMANN DFA:: ::Command MdpO? Discrete Finite Automata command processor RSAVAGE ::Kleene Rdpfp Kleene's Algorithm for DFA STBEY ::Simple cdpO? An "augmented transition network" RANDYM X500:: ::DN adpOp Handle X.500 DNs (Distinguished Names) RJOOP ::RDN adpOp handle X.500 Relative Distinguished Names RJOOP X500::DN:: ::Parser MdpO? X500 Distinguished Name parser RSAVAGE Boulder MdpO? Generalized tag/value data objects LDS Thesaurus RdpOp Create associations between related things DROLSKY BabelObjects cdpf? Web Service Framework KERMAGO YAML adphp YAML Ain't Markup Language (tm) INGY GDS2 bdpOa manipulate GDS2 stream format files SCHUMACK ADT cdhhp Abstract Data Type top level ABERGMAN ADT::Queue:: ::Priority cnphp Abstract Data Type Priority Queue ABERGMAN
7) Database Interfaces (see also Data Types)
Name DSLIP Description Info ------------ ----- -------------------------------------------- ---- DBI MmcOp Generic Database Interface (see DBD modules) DBIML DBI:: ::Format bmpO? Defined display formats for data from DBI TLOWERY
DBIx -- Extensions to the DBI
DBIx:: ::Abstract RmpO? Wrapper for DBI that generates SQL TURNERA ::AnyDBD bdpO? Module to make cross db applications easier MSERGEANT ::CGITables adpO? Easy DB access from a CGI TOBIX ::Copy adpO? Copying databases TOBIX ::FullTextSearch bmpOp Index documents with MySQL as storage TJMATHER ::glueHTML bdpO? CGI interface to DBI databases JFURNESS ::HTMLView cdpO? Creating web userinterfaces to DBI dbs HAKANARDO ::OracleSequence adpOp OO access to Oracle sequences via DBD-Oracle BLABES ::Password MdpO? Abstration layer for database passwords KROW ::Recordset bmpO? DB-Abtractionlayer / Access via Arrays/Hashs GRICHTER ::Table bdpO? OO access to DBI database tables DLOWE ::TableAdapter adpOa A object-relational table adapter class GED ::Tree adpO? Expand self-referential table into a tree BJEPS ::XML_RDB ????? Creates XML from DBI datasources MSERGEANT ::DBSchema bmpOp Database-independent schema objects IVAN ::XMLMEssage bdpOp Exchange of XML messages between DBI sources ANDREIN ::Browse bdpOg A class to browse related tables via CGI/Web EJDRS ::XHTML_Table RdpOp SQL query result set to XHTML table JEFFA ::SchemaView adpf? Retrieving and drawing of DB schema (Tk) MILSO ::SystemCatalog RdpO? Accessing system catalog in common databases MILSO ::dbMan bmpOp Tk/cmdline database manipulating tool MILSO ::Sequence MdpOp Database independent ID generation BBEAUSEJ ::TextIndex bdpOp Creates fulltext indexes of SQL text columns DKOCH ::FetchLoop RdpOg Fetch with change detection and aggregates BITS DBIx::Lookup:: ::Field Rdpfp Create a lookup hash from a database table MARCEL DBD:: ::ASAny adcO? Adaptive Server Anywhere Driver for DBI SMIRNIOS ::Altera bdpO? Altera SQL Server for DBI - pure Perl code DSOUFLIS ::CSV adcO? SQL engine and DBI driver for CSV files JZUCKER ::DB2 adcO? DB2 Driver for DBI MHM ::Empress adcO? Empress RDBMS Driver SWILLIAM ::FreeTDS adcO? DBI driver for MS SQLServer and Sybase SPANNRING ::SearchServer cdcO? PCDOCS/Fulcrum SearchServer Driver for DB SHARI ::Illustra bmcO? Illustra Driver for DBI PMH ::Informix amcO? Informix Driver for DBI JOHNL ::Informix4 adcO? DBI driver for Informix SE 4.10 GTHYNI ::Ingres bmcO? Ingres Driver for DBI HTOUG ::Multiplex RmpO? Spreading database load across servers TKISHEL ::ODBC amcO? ODBC Driver for DBI DBIML ::Oracle MmcO? Oracle Driver for DBI DBIML ::QBase amcO? QBase Driver for DBI BENLI ::RAM bmpO? a DBI driver for files and data structures JZUCKER ::SQLrelay bdpO? SQLrelay driver for DBI DMOW ::Solid amcO? Solid Driver for DBI TWENRICH ::Sqlflex RdcO? SQLFLEX driver for DBI INFOFLEX ::Sybase bmcO? Sybase Driver for DBI MEWP ::Unify bdcO? Unify driver for DBI HMBRAND ::XBase RmpO? XBase driver for DBI JANPAZ ::mSQL RmcO? Msql Driver for DBI JWIED ::mysql RmcO? Mysql Driver for DBI JWIED ::pNET amcO? DBD proxy driver JWIED ::InterBase bmcO? DBI driver for InterBase RDBMS server EDPRATOMO ::RDB Rdof? DBI driver for Oracle RDB (OpenVMS only) ASTILLER ::DtfSQLmac RdpO? dtF/SQL (Mac OS edition) driver for DBI TWEGNER ::ADO bmpO? Database interface modules of MS ADO for DBI TLOWERY ::Excel adpO? Excel database driver for the DBI module KWITKNR ::Recall adpOp Transparent database replication layer AGUL ::Sprite RdpO? Sprite driver TURNERJW ::PrimeBase bmc?p A primeBase database interface PRIMEBASE ::mysqlPP bdpOp Pure Perl MySQL driver for the DBI OYAMA ::PgPP bdpOp Pure Perl PostgreSQL driver for the DBI OYAMA Oraperl Rmpf? Oraperl emulation interface for DBD::Oracle DBIML Ingperl bmpf? Ingperl emulation interface for DBD::Ingres HTOUG DDL:: ::Oracle RdpO? Reverse engineers object DDL; also defrags RVSUTHERL MSSQL:: ::DBlib Md+O? Access MS SQL Server through DB-Library.
SOMMAR ::Sqllib MdpO? High-level interface using MSSQL::DBlib.
SOMMAR Oracle:: ::OCI bmcr? Raw interface to the Oracle OCI API TIMB Sybase:: ::Async cdpO? interact with a Sybase asynchronously WORENKD ::BCP RdcOp Sybase BCP interface MEWP ::DBlib RdcO? Sybase DBlibrary interface MEWP ::Simple bdpOp Simplified db access using Sybase::CTlib MEWP ::Sybperl Rdpf? sybperl 1.0xx compatibility module MEWP ::CTlib RdcO? Sybase CTlibrary interface MEWP ::Xfer RdpO? Transfer data between sybase servers SPRAGST Ace RdpOp Interface to ACEDB (Popular Genome DB) LDS BBDB Rdph? Insiduous big brother database LAXEN DTREE cdcf? Interface to Faircom DTREE multikey ISAM db JWAT Datascope Rdcf? Interface to Datascope RDBMS DANMQ Fame MdcOp Interface to FAME database and language TRIAS LotusNotes i ? Interface to Lotus Notes C/C++ API MBRECH Msql RmcO? Mini-SQL database interface JWIED Mysql RmcO? mysql database interface JWIED NetCDF bmcr? Interface to netCDF API for scientific data SEMM ObjStore Rm+O? ObjectStore OODBMS Interface JPRIT Pg Rdcf? PostgreSQL SQL database interface MERGL PgSQL adpO? "Pure perl" interface to PostgreSQL GTHYNI Pogo ad+O? Interface for GOODS object database SEYN Postgres RncO? PostgreSQL interface with Perl5 coding style DAVEHOLL Sprite RdpO? Limited SQL interface to flat file databases SHGUN VDBM cdph? Client/server-layers on top of DBM files RAM WAIT adhO? A rewrite of the freeWAIS-sf engine in Perl ULPFR Wais Rdcf? Interface to the freeWAIS-sf libraries ULPFR XBase RdpO? Read/write interface to XBase files JANPAZ Xbase bdpf? Read Xbase files with simple IDX indexes PRATP MySQL:: ::TableInfo RdpOp Access to MySQL table's meta data SHERZODR
Tied Hash File Interfaces:
AnyDBM_File Sup ? Uses first available *_File module above P5P BerkeleyDB RdcO? Interface to Berkeley DB version 2, 3 or 4 PMQS CDB_File adc ? Tie to CDB (Bernstein's constant DB) files TIMPX DBZ_File adc ? Tie to dbz files (mainly for news history) IANPX DWH_File adpO? DBM storage of complex data and objects SUMUS DB_File Suc ? Tie to DB files PMQS GDBM_File Suc ? Tie to GDBM files P5P NDBM_File Suc ? Tie to NDBM files P5P ODBM_File Suc ? Tie to ODBM files P5P SDBM_File Suc ? Tie to SDBM files P5P CDB_File:: ::BiIndex aupOl Two directional index based on CDB File MIKEDLR ::Generator iupOg CDB_File::Generator MIKEDLR CDB_File::BiIndex:: ::Generator aupOl Creates for CDB_File::BiIndexes MIKEDLR DB_File:: ::Lock RdpO? DB_File wrapper with flock-based locking DHARRIS ::DB_Database RdpOn DB_File to MultiField Table with Index RANN MLDBM RdpO? Transparently store multi-level data in DBM GSAR MLDBM:: ::Sync Rdprp MLDBM wrapper to serialize concurrent access CHAMAS DBM:: ::DBass adpf? DBM with hashes, locking and XML records SPIDERBOY AsciiDB:: ::TagFile RdpOp Tie class for a simple ASCII database JOSERODR ::Parse i ? Generic text database parsing MICB Db:: ::Ctree Rdcrp Faircom's CTREE+ database interface REDEN ::dmObject cdpO? Object-based interface to Documentum EDMS JGARRISON DbFramework:: ::Attribute adpO? Relational attribute class PSHARPE ::DataModel adpO? Relational data model/schema class PSHARPE ::DataType adpO? Attribute data type class PSHARPE ::ForeignKey adpO? Relational foreign key class PSHARPE ::Key adpO? Relational key class PSHARPE ::Persistent adpO? Persistent object class PSHARPE ::PrimaryKey adpO? Relational primary key class PSHARPE ::Table adpO? Relational table/entity class PSHARPE ::Util adhO? Utility functions/methods PSHARPE BTRIEVE:: ::SAVE bdpO? Read-write access to BTRIEVE SAVE files DLANE MARC bmpO? MAchine Readable Catalog (library bib. data) PERL4LIB MARC:: ::XML ampO? MAchine Readable Catalog / XML Extension PERL4LIB ::Record RmpOp MARC manipulation (library bibliographic) PETDANCE Metadata:: ::Base bdpO? Base metadata functionality DJBECKETT ::IAFA bdpO? IAFA templates metadata DJBECKETT ::SOIF bdpO? Harvest SOIF metadata DJBECKETT OLE:: ::PropertySet aupO? Property Set interface MSCHWARTZ ::Storage aupO? Structured Storage / OLE document interface MSCHWARTZ ::Storage_Lite adpO? Simple Class for OLE document interface KWITKNR Spectrum:: ::CLI RdpO? API for Spectrum Enterprise Mgr. CLI PLONKA Spreadsheet:: ::WriteExcel RupO? Write cross-platform Excel binary file.
JMCNAMARA ::ParseExcel RdpO? Get information from Excel file KWITKNR ::Excel i ? Interface to Excel spreadsheets RRAWLINGS ::Lotus i ? Interface to Lotus 1-2-3 spreadsheets RRAWLINGS Alzabo RdpOp A data modelling tool and RDBMS-OO mapper DROLSKY Gemstone RdpO? Interface to a GemStone object database YOUD FameHLI bdcfg Ports Fame's C-API to Perl DAVEO Splash:: ::DB ????? ? BEN PApp:: ::SQL Mdchp easy yet fast and powerful dbi sql wrapper MLEHMANN CDDB RdpOp high-level interface to cddb/freedb protocol RCAPUTO Palm:: ::ThinkDB cdpOa Manipulate ThinkDB TinyBytes for PalmOS EARNESON Relations adphp Database, CGI, and Graph Interfunctionality GAFFER Stanza i ? Text format database used by OSF and IBM JHI
8) User Interfaces (Character and Graphical)
Name DSLIP Description Info ------------ ----- -------------------------------------------- ---- Term:: ::ANSIColor Sdpfp Color output using ANSI escape sequences RRA ::ANSIScreen bdpf? Terminal control using ANSI escape sequences AUTRIJUS ::Cap Supf? Basic termcap: Tgetent, Tputs, Tgoto TSANDERS ::Complete Supf? Tab word completion using stty raw WTOMPSON ::Control idpf? Basic curses-type screen controls (gotxy) KJALB ::Gnuplot adcf? Draw vector graphics on terminals etc ILYAZ ::Info adpf? Terminfo interface (currently just Tput) KJALB ::ProgressBar RdpOp Progress bar in just ASCII / using Term FLUFFY ::Prompt adpf? Prompt a user ALLENS ::Query Rdpf? Intelligent user prompt/response driver AKSTE ::ReadKey Rdcf? Read keystrokes and change terminal modes KJALB ::ReadLine Sdcf? Common interface for various implementations ILYAZ ::Screen RdpOp Basic screen + input class (uses Term::Cap) JSTOWE ::Size adcf? Simple way to get terminal size TIMPX ::TUI bdpfp User interface based on Term::ReadLine SBECK ::VT102 bdpOa Emulates a colour VT102 terminal in memory AJWOOD ::Interact bdpOp Get Data Interactively From User PRL Term::ReadLine:: ::Perl RdpO? GNU Readline history and completion in Perl ILYAZ ::Gnu RdcOp GNU Readline XS library wrapper HAYASHI
Major Character User Interface Modules:
Cdk RdcO? Collection of Curses widgets GLOVER Curses Rdcfp Character screen handling and windowing WPS Dialog bdch? interface library to libdialog UNCLE PV bdpOp Text-mode user interface widgets AGUL PerlMenu Mdpf? Curses-based menu and template system SKUNZ Curses:: ::Forms adpO? Form management for Curses::Widgets CORLISS ::Widgets RmpOg Assorted widgets for rapid interface design CORLISS Emacs adpf? Support for Perl embedded in GNU Emacs JTOBEY Emacs:: ::Lisp bdch? Perl-to-Emacs-Lisp glue JTOBEY
Tk X Windows User Interface Modules
Tk bmcO? Object oriented version of Tk v4 TKML Tk:: ::TextANSIColor bdpOp use ANSI color codes in Text widget TJENNESS ::Autoscroll adpfp Alternative way to scroll SREZIC ::Axis RmpO? Canvas with Axes TKML ::CheckBox RdpO? A radio button widget that uses a checkmark DKWILSON ::ChildNotification RdpO? Alert widget when child is created DKWILSON ::Clock RdpO? Canvas based Clock widget HMBRAND ::Cloth RdpO? Object interface to Tk::Canvas and items ACH ::Columns RdpO? Multi column lists w/ resizable borders DKWILSON ::ComboEntry RdpO? Drop down list + entry widget DKWILSON ::ContextHelp adpOp A context-sensitive help system SREZIC ::Dial RmpO? An alternative to the Scale widget TKML ::Date bdpOp A date/time widget SREZIC ::Enscript cdpfp Create postscript from text files using Tk SREZIC ::FcyEntry adpO? Entry with bg color depending on -state ACH ::FileDialog RdpO? A highly configurable file selection widget BPOWERS ::FileEntry adpO? Primitive clone of Tix FileEntry widget ACH ::FireButton RdpO? Keeps invoking callback when pressed ACH ::FlatCheckbox adpOp A checkbox suitable for flat reliefs SREZIC ::FontDialog bdpOp A font dialog widget for perl/Tk SREZIC ::Getopt adpOp Configuration interface to Getopt::Long SREZIC ::HistEntry adpOp An entry widget with history capability SREZIC ::HTML bdpO? View HTML in a Tk Text widget NI-S ::IconCanvas RdpO? Canvas with movable iconic interface DKWILSON ::JPEG RdcO? JPEG loader for Tk::Photo NI-S ::LockDisplay RdpO? Screen saver/lock widget with animation LUSOL ::Login cdpO? A Login widget (name, passwd, et al) BPOWERS ::Menustrip RdpO? Another MenuBar DKWILSON ::More adpO? A more (or less) like text widget ACH ::Multi bdpO? Manages several Text or Canvas widgets DDUMONT ::NumEntry RdpO? Numerical entry widget with up/down buttons ACH ::ObjScanner RdpO? Tk data or object scanner DDUMONT ::Olwm RmpO? Interface to OpenLook toplevels properties TKML ::Pane RdpO? A Frame that can be scrolled TKML ::PNG RdcO? PNG loader for Tk::Photo NI-S ::Pod ?mpO? POD browser toplevel widget TKML ::ProgressBar RdpO? Status/progress bar TKML ::ProgressMeter cdpO? Simple thermometer-style widget w/callbacks BPOWERS ::RotCanvas RdpO? Canvas with arbitrary rotation support AQUMSIEH ::SplitFrame RdpO? A sliding separator for two child widgets DKWILSON ::TabFrame RdpO? A tabbed frame geometry manager DKWILSON ::TabbedForm RdpO? Ext. TabFrame, allowing managed subwidgets DKWILSON ::TableEdit RdpO? Simplified interface to a flat file database DKWILSON ::TableMatrix bdcO? Display data in Table/Spreadsheet format CERNEY ::TiedListbox RmpO? Gang together Listboxes TKML ::TFrame RdpO? A Frame with a title ACH ::TIFF adpOp TIFF loader for Tk::Photo SREZIC ::Tree RdpO? Create and manipulate Tree widgets CTDEAN ::TreeGraph RdpO? Widget to draw a tree in a Canvas DDUMONT ::WaitBox RdpO? A Wait dialog, of the "Please Wait" variety BPOWERS ::XMLViewer adpOp Tk widget to display XML SREZIC ::ObjEditor bdpO? Tk widget to edit data or objects DDUMONT ::ObjEditorDialog bdpO? Tk popup dialog to edit data or objects DDUMONT ::Pgplot bdcfp Pgplot widget for Tk CPHIL ::PathEntry adpOp Entry for selecting paths with completion SREZIC ::JComboBox bdpOp another combo box (similar to the java comp) RCS ::Workspace RdpO? Persistent Text/Shell/Command Widgets RKIES ::DateEntry RdpO? Drop down calendar for selecting dates SREZIC ::MListbox RdpO? Multicolumn Listbox.
RCS
Modules in the realm of Tk but with a separate namespace
Log::Dispatch:: ::ToTk RdpOp Interface class between Log::Dispatch and Tk DDUMONT ::TkText RdpOp Text widget to log Log::Dispatch messages DDUMONT Puppet:: ::Body adpO? Base class for persistent data DDUMONT ::Log bdpO? Logging facility based on Tk DDUMONT ::Any adpO? Base class for an optionnal GUI DDUMONT Puppet::VcsTools:: ::History bdpO? VCS (RCS HMS) history viewer based on Canvas DDUMONT ::File adpO? VCS (RCS HMS) file manager DDUMONT Orac RdpO? DBA GUI tool for Oracle, Informix and Sybase ANDYDUNC PPresenter MdpOp Create presentations with Tk in Perl or XML MARKOV
Other Major X Windows User Interface Modules:
Gtk bdcO? binding of the Gtk library used by GIMP KJALB Gtk:: ::Dialog adph? Simple interface to create dialogs in Gtk ALISTAIRC Fresco cd+O? Interface to Fresco (post X11R6 version) BPETH Glade bdphp Glade/Gtk+/Gnome UI source code generator DMUSGR Gnome bdcO? Bindings to the Gnome Desktop Toolkit KJALB Qt ad+O? Interface to the Qt toolkit AWIN Sx Rdcf? Simple Athena widget interface FMC X11:: ::Auth adpO? Read and handle X11 '.Xauthority' files SMCCAM ::Fvwm RdcO? interface to the FVWM window manager API RJRAY ::Keysyms adpf? X11 key symbols (translation of keysymdef.h) SMCCAM ::Lib bdcO? X11 library interface KENFOX ::Motif bdcO? Motif widget set interface KENFOX ::Protocol adpO? Raw interface to X Window System servers SMCCAM ::Toolkit bdcO? X11 Toolkit library interface KENFOX ::Wcl bdcO? Interface to the Widget Creation Library JHPB ::XEvent bdcO? provides perl OO acess to XEvent structures MARTINB ::XFontStruct bdcO? provides perl OO access to XFontStruct MARTINB ::XRT adcO? XRT widget set (commercial) interface KENFOX ::Xbae adcO? Xbae matrix (spreadsheet like) interface KENFOX ::Xforms bdcO? provides the binding to the xforms library MARTINB ::Xpm adcf? X Pixmap library interface KENFOX
Abstract Graphical User Interfaces modules
GUI:: ::Guido i ? bd+O Communicate with objects in a GUI TBRADFUTE Cmenu bdpfg Curses-based menu and data entry functions DREWF Prima Rmchb A perl GUI toolkit KARASIK
9) Interfaces to or Emulations of Other Programming Languages
Name DSLIP Description Info ------------ ----- -------------------------------------------- ---- Clips adpO? Interface to the Expert System Clips MSULLIVAN Java RdhOl A Perl front-end for JVM communication METZZO Rc cdcO? Perl interface for the Rc shell JPRIT SICStus adcO? Interface to SICStus Prolog Runtime CBAIL Java::JVM:: ::Classfile RdpO? Parse JVM Classfiles LBROCARD Language:: ::Basic adpO? Implementation of BASIC AKARGER ::ML cdpf? Implementation of ML DSPARLING ::PGForth i ? Peter Gallasch's Forth implementation PETERGAL ::Prolog anpO? An implementation of Prolog JACKS ::Style cdcOa Interpreter/Compiler for the Style Language EKMETT ::VBParser adp?g Visual Basic 6 source parser FRETT Language::DATR:: ::DATR2XML RdpOp Convert DATR to XML and back, wth XSLT 
