Welcome to Washington District of Columbia skip to left navigation skip to main content skip to right navigation DC home DC Guide Residents Business Visitors DC Government kids - Mayor Anthony Williams Fire and Emergency Medical Services FEMS HOME NEWS ROOM Events Press Releases Newsletters 2003 Monthly Listing Jan Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec 2002 Monthly Listing Jan Feb Mar Apr May Jun Jul Aug Sep Oct Nov Dec SERVICES INFORMATION ONLINE SERVICE REQUESTS News Releases Events [newsletters_off.gif] September 16, 2002 National Fallen Firefighters Foundation Memorial Weekend PROCESSION OF HONOR WHO: Surviving family members of fallen firefighters.
Fire service personnel from around the world.
WHAT: In a visual show of support, an unprecedented number of honor guard units and bagpipe bands will lead a procession to the MCI Center, site of the National Memorial Service.
Firefighters from across the world will form a "Sea of Blue" along the route as buses carrying the families of the fallen firefighters pass by.
Uniformed firefighters from the departments of those being honored will follow the buses.
Fire apparatus will form ladder arches with the American Flag hung from the cross sections.
Fire service personnel along the streets will remain in place until the last unit in the procession passes.
Then they will be directed to the MCI Center and the Navy Memorial where they will be able to watch the program on large Jumbotron screens.
WHEN: October 6, 2002, 11:00 am
WHERE: The Procession of Honor will stage on Constitution Avenue between 14th Street and 10th Street.
Constitution Avenue from 10th Street to 7th Street and all of 7th Street up to the MCI Center will be lined with uniformed firefighters from around the world who will form a "Sea of Blue" through which the Procession of Honor will pass.
Pennsylvania Avenue between 14 th Street and 7 th Street will be used as an assembly area for the thousands of fire service members who will be in attendance for this event.
This area will serve as both a pre- and post-gathering point for the Procession of Honor that will begin on Constitution Avenue and 10th Street.
Following the National Tribute, a reception will be held in this area for all event participants.
Light refreshments will be provided.
Alcoholic beverages will not be served.
During the National Tribute, it is anticipated that 6th Street between F Street and G Street, along with 7 th Street between F Street and G Street and F Street between 6 th Street and 7 th Street will be used as a mass gathering area for overflow attendance at the event.
For this venue, it is expected that the MCI Center will be filled to capacity.
To accommodate the thousands of fire service members who wish to view the National Tribute, the Foundation will provide Jumbotron Screens in this area.
When the program ends these individuals will return to Pennsylvania Avenue.
Page 6 of 8 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 - - - Government of the District of Columbia Citywide Call Center : (202) 727-1000 TTY/TDD Directory - - Telephone Directory by Topic - | - Agencies - | - DC Council | Search | Elected Officials - - - Feedback - | Translation - | - Accessibility - | - Privacy 
