Skip common site navigation and headers United States Environmental Protection Agency Technology Transfer Network Air Toxics Website Contact Us | Print Version Search: __________ Run Search Begin Hierarchical Links EPA Home 
"Integrated rule development" refers to the concurrent development process of two separate rules: 1) NESHAP for the paper and other web coatings (POWC) hazardous air pollutant (HAP) source category pursuant to Section 112(d) of the Clean Air Act (CAA), and 2) regulatory action for the Paper, Film, and Foil volatile organic chemicals (VOC) category pursuant to Section 183(e) of the CAA.
Section I of these minutes includes an overview of the presentations, and Section II includes comments expressed and questions raised during the meeting and EPA's responses.
A list of meeting attendees, including those attending via teleconference, is attached as Attachment 1.
The meeting handouts are compiled in Attachment 2.
I. OVERVIEW OF PRESENTATIONS
Trish Koman, the EPA project leader, began the meeting by introducing the POWC project team, consisting of herself and contractor staff, headed by Dr. Donna Lee Jones of EC/R Incorporated.
Ms. Koman works in the Coatings and Consumer Products Group (CCPG), within the Emission Standards Division (ESD) of the Office of Air Quality Planning and Standards (OAQPS).
The following information was made available to stakeholders for the meeting:
1) meeting agenda; 2) issue memorandum dated January 5, 1998; 3) project update dated October 22, 1997; 4) Printing 
Items 1, 2, and 7 are included in Attachment 2.
Ms. Koman proceeded with introductions of meeting attendees.
She presented the objectives of the meeting by reviewing the meeting agenda, which included data gathering, maximum achievable control technology (MACT) applicability, and compliance initiatives and methods.
An open discussion period was also scheduled.
Ms. Koman reviewed a timeline with benchmarks for the integrated rule development.
She emphasized the value of industry involvement, whether newly initiated or continued, since there are one and one-half years remaining till the proposal of the POWC MACT standards.
The current schedule for the POWC NESHAP was presented as follows:
POWC NESHAP Presumptive-MACT May 1997 Data gathering, analysis, and model plants mid-1998 Regulatory options late-1998 Economic Impacts early-1999 Proposal November 1999 Promulgation November 2000
Industrial Surface Coating Rule Development Home Page on EPA Website
Dr. Nancy Pate of EPA/OAQPS Information Transfer and Program Integration Division's (ITPID's) Information Transfer Group (ITG) presented information on accessing sites of interest to POWC stakeholders.
Dr. Pate demonstrated the industrial surface coating rule development home page on the EPA web site 
The web address to access information on coating regulatory projects is 
Documents such as Presumptive-MACT (p-MACT), meeting agendas, and meeting minutes are organized by project.
Other EPA sites of interest include the OAQPS Technology Transfer Network (TTN) page 
gov/ttn/atw
Dr. Pate also explained that Federal Register notices not available at the EPA website may be accessed through the Government Printing Office website 
For information related to Section 112(r) of the CAA, she referred to the website at 
For information on "Form R" used for Toxic Release Inventory (TRI) reporting, she referred to the "right-to-know" network 
Dr. Pate also mentioned that the EPA plans to place entire rulemaking dockets (not just indices) on-line and make them accessible through web interfaces.
Current Data Gathering Issues
Dr. Jones of EC/R Incorporated presented information on data gathering for the POWC project.
Data gathering efforts include surveys, site visits, state and local regulations, and permit data as well as discussions with industry groups.
* Survey Status
A primary facet of data gathering has been collecting and analyzing information from CAA Section 114 surveys of facilities within certain industry sectors.
Dr. Jones explained that three industry sectors were identified and surveyed, based on the standard industrial classification (SIC) codes corresponding to the highest actual emissions reported in the TRI database.
These sectors are the pressure sensitive tapes and labels (PST), flexible vinyl and photographic film (Film), and industrial and decorative laminates (IDL) sectors, respectively.
The project team is currently analyzing survey data separately for each sector.
Data entry, analysis, and various quality assurance (QA) procedures (such as checking control efficiency calculations and whether a chemical reported as a HAP is listed a HAP) are being conducted.
When these tasks are completed, the team will view the data across the sectors and conduct additional analyses with reference to substrate, coating type, and type of operation.
Data analyses performed thus far indicate high levels of emissions control.
The best add-on controls are thermal oxidizers (TOs) with permanent total enclosure.
The EPA recognizes the feasibility of more than 98 percent pollutant destruction efficiency for TOs, as stated in published reference materials.
Dr. Jones noted that the EPA realizes that solvent recovery systems may not achieve an overall control efficiency as high as that of TOs; as far as results of data analysis will permit, the EPA will attempt to include pollution prevention provisions in the standards.
Other control techniques found in surveyed facilities include the use of low-solvent technologies, such as water-based and hot-melt coatings.
Specific survey results will be presented at a subsequent stakeholder meeting, possibly in June 1998.
Some data gaps have been identified during data gathering on the project.
One is the lack of quantitative data on emissions from mixing and storing coatings.
Other data gaps are discussed below in relation to specific coatings and techniques.
Dr. Jones encouraged attendees to provide their input on data gaps.
* Specific Coatings and Techniques
Dr. Jones explained that the project team is examining four areas from the survey data, namely vinyl coating, plastisol coatings, silicone/release coatings, and extruding and calendering.
These areas were initially uncovered following an examination of state/district regulations for VOC from paper and other web coating activities.
A handout, the "Issues to Consider for the POWC MACT Project" memorandum, summarizes these four areas.
Ms. Koman added that the team may also broadly examine adhesives to determine if there are any fundamental differences from decorative coatings.
For the 22 states whose environmental regulations were investigated, 14 have separate regulations for the coating of vinyl substrates.
Of these 14 states, 12 set the vinyl coating VOC emissions limit less stringent than the paper coating limit (3.8 lb VOC/gal for vinyl vs. 2.9 lb VOC/gal for paper).
The project team is attempting to determine the technical basis for the unique, higher emissions limit for vinyl coating and whether the POWC survey data reflect a lower control ability for facilities conducting vinyl coating.
The South Coast Air Quality Management District (SCAQMD) in California has a separate regulation for the use of plastisol coatings on paper, film, and foil.
Plastisol coatings are dispersions of polyvinyl chloride (PVC) in a plasticizer and have higher solids content than other vinyl solutions.
They are used to create a plasticized film of PVC on substrates.
The SCAQMD has set the VOC emissions limit for the use of plastisol coatings (0.17 lb VOC/gal) much more stringent than other coatings used on paper, film, and foil (2.2 lb VOC/gal).
The SCAQMD's reasoning is that plastisols are very high solids formulations; thus, emission levels can be maintained or driven lower with a unique and stricter regulation for plastisol coatings.
The project team is looking for other data concerning plastisol coatings and is trying to determine whether the POWC survey data reflect a lower emissions limit.
Both release and silicone coatings are generally conceived of as low-HAP emitting (or low-VOC emitting).
Release coatings can be used with labels or tapes.
In a label product, release coating covers the release or mounting paper of a pressure sensitive label, to allow the consumer to remove the label prior to adhering it to another surface.
In a tape product, release coating is applied to the nonadhesive side of the tape, to allow the consumer to unroll it with ease.
Regarding silicone coatings, however, some cases of primarily solvent-based silicone coatings have been encountered; the project team is aware of one facility in EPA Region V (Chicago, Illinois) that uses a control device in conjunction with a coating operation involving solvent-based silicone coatings.
The project team is seeking clarification on how the class of low-HAP emitting coatings should be addressed by the POWC MACT and what types of coatings are consistently low emitters.
One specific question the project team has is the prevalence of solvent-based silicone coatings.
Extruding and calendering are two coating techniques that produce relatively low levels of emissions, according to preliminary survey results.
Extrusion involves forcing a molten polymer resin through a die onto a web substrate.
The molten resin (usually low-density polyethylene) cools into a solid film that coats the web.
This extrusion application is used mostly in packaging (cartons and paperboard) and flexible vinyl product manufacturing.
Calendering is a formation process in which molten material (PVC resins, plasticizers, etc.) is pressed by rollers to form a continuous web that solidifies on cooling.
Calendering is primarily used in flexible vinyl product manufacturing.
The project team is seeking clarification on how the POWC MACT should address these operations.
An important aspect is the extent of current or potential future use of solvents in these operations.
* Additional Site Visits
Dr. Jones indicated that one way to fill data gaps may be through additional visits to facilities.
Not only would these site visits help in resolving existing issues (data gathering, MACT applicability, etc.), but they also may identify other affected industry sectors.
Suggestions from stakeholders for site visits currently include: 1) paper coating operations at a Connecticut facility (offered by Rob Kaufmann of the American Forest 
Dr. Jones also solicited ideas for additional site visits.
Potential Additional Industries for POWC Stakeholders
Ms. Koman discussed how the scope of the POWC source category is still evolving, with the progression of the other coating MACT standards.
The source category already encompasses a variety of web substrates and products, as addressed in the October 22, 1997 project update sent to stakeholders.
Due to the diversity of web products included, the source category may serve as a 'catch-all' for web process coating operations for which another MACT does not exist.
Ms. Koman emphasized her preference for defining scope early in the rule development process.
Trade associations have provided more information about several industry sectors that appear to belong in the POWC source category.
These sectors include abrasives coating (represented by the Coated Abrasives Manufacturers Institute, or CAMI), aseptic/medical packaging (represented by the Aseptics Packaging Council, or APC), fabric coating (aside from textile or carpet manufacturing), plastics coating (represented by the Society of the Plastics Industry, or SPI), and coated rubber products, such as gaskets and sealing devices (possibly represented by the Rubber Manufacturers Association, or RMA).
MACT Applicability Issues
Ms. Koman explained that MACT standard applicability could be determined on the basis of substrates, coating technologies or products, HAP emission sources within a plant, and size of a source.
The applicability of the standards to area sources is also an aspect that needs to be addressed.
Ms. Koman encouraged stakeholder input on MACT applicability issues.
Ms. Koman discussed the coating technologies and types of products under consideration and indicated that Dr. Jones would discuss HAP emission sources within a facility.
* Coating Technologies
The types of coating technologies in this MACT source category include web coating processes not covered under other source categories.
Ms. Koman discussed specific coating technologies and types of products including:
- calendaring and extrusion coating techniques
- rubber products
- silicone and low-emission coatings
- flexible package printing materials
- foil
- fabric
- printing/coating lines
Preliminary data from the survey indicate that calendaring and extrusion processes tend to have low emissions.
Rubber products, which may have calendaring operations, may have higher emissions, but these products may be covered under the Fabric Printing, Coating, and Dyeing NESHAP.
Ms. Koman noted that the EPA has other rulemakings underway that could affect the POWC rule.
For example, the Flexible Package Printing Materials VOC category is scheduled for regulation in 1999 pursuant to Section 183(e) of the CAA.
* Foil/Coil Products
A NESHAP for metal coil coating is currently under development, and because descriptions of coil coating and web coating may be similar, it will be important to distinguish between these.
A potential criterion for differentiating which MACT standard applies is gauge width.
The current New Source Performance Standard (NSPS) uses 0.006 inches, although there are a few coil coaters that coat thinner material.
Ms. Koman suggested that a smaller stakeholder group could be formed to determine how gauge width (or other criteria) could be used to differentiate continuous metal coating processes.
* Fabric Coating, Printing, and Dyeing
Fabric coating, printing, and dyeing encompasses both textiles such as clothing and sheets, and products such as tire cords and circuit boards which use coated fabrics (some in a continuous web coating process).
Ms. Koman explained that the Fabric Coating, Printing, and Dyeing NESHAP will likely address textiles and carpets; other fabric products may be covered by the POWC NESHAP.
However, the RMA has provided information regarding their processes because they may be covered by Fabric Coating, Printing, and Dyeing and/or POWC NESHAPs.
* Printing/Coating Operations
Ms. Koman noted that one of the most difficult technical issues on the project is distinguishing clearly between printing and coating operations.
Printing and coating operations are often conducted on the same line, and novel uses of coatings tend to blur any easy distinction.
Ms. Koman read the definitions provided in the Printing 
Ms. Koman mentioned that she had asked the Flexible Packaging Association to draft language to distinguish between printing and coating.
Because no regulatory language that translates to a meaningful operational distinction has emerged, Tom Loredo, from Reynolds Metals, has suggested equating printing and coating for the purposes of regulation, at least with respect to flexible packaging.
Gary Jones of the Graphic Arts Technical Foundation (GATF) suggested distinguishing between inks and other coatings.
HAP Emission Sources
Dr. Jones explained that coating and laminating lines, substrate formation operations, mixing operations, storage activities, cleaning operations, and wastewater treatment have been identified as HAP emission sources at surveyed POWC facilities.
Coating lines, generally, emit the highest amount of HAP, while wastewater treatment is one of the lowest-emitting, if not nonexistent, HAP sources.
The POWC project team is attempting to determine how these HAP sources should be addressed in the regulation.
The team is also pondering whether it might be most appropriate to form work practice standards (WPS) for those low-HAP emitting sources to be regulated.
Dr. Jones explained that the EPA uses WPS when it is not possible to prescribe or enforce an emission standard.
Work practice standards involve physical actions intended to directly affect emissions reductions, such as keeping cleaning solvent containers closed when not in use.
A specific question is the prevalence of on-site mixing at POWC facilities and whether significant emissions are produced.
Compliance Initiatives
Ms. Koman stated that one of ESD's goals is to promote ease in rule implementation.
The Plain English initiative and the "Permit Friendliness" program are examples of EPA programs that further this goal.
The Plain English initiative involves generating versions of regulatory documents in 'Plain English,' rather than complicated legal jargon.
For example, Plain English format would include the use of second ('you') rather than third person and a question/answer format.
The 'Plain English' documents are designed to be clearer but not necessarily simpler (in terms of content).
The "Permit Friendliness" program seeks to review a draft proposed regulation for its clarity from a permit writer's perspective and involves a set of checklist criteria that evaluate the standards and compliance methods specified.
Ms. Koman added that computer-based compliance assistance sites are also at the forefront of EPA's efforts.
Linda Herring, the CCPG group leader, stated that ESD's director, Bruce Jordan, is interested in continuous emission monitors (CEMs) as a compliance option in upcoming NESHAPs.
Ms. Koman asked the stakeholders and meeting attendees about the extent to which CEMs are currently used by the POWC industry to measure VOC/HAP emissions and the advantages and disadvantages, from both a technical and economic standpoint.
Ms. Koman said that the project team is currently talking to Michael Wax of the Institute of Clean Air Companies (ICAC), a POWC stakeholder group, on CEM use in web coating facilities.
Printing 
Ms. Koman indicated continued use of the P
The P
The former subcategory has one emission limit for a broadly defined source that includes printing presses and other associated equipment (e.g., storage, mixing, and cleaning).
In the latter subcategory, however, the affected source is defined as the printing presses.
Ms. Koman reviewed the compliance provisions of the P
In this rule, compliance options include the use of pollution prevention, that allows substitution of non-HAP chemicals in materials used (coatings, cleaners, and other materials).
Maintaining the efficiency on emissions capture and control equipment may be used to comply with the rule as well.
Combinations of the two main compliance options are also acceptable.
Conclusion of Presentations
Ms. Koman emphasized that information presented at this meeting is only preliminary, and she would welcome comments, including revisions for definitions from the issue memo, as this material will ultimately be used in the background information document (BID).
II.
COMMENTS
The comments of stakeholders and meeting attendees are presented in this section, grouped somewhat by topic, but not necessarily in order of their presentation.
Where applicable, the EPA responses to the comments are included following the comment.
Representativeness of Data Analyzed
Tim Owens questioned whether the high level of emissions control in EPA-surveyed facilities is representative of the universe of facilities falling under the POWC source category.
Mr. Owens remarked that the PST sector has historically been well controlled (due to reasonably available control technology, NSPS, and other programs), and he pointed out that survey responses from PST facilities comprise approximately half of the 200 facilities that responded.
Ms. Koman reassured him that the best effort at obtaining a representative sample was put forth.
Bernie Lipka asked how the EPA assured the accuracy of the completed surveys, noting that the PSTC has had to disregard some responses to its own member surveys in the past because of blatant inaccuracies (e.g., one facility claimed 100 percent capture from a partial hood).
Dr. Jones responded that QA procedures were implemented during the survey data analyses.
As an example, overall control efficiencies were recalculated in cases where controlled emissions were reported as exceeding uncontrolled emissions.
In addition, the EPA benefitted from PSTC's efforts in clarifying the design of the EPA questionnaire.
Tom Godonis stated it seemed that the extent of emission controls found in the surveyed industry sectors was higher than the EPA project team had expected, and he offered the possible explanation that some of the surveyed facilities are well controlled in order to comply with the P
Ms. Koman responded that what was surprising was not a high control efficiency value but rather the large number of thermal oxidizers and permanent total enclosures in use.
Mr. Godonis asked how the EPA applies the 12 percent provision to determine the MACT floor.
Ms. Koman replied that there are several ways in which it can be applied, such as on entire facilities, individual units, or permitted emission levels.
Dave Salman agreed that the EPA has discretion as to how the MACT floor is determined.
Add-On Control Devices
A commenter noted that a regenerative thermal oxidizer does not achieve a destruction efficiency as high as that of a recuperative (once-through) oxidizer.
A recuperative oxidizer might instantaneously achieve a 99.5 percent destruction at a high inlet loading, but to achieve even a 90 or 95 percent destruction efficiency might be difficult at a lower inlet loading.
A commenter stated that a regenerative thermal oxidizer is being installed at his facility; although the oxidizer air stream is not totally clean, a 98 percent destruction efficiency is being achieved.
He noted that there are no historical data for this new unit.
David Yount indicated that a maximum outlet HAP concentration (concentration limit provision) would be preferable to a minimum control device efficiency, in order to account for all variations in the coating operation (such as during low loading).
Paul Narog questioned whether NESHAPs take other environmental impacts (secondary emissions) as well as economic impacts into consideration.
He elaborated that the production of oxides of nitrogen (NOx) and carbon monoxide (CO) from thermal incinerators may offset the environmental benefit of destroying HAPs or VOCs.
Ms. Herring responded that the EPA believes that the operation of TOs to control HAP emissions does not significantly contribute to other pollutant emissions, such as NOx and CO. Mark Hawes stated that North Carolina state regulators are conducting modeling for NOx and CO generation from TOs and solvent recovery units (SRUs).
Mr. Hawes expressed interest in survey data on TOs and permanent total enclosures, specifically whether they are being used with high-flow or low-flow exhaust streams.
Mr. Godonis said fuel availability should be considered when evaluating the suitability of TOs, as a fossil fuel shortage may be on the horizon.
Another commenter indicated the EPA should take SRUs (which process large air volumes) into consideration when establishing the top 12 percent for the MACT floor.
Definition of Source and Other Applicability Issues
Ann Pantle inquired whether the POWC NESHAP will have standards delineated by coating type, in response to the project team's proposed analysis of survey control efficiency values by coating types or technologies.
Ms. Koman stated that the preference is not to subcategorize if the data show sufficient agreement across coating types or technologies, but that no decisions have been made as yet.
Mr. Yount stated that the definition of mixing operations should be clarified to distinguish mixing of the coating for end uses, from mixing during formulation (manufacture) of a coating.
Ms. Koman indicated that all on-site mixing will be counted.
Mr. Owens questioned why it is that in the P
Mr. Salman explained that all the 25 to 30 publication rotogravure facilities (belonging to approximately 4 to 5 companies) in the U.S. use of toluene as the most common solvent, use carbon adsorption solvent recovery systems and conduct material balances for all materials arriving at their sites.
Since storage, mixing, and cleaning materials were inherent to a material balance, the standard for this subcategory was written to include these sources in addition to printing presses.
The data gathered on cleaning, storage, and mixing for packaging and product gravure and wide-web flexography were inconclusive and no MACT loor could be established.
Commenters expressed concern that different rules could apply to different presses at the same plant.
Ms. Pantle expressed concern about a facility's being subject to the POWC MACT if it is only major based on its printing operations.
Ms. Koman responded that the P
Dale Kalina inquired as to how lithography lines should be covered, because they are HAP sources and perform some coating operations.
A lithography operation may be major only by virtue of its being co-located with a flexography operation.
Mr. Salman remarked that there is some use of coatings at the end of a lithography press (unpigmented inks, adhesives, solvent-based finishes, and overprint varnishes).
Ms. Koman acknowledged that separating printing from coating operations on a lithography press would be a puzzle, and she indicated that a likely regulatory approach would be to allow a lithography press to opt into the POWC NESHAP, similar to the allowance for incidental coating under the P
Howard Hofmeister said that for the purposes of averaging, in formulation or testing data, an "incidental coating" determination should contain a de minimis level of HAP; he noted that a de minimis level is incorporated to some extent in the P
Mr. Hofmeister said the POWC NESHAP should limit the HAPs it regulates, as the P
He also requested that the POWC standards include provisions for application of low-solids coatings.
Greg Moeller and Mr. Narog noted that the Miscellaneous Organic NESHAP ("MON") applicability may overlap with POWC applicability.
Mr. Narog of 3M said Ms. Koman would be copied on a letter forthcoming from 3M regarding the MON.
Coating vs. Printing
Mr. Jones expressed concern about the inclusion of inks in a definition of a coating.
The distinction between coating and printing has been problematic, even prior to the start of the POWC MACT project.
Other commenters, including David Ellison, supported equating printing with coating, since the nature of the end product is more significant than the manufacturing operation by which it is made.
183(e) Rulemaking
Ms. Pantle stated that in situations where there are two or more NESHAPs applicable to a facility and one of them has a Section 183(e) (VOC standard) component, there should be sufficient operational flexibility incorporated in the regulations.
This flexibility should allow the facility to comply with the VOC standards at times when the facility does not fall under the NESHAP that has no VOC component.
Participants asked for clarification on the relationship between the HAP rule (under Section 112(d) of the CAA) and the VOC rule (under Section 183(e) of the CAA).
Ms. Koman clarified that these are separate rules, with a common information collection effort by EPA for POWC.
For various VOC categories listed pursuant to Section 183(e), the Agency action will take the form of either a National VOC rule (based on Best Available Control, or BAC) or a control techniques guidelines (CTG) document.
A National VOC rule would typically apply to U.S. manufacturers, suppliers, and distributors of web coatings, while a CTG would likely apply to coatings users located in ozone nonattainment areas, as implemented by State rules.
Categories to be regulated include: Flexible Package Printing Materials (scheduled for regulation by 1999); Paper, Film, and Foil (with a 2003 deadline); and Miscellaneous Industrial Adhesives (with a 2001 deadline).
As defined in Section 183(e), a "consumer and commercial product" means "any substance, product (including paints, coatings, and solvents) or article (including any container or packaging) held by any person, the use, consumption, storage, disposal, destruction, or decomposition of which may result in the release of volatile organic compounds."
The EPA asserts that consumer and commercial products include all VOC-emitting products used in homes, businesses, institutions, and a multitude of commercial manufacturing operations.
Compliance Issues
Commenters conveyed that CEMs are not cost effective and would not be favored by industry.
Ms. Herring explained that the EPA is interested in CEMs for continuous compliance assurance; a 3-hour performance test that shows attainment of a 99 percent control efficiency may not reflect the 'regular' state of operations.
The use of a CEM allows averaging over a longer period of time so that even if a lower average value for control efficiency exists, the EPA is assured of continuous compliance on the part of the facility.
Mr. Kalina asked whether the use of CEMs by facilities then would allow them to be subject to less stringent standards.
Graham Fitzsimons stated that the use of the term 'stringent' is problematic.
Essentially, the EPA attempts to establish emissions limits corresponding to the averaging period that is concurrently specified.
Thus, a higher value for the minimum control efficiency coupled with a three-hour performance test, and a lower value for the minimum control efficiency coupled with a much longer test period with the use of a CEM, actually represent the same degree of control for HAP emissions.
Mr. Narog stated that 3M had used CEMs at one time for measuring emissions from mixing compound adhesives.
A participant questioned whether only emissions monitoring or monitoring of process equipment parameters were being considered as compliance options for the POWC MACT.
Ms. Herring stated that the EPA has flexibility in defining the continuous compliance provisions to incorporate other types of monitoring schemes.
Information from stakeholders on correlations between process parameters and control device performance would be useful to this end.
Mr. Kalina stated that, while the P
Hank Naour commented that job shops should be included in the process of developing standards, especially with regard to compliance requirements.
Mr. Naour suggested that facilities be allowed to volunteer to test "model conditions," to ensure common-sense proposals.
Background Information Document
Mr. Hofmeister inquired about the status of the BID to be published by the EPA for POWC.
Ms. Koman responded that, although difficult for the team to do concurrently with data gathering, BID sections are being drafted as the project proceeds and that the EPA will share chapters as they are ready for outside review.
Ms. Koman acknowledged that by sharing draft chapters with industry early on, EPA can maximize the amount of information available.
Mr. Hofmeister added that by reviewing the BID in draft form, industry members can ensure effective communication between the EPA and industry.
Attendee List for POWC Stakeholder Meeting on January 27, 1998
Name
Company/Affiliation
Telephone Number Kavita Bhatia EC/R Inc. 919-484-0222 Jim Boswell Smith Environmental Corp. 409-448-1010 Dan Bowman EC/R Inc. 919-484-0222 Tommy Carroll Mebane Packaging Group 919-563-3516 Charlie Carter Womble Caryle Sandridge 
The following individuals attended the meeting via teleconference:*
Name
Company/Affiliation George Fuchs National Association of Printing Ink Manufacturers Jennifer Griffith North East Waste Management Officials Association/ NESCAUM Gary Jones Graphic Arts Technical Foundation Peter Mayberry Heathcare Compliance Packaging Council and INDA (the association of the nonwoven fabrics industry) Hank Naour Illinois EPA Bob Nelson National Paint and Coating Association Mary Opfer Fibre Box Association Alex Ross RADTECH International Jeff Shumaker International Paper Michael Wax Institute of Clean Air Companies
* Note: Due to difficulties with the teleconference line, there may have been other individuals attending via telephone who we could not hear identify themselves.
Begin Site Footer
EPA Home | Privacy and Security Notice | Contact Us
