Issued by THE LABOR AND INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS COMMISSION FINAL AWARD ALLOWING COMPENSATION ( Modifying Award and Decision of Administrative Law Judge) Injury No.: 87-004591 Employee: Patrick Bray Employer: Eastern Airlines Insurer: Travelers Insurance Co.
Additional Party: Treasurer of Missouri as Custodian
of Second Injury Fund
Date of Accident: January 21, 1987
Place and County of Accident: Platte County, Missouri
The aboveentitled workers' compensation case is submitted to the Labor and Industrial Relations Commission for review as provided by 287.480 RSMo.
Having reviewed the evidence and briefs and considered the whole record, the Commission finds that the award and decision of the administrative law judge allowing compensation must be modified.
Patrick Bray (employee and claimant) was 48 years old at the time of the hearing in 1996.
He did not graduate from high school but obtained a GED while in the military.
In the military, Mr. Bray was a weapons instructor.
He never attended college.
He took but did not complete some course work in refrigeration and air conditioning.
His entire adult work history has been as a baggage handler or lead baggage person with Eastern Airlines.
He quit work in August 1988 when he could no longer physically endure the demands of the job.
The employer admits that the claimant sustained an injury as a result of an accident arising out of and in the scope of his employment at the Kansas City International Airport.
The claimant had picked up some luggage in both hands and had started to walk on the ramp when he slipped and fell on a mixture of ice and snow.
He landed on "all fours" but it "seemed like I hit everything on the way down" (Tr. 25).
Soon after the accident the claimant began to feel pain in both knees, his back and shoulders.
The accident was reported.
The claimant was off work for several weeks and then returned to his usual position.
The claimant said there was no such thing as light duty.
He began having problems lifting, walking and functioning in the bin of the aircraft.
His back problems made sneezing and coughing difficult.
On August 15, 1988, the claimant quit work.
He has not sought or attempted work since that date.
On December 5, 1988, Dr. Richard Lehman performed bilateral arthroscopies and found the claimant's knees to have severe degenerative disease.
The claimant also had a torn medial meniscus in the left knee.
A hemiarthroplasty of the right knee was performed on August 9, 1989.
The claimant endured work hardening.
Despite the lack of post operative complications, "he did poorly in terms of resolution of his discomfort" (Tr. 612).
Dr. Lehman did not treat the claimant for his back complaints but he does mention in his reports that the claimant had continued back complaints (Tr. 663).
The claimant continues to complain of pain in his knees.
He has seen Dr. Richard Hollocher, an orthopaedic surgeon located in St. Louis, approximately every six months for his knees.
The physician has prescribed anti-inflammatories and pain medication.
Because of financial difficulties, the claimant now is being treated at the Veterans Administration for his knees and back pain.
The claimant understood that he would be a candidate for total knee replacements in the future.
Dr. Lehman indicated that the claimant "might be a candidate in the future for total knee replacement or total knee arthroplasty" (Tr. 613).
The injuries sustained in 1987 were not the claimant's first physical disabilities.
The claimant suffered an injury to his right knee in 1977 when his leg was bumped by some container dollies.
He missed some work as a result of the injury and subsequently was forced to carry a small ball with him.
While working, claimant would place the ball behind his knee, squat, and force cartilage back in place.
He suffered yet another knee injury in 1979 when he was attempting to dislodge a luggage jam.
A coworker unwittingly started the luggage ramp and the claimant's leg "popped" as he scrambled out of the way.
The claimant underwent surgery and lost significant time from work.
After this accident, the claimant was forced to work with a prescribed Lenox-Hill brace which was designed to keep his leg from collapsing.
The claimant wore the brace for five or six years.
Following the 1979 accident the claimant could not engage in sporting activities.
Claimant said he did what needed to be done in order to keep his job.
The claimant also suffered an injury to his right shoulder in early 1980s when he reached to stop some freight from falling.
This resulted in a functional loss of the use of the shoulder.
In 1983 the claimant underwent a resection of the distal clavicle with an acromioplasty and resection of the coracoacromial ligament.
The claimant was off work nearly three months after this surgery.
The claimant also testified that he had suffered a fractured right wrist in 1962 which resulted in some loss of range of motion.
In terms of daily living, the claimant has significant difficulty sleeping, waking five to ten times a night.
He naps during the day.
He can walk short distances of 35 or 40 feet, but not around the block.
He can drive a car but experiences difficulty with his hands and shoulder.
He is afraid he will not get his foot on the brake pedal quick enough because of his knees.
Driving causes him extensive pain.
The claimant can do light grocery shopping but can not lift much more than a carton of milk or a small bag of groceries.
He helps around the house by light dusting, minor meal preparation and taking dishes out of the dishwasher.
He does no home repairs and does not mow the lawn.
He does not participate in any sports although he does purchase a fishing license each year.
He can not sit for more than one hour or lie for more than two hours without the need to alter his position.
The claimant did not believe he was capable of working.
In 1994, the claimant was engaged in a vehicular accident for which he was paid $17,000 in settlement for an injury to his cervical spine.
The claimant did not believe that the car accident aggravated his middle or low back pain which had been constant since the date of the work accident in 1987.
The car accident had no effect on the claimant knees.
The only vocational expert to testify was Michael Dreiling, who is Director of the Return to Work Center for the Menninger Center in Kansas City.
Based on the extent of the claimant's physical limitations and his lack of transferable skills or vocational training, Mr. Dreiling believed the claimant was unemployable in the open labor market.
Medical evidence was presented on behalf of the claimant through the deposition of Dr. P. Brent Koprivica.
The physician opined that the employee was permanently and totally disabled as a result of a combination of all of his injuries, both preexisting and from the 1987 work accident.
Dr. Koprivica specifically rated the claimant as having the following disabilities from the 1987 work accident: 25% permanent partial disability to the right knee, 30% permanent partial disability to the left knee, 10% permanent partial disability to the thoracic spine or a combined permanent partial disability to the body as a whole in the amount of 35%.
Dr. Koprivica rated the claimant as having the following preexisting permanent partial disabilities: 25% to the right knee, 20% for chronic impingement of the shoulder and 10% as a result of a right wrist fracture and 15% permanent partial disability to the lower back for a total overall preexisting permanent partial disability to the body as a whole in the amount of 50%.
Dr. Richard Lehman testified on behalf of the employer/insurer.
He found that the claimant had a 5% permanent partial disability to each knee as a result of the 1987 work accident and that the claimant was capable of working.
The administrative law judge rejected Dr. Koprivica's testimony and found Dr. Lehman credible.
We disagree with the administrative law judge's credibility finding, as is our prerogative when neither expert witness has testified personally before the administrative law judge.
Davis v. Research Medical Center, 903 S.W.2d 557 (Mo.App.
1995).
Dr. Lehman's ratings and statement that the claimant can work are not a true assessment of the claimant's disabilities.
First, Dr. Lehman admitted on cross examination that his five percent ratings to each knee were impairment ratings only.
They were a measure of the anatomical dysfunction based on the American Medical Association guidelines and nothing else.
He had no information regarding the claimant's educational background when he made his rating.
He also did not consider any of the claimant's preexisting conditions.
He admitted to having little experience in performing ratings.
Second, Dr. Lehman previously had said in an April 3, 1991 letter that the claimant was "not gainfully employable" (Tr. 675).
This opinion was given just a few months prior to the date Dr. Lehman found that the claimant had reached maximum medical improvement.
When questioned on cross examination about these conflicting opinions, Dr. Lehman admitted that he had said the claimant was totally unemployable but that was only "during his workup...." of the claimant.
Dr. Lehman's explanation is not persuasive.
Although Dr. Lehman said that this April 3, 1991, opinion was given during a "workup," it was well after surgery and was three and l/2 years post accident.
Throughout Dr. Lehman's treatment of the claimant he wrote repeated letters indicating the severity of the claimant's condition.
On November 15, 1988, Dr. Lehman wrote Travelers Insurance (the employer's workers' compensation insurer) stating that the claimant's condition was "quite severe" (Tr. 658).
On March 13, 1989, Dr. Lehman was of the opinion that the employee could not return to his previous occupation (Tr. 663).
In April 1991, in writing to Cigna Insurance, Dr. Lehman opined that the claimant was not capable of any gainful employment.
We find nothing in the medical records indicating a dramatic improvement in the claimant's condition which could account for the radical shift in Dr. Lehman's opinion.
Dr. Lehman simply gave low percentages of disabilities as to the knees when acting on behalf of Travelers' Insurance, the workers' compensation carrier who was paying his bill.
Yet, when writing to the group disability carrier for the employee, CIGNA, he opined that the employee was permanently and totally disabled and could not perform any work, sedentary or otherwise.
Dr. Lehman is not credible in this case as to the degree of permanent disability or the extent for which the employer/insurer have responsibility.
We accept the findings and ratings of Dr. Koprivica.
Consistent with his opinion, the employer/insurer have responsibility for 35 percent permanent partial disability to the body as a whole as a result of the January 21, 1987 accident.
We specifically reject the administrative law judge's finding that the claimant's disabilities from the work accident are limited to the knees.
Contrary to the finding of the administrative law judge, we fail to find credible evidence that the claimant's back pain resolved "very shortly" after the January 1987 accident (Award page 6).
Numerous treating records validate the chronic back pain of the injured employee subsequent to the 1987 accident.
The claimant's testimony also indicates that he suffered chronic pain after the 1987 accident.
There is nothing in the record to indicate that the claimant is a malingerer or is not credible.
To the contrary, this is a claimant who continued to return to work after several serious injuries.
His fortitude is impressive.
Our award of permanent partial disability against the employer includes Dr. Koprivica's finding of disability to the back.
We also accept Dr. Koprivica's rating as to the extent of preexisting permanent partial disability.
We find that the claimant's overall preexisting disabilities of 50 percent to the body as a whole combine synergystically with his disabilities from the work accident in 1987 to create permanent total disability.
The finding of permanent total disability is based on the opinions of Mr. Dreiling, Dr. Koprivica, the April 1991 report of Dr. Lehman, and the credible testimonies of the claimant and his spouse.
The testimony of the employee and other lay witnesses as to the facts within the realm of lay understanding can constitute substantial evidence of the nature, cause and extent of disability of the injured employee, especially when supported by some medical evidence.
Patchin v. National Super Markets, 738 S.W.2d 166 (Mo.App.
1987).
Although the claimant can perform some minor housekeeping and shopping chores, the evidence supports the finding that the claimant could not hold a job in the open labor market.
An injured employee does not have to be bedridden, in a wheelchair or inert to be declared permanently and totally disabled.
See e.g. Gordon v. Tri-State Motor Transit Co., 908 S.W.2d 849 (Mo.App.
1995), and Blaise v. J.S. Alberici Construction Co., 755 S.W.2d 753 (Mo.App.
1988).
We find that the permanent total disability is the responsibility of the Second Injury Fund because the claimant suffers preexisting permanent partial disabilities which are of "such seriousness as to constitute a hindrance or obstacle to employment or to obtaining reemployment if the employee becomes unemployed."
287.220 RSMo 1994.
Although the claimant continued to work after numerous injuries and accidents, it was not without pain or discomfort.
The claimant was able to continue to work only with the aid of a brace and his "ball" which is described above.
He has had extensive preexisting degenerative arthritis and other disabilities to his wrist, shoulder, back and knee.
Pat Bray lost little time from work because he was a good employee who struggled to continue working.
He should not be penalized for his strong work ethic.
In Wuebbling v. West County Drywall, 898 S.W.2d 615 (Mo.App.
1995), the appellate court held that it was not necessary for the claimant to demonstrate that she missed work or suffered diminished earnings prior to the primary injury.
"[I]t is the potential that the condition may combine 
Wuebbling, at 620.
Based on court's interpretation of 287.220 RSMo 1994, we conclude that the claimant sustained his burden of proving that his preexisting disability was of such seriousness as to constitute an hindrance or obstacle to employment or reemployment.
The Second Injury Fund's liability for permanent total disability should begin as of the date Dr. Lehman, the treating physician, stated that the claimant reached maximum medical improvement.
That date is August 8, 1991 (Tr. 613, 678).
We affirm and adopt the administrative law judge's findings, conclusions and the award as it relates to the award of temporary total disability and past and future medical care.
As for weekly permanent benefits, the employer and its insurer are liable for 35% permanent partial disability to the body as a whole, at the stipulated rate of $156.71 per week for a total of $21,939.40 (140 weeks X $156.71).
The Second Injury Fund is liable for $104.48 per week for a period of 140 weeks beginning August 8, 1991, and thereafter for $261.19 per week for the remainder of the employee's life.
The claimant's attorney Jerry Kenter is allowed a lien in the amount of 25 percent of the award for necessary and reasonable legal fees.
Any past due compensation shall bear interest as provided by law.
The award, findings and conclusions of Administrative Law Judge Mark S. Siedlik, issued January 22, 1997, are affirmed except as modified by this opinion.
His award is attached for purposes of reference.
Given at Jefferson City, State of Missouri, this 29th day of July, 1997.
LABOR AND INDUSTRIAL RELATIONS COMMISSION
Christopher S. Kelly, Chairman
Philip M. Barry, Member
DISSENTING OPINION FILED
Christian C.R. Wrigley, Member
Attest:
Secretary
DISSENTING OPINION
I dissent from the award of the Commission majority.
Although I would have modified the award of the administrative law judge, it would have been to reduce the amount of permanent partial disability award for the disability to each knee and to eliminate the award for future medical care.
The claimant's evidence is simply unbelievable.
The testimony of Dr. Brent Koprivica, a physician retained by the claimant, is unconvincing.
He saw the claimant one time for a disability rating in October 1993.
That was six years after the work accident in 1987.
Dr. Koprivica is not an orthopedic surgeon.
In contrast Dr. Lehman was the treating physician who had monitored the claimant's progress throughout his surgery and recovery.
His an orthopedic physician who does not make a habit out of rating disabilities for employees.
Dr. Lehman's opinion is certainly more credible in light of his expertise and intrinsic knowledge of the claimant's case.
Dr. Lehman indicated that the claimant suffered only some soft tissue trauma to the claimant's knees, which resolved shortly after the fall in 1987.
The real problem was preexisting and progressive arthritis which is not the responsibility of the employer.
The arthritis, according to Dr. Lehman, was attributable in part to the claimant's excessive weight and the structure of his legs.
In light of these facts, the 20 percent permanent partial disability to each knee assessed by the administrative law judge is excessive.
I recognize that Dr. Lehman's opinion of five percent was couched in terms of impairment rather than disability.
I would have assessed ten percent permanent partial disability to each knee, attributable to the work accident in 1987.
I would have found Second Injury Fund liability for additional permanent partial disability, but certainly not permanent total disability.
I also question the appropriateness of the award of medical benefits.
Under Missouri law, to be entitled to future medical benefits, the claimant must present competent and substantial evidence of a causal relationship between the treatment and the accident, establishing that the medical care flows from the accident.
Modlin v. Sun Mark, Inc., 699 S.W.2d 5 (Mo.App.
1985).
The claimant failed to meet this burden.
Dr. Lehman testified that the surgeries he performed were caused by the claimant's preexisting arthritis and not from the work accident.
Dr. Lehman noted that it was the claimant's severe preexisting degenerative arthritis that would necessitate future knee replacements
; not the trauma from the work accident.
Although I would not allow for a credit against the past medical care provided, I certainly would not require the employer to pay for additional future care.
Christian C.R. Wrigley, Member
Employee: Patrick Bray Injury No: 87-004591
Dependents: N/A
Employer: Eastern Airlines
Additional Party: Missouri State Treasurer,
Custodian, Second Injury Fund
Insurer: Travelers Insurance
Checked by: MSS:pjs
FINDINGS OF FACT and RULINGS OF LAW:
Before the
DIVISION OF WORKERS'
COMPENSATION
Department of Labor and Industrial Relations of Missouri
Jefferson City, Missouri
Issued by DIVISION OF WORKERS' COMPENSATION WC-32-R1 (6-81)
This case comes on for hearing on November 6, 1996, before Administrative Law Judge Siedlik in Kansas City, Missouri.
The Division has jurisdiction to hear this cause pursuant to 287.110 R.S.Mo.
The claimant, Patrick Bray, was represented by counsel Mr. Jerry Kenter.
The employer and insurer were represented by their counsel, Mr. Lee Baty.
The Missouri Treasure as Custodian of the Second Injury Fund was represented by their counsel, Mr. Randall Collins.
Claimant alleges injuries on or about January 21, 1987, while in the employ of Eastern Airlines.
At the time of the injuries, the employer's Workers' Compensation liability was insured by Travelers Insurance Company.
The claimant's weekly wages of $684.00 establish agreed upon compensation rates of $261.19 over $156.71.
The employer has paid weekly benefits totaling $22,462.34, and medical expenses of $57,554.00 have been paid by the employer and insurer.
The issues to be resolved at trial include:
1) the need for future medical care;
2) the nature and extent of permanent disability; and
3) the liability of the Second Injury Fund.
The evidence at trial consisted of the testimony of the claimant, his spouse, and Mr. Michael Dreiling in person.
The deposition testimony of Dr. Lehman and Dr. Koprivica were also admitted, together with various medical records and reports.
In Claimant's Exhibit H, the medical records enclosed in tabs numbered 7, 8 and 9 were not admitted into evidence.
Further, the medical report dated January 12, 1982, within tab number 5 of Exhibit H was not admitted into evidence.
The claimant testified that while in the course and scope of his employment for Eastern Airlines, he was injured on January 21, 1987, a fact not disputed by the parties.
The claimant began working for Eastern Airlines in 1969.
Prior experience of the claimant included attendance without completion of a heating and air conditioning course after the claimant's service in the United States Army as a weapons instructor.
The claimant did not graduate high school but received his GED while in the service.
The claimant's entire working career at Eastern Airlines was that of a baggage handler, both in the St. Louis and Kansas City airports.
In January 21, 1987, claimant was employed as a lead ramp serviceman, and while so employed was carrying baggage over an icy slope, slipped and fell injuring his knees, back and shoulders.
From the injuries of January 21, 1987, the claimant returned to work in February 1987 and related to company doctors no shoulder complaints, intermittent mild back pain and no knee complaints.
The claimant testified after his return to work in February 1987, he had difficulty squatting and lifting as well as discomfort crawling into
airplane baggage compartments.
The claimant resigned from Eastern Airlines in August of 1988, because the claimant testified he could no longer tolerate the pain in his back and both knees, leaving him unable to do his job.
Claimant in August 1988 began to see Dr. Martin and, later, Dr. Lehman for ongoing knee complaints, and after initial attempts of conservative treatment, the claimant had multiple surgeries to both knees, with a partial replacement of the right knee.
Claimant was released from treatment in December 1989.
The claimant testified his job at Eastern Airlines was largely heavy manual labor throughout his working career.
The claimant was charged with handling mail and cargo and loading it into various airplanes, as well as attending a conveyor belt which frequently jammed, requiring the claimant or others to move down the cargo belt to allow the movement of cargo.
Claimant testified he had to move cargo weighing up to 500 pounds with assistance and frequently had to move cartons of up to 200 pounds alone.
Claimant also testified other job experience included that of a house painter, which he had done during layoffs at Eastern Airlines in the past.
The claimant testified prior to January 21, 1987, he had numerous other medical conditions which he contends impaired his employability.
The claimant testified he had a right wrist fracture as a child in 1963 which he testified caused no problems as they related to his work.
The claimant also testified he had prior knee injuries in 1970 and 1979 which resulted in surgery to his right knee in 1979.
Claimant also suffered an injury to his right shoulder in 1983 for which surgery was performed to correct chronic impingement syndrome.
After normal recoveries, the claimant returned to his same duties at Eastern Airlines without change in job duties or restrictions.
The claimant did, however, testify he wore a knee brace after the 1979 injury to allow him to keep working.
The claimant testified that his knees, back and shoulders hurt all the time, and his daily activities have been severely limited because of his discomfort.
Claimant at times uses a cane to walk because of the instability of his knees, cannot sit or stand for long periods without frequent movement.
The claimant testified he currently takes a number of prescription medications which cost approximately $200 per month for conditions including high blood pressure, impotency, anxiety, upset stomach, and pain and inflammation of the joints for which he takes anti-inflammatory medication.
The claimant testified he will need additional surgeries to both knees with the likelihood of full knee replacements at some point.
Vocational Evidence
The claimant was interviewed by Mr. Michael Dreiling, the vocational expert who testified at trial.
Mr. Dreiling reviewed the medical treatment and physical restrictions placed on the claimant and interviewed the claimant.
Mr. Dreiling noted the claimant received his GED while in the Army, was trained in the service as a weapons instructor, and had no other vocational training or experience.
The claimant was found to have worked primarily as a baggage handler his entire career, a heavy job, with brief periods of time working as a house painter.
Mr. Dreiling performed no aptitude or intelligence testing, and did no physical functional capacities tests, testifying he wasn't asked to perform those types of tests.
Mr. Dreiling opined based on the medical reports reviewed that the claimant was unemployable and permanently and totally disabled, having no transferrable skills and in need of work accommodations to allow the claimant to sit or stand as needed.
On cross-examination, Mr. Dreiling admitted that his opinion would change regarding the claimant's employability if medical opinions on employability suggested that the claimant was, in fact, employable in a sedentary capacity with some accommodation.
Mr. Dreiling, in response to questioning, indicated his opinion would certainly change based on Dr. Lehman's testimony that the claimant was employable in a sedentary capacity, admitting the importance of that doctor's opinion in the resulting change in Mr. Dreiling's own opinion regarding the claimant's abilities.
Mr. Dreiling did not, however, review any additional reports or amend his testimony, although admitting his testimony would, in fact, change.
Mr. Dreiling did no market studies to determine the claimant's employability or find that vocational rehabilitation would be helpful.
Medical Evidence
Claimant was treated for his January 21, 1987, injuries by Dr. Lehman, an orthopedist in St. Louis Missouri, and his deposition testimony is in evidence.
(Employer and Insurer Exhibit No. 1) Dr. Lehman first saw the claimant in September 1988 and after taking a history of the claimant's condition, performed an examination.
Dr. Lehman was authorized by the employer to treat the claimant's injuries from his January 21, 1987, accident to perform surgeries on both knees.
Dr. Lehman recommended and performed an arthroscopy in both of the claimant's knees.
As a result of these arthroscopies, Dr. Lehman found bone-on-bone changes on the medial aspect of the claimant's right knee with severe degenerative arthritis and a torn medial meniscus on the left knee with severe degenerative arthritis.
Subsequent to this diagnosis, Dr. Lehman repaired the tear in the left medial meniscus and performed a partial replacement of the right knee.
Following these procedures, Dr. Lehman placed the
claimant at maximum medical improvement in December of 1989.
Dr. Lehman opined the claimant had a permanent partial disability of five percent of each knee from the work injuries of January 21, 1987, noting the claimant had preexisting degenerative arthritis so severe that additional medical treatment and probably knee replacements will be necessary in the future.
Dr. Lehman further opined the surgeries he did perform were because of the claimant's preexisting arthritis, and not from the work accident.
Dr. Lehman also indicated he found no permanent partial disability in the claimant's back or shoulder from the January 21, 1987, accident.
Dr. Lehman in his deposition testimony indicated he felt the claimant was employable in some sedentary capacity.
The claimant was examined for rating purposes by Dr. Koprivica on behalf of the claimant, who saw the claimant on one occasion, October 4, 1993, and his deposition testimony is in evidence.
(Claimant's Exhibit F) Dr. Koprivica reviewed medical records provided, and after soliciting from the claimant a history of complaints and conditions, performed an examination.
Dr. Koprivica found the claimant to have had prior injuries including a fractured wrist, a shoulder injury which required surgery, two prior injuries to the right knee, one of which required surgery, and a sprain or strain to the low back and hip.
Dr. Koprivica noted these prior conditions and felt they were hindrances to the claimant's employability, contrary to testimony of the claimant.
Dr. Koprivica further noted the January 21, 1987, accident and subsequent surgeries to the claimant's knees.
Dr. Koprivica notes the claimant complained of injuries to his back and shoulder from the fall on January 21, 1987, and opined from these injuries the claimant had permanent partial disability of 25 percent of the right knee, 30 percent of the left knee, and 10 percent of the body relative to a back strain, resulting in an overall disability of 35 percent of the whole body.
Dr. Koprivica noted in addressing the claimant's preexisting conditions that the claimant's prior right knee injury attributed 25 percent to the overall 50 percent disability to the right knee and Dr. Koprivica further opined the claimant had a permanent partial disability of 20 percent to the right shoulder, 10 percent of the right wrist, and 15 percent of the whole body relative to the prior low back strain, resulting in 50 percent overall whole body disability preexisting the January 21, 1987, accident.
Dr. Koprivica indicated in his opinion that the claimant, from his preexisting conditions, as well as his injuries of January 21, 1987, is unemployable and permanently and totally disabled, and likely to need future medical treatment for his injuries to his knees.
Findings
It is well established in the State of Missouri that the burden is on the employee to prove all material elements of his claim.
Bever v. Howard, 736 SW 2d 78 (Mo.App.
1987).
Further, the Commission is charged with the responsibility of passing on the credibility of all witnesses, and it is not obligated to accept the employee's testimony as true even though no contradictory or impeaching evidence is introduced.
Raef v. Stock, 416 SW 2d 201 (Mo.
App. 1967) and Hawkins v. Emerson, 676 SW 2d 872 (Mo.App.
1984).
When the Second Injury Fund is involved in the case, to establish any liability against the Second Injury Fund, proof of a condition preexisting a work related accident is not proof of causation in determining overall disability.
Further, Section 287.220 R.S.Mo. 1994, which establishes the Second Injury Fund, provides when and what compensation shall be paid from the Fund in cases of permanent disability where there has been previous disability.
See Stuart v. Johnson, 398 SW 2d 850 (Missouri 1966).
I find after careful review of the evidence and testimony presented, the greater weight of the more credible evidence leads me to conclude the claimant has met his burden of proof to establish a compensable work related accident and prior conditions of ill which involve the Second Injury Fund.
I find also the claimant has met his burden of proof to establish by medical expert opinion that the claimant will need additional medical treatment to cure and relieve the condition of both knees.
I find the testimony of the treating doctor, Dr. Lehman, credible and his findings of the claimant as employable in a sedentary capacity, with restrictions, and that the majority of the claimant's knee problems are from degenerative arthritis.
This arthritic condition, however, was asymptomatic prior to January 21, 1987, by a review of the evidence presented.
Dr. Lehman also attributed no disability to the claimant's shoulder and low back, those injuries alleged to have taken place January 21, 1987, but within days to a few weeks after the injuries themselves, any complaints regarding the back and shoulder as completely resolved as indicated by the testimony of the claimant and the history as provided to Dr. Lehman.
Dr. Lehman opined that the claimant had, from the work accident of January 21, 1987, 5 percent permanent partial disability to each knee, an amount I feel is unreasonable in light of the surgical procedures performed and the present but asymptomatic arthritic conditions which were made symptomatic by the injuries of January 21, 1987.
The testimony of Michael Dreiling, a vocational expert, I find fails to establish the claimant's conditions regarding employability or unemployability, since Mr. Dreiling was not given complete medical records, performed no tests of a vocational nature in rendering his opinions.
This becomes relevant when, in his testimony, Mr. Dreiling finds the claimant is unemployable, without transferable skills, but
when presented with Dr. Lehman's opinions that the claimant is, in fact, employable in sedentary work with restrictions, indicated that this information would certainly change his opinions.
Mr. Dreiling did not, however, request leave to examine additional medical records, or on redirect examination indicate how his opinion might change, leaving the court with his opinion that the claimant is, one must surmise by Mr. Dreiling's own answer, employable.
Dr. Koprivica, who examined the claimant over six years post accident, attributes permanent disability to the fractured wrist from a childhood accident, to the whole body for a back sprain involving no lost time or treatment, and from a prior shoulder surgery as well as a prior knee surgery.
These preexisting conditions, Dr. Koprivica opines, total 50 percent of the whole body disability, significant for its excess in light of the fact that the claimant performed duties that a fair reading of the testimony would deem to be heavy physical labor on a daily basis with the only accommodation being that of wearing a right knee brace after the 1979 surgery.
The claimant was losing no time from work and did not require accommodations to perform his job.
For the last injury in January of 1987 to which Dr. Koprivica attributes disability to the back and shoulder as well as both knees, I find not credible, because claimant's own testimony and reports to the treating doctor indicate near complete resolution of any complaints to the shoulder and back very shortly after the January 21, 1987, accident.
I find therefore the claimant has a permanent partial disability of 20 percent of each knee (64 weeks) which is the result of the January 21, 1987, accident and the responsibility of the employer and the insurer.
I find no permanent partial disability to the back or shoulder from the injuries of January 21, 1987.
Claimant had a preexisting condition involving a prior injury to the right knee to which a permanent partial disability of 25 percent of the right knee was attributed (40 weeks), and an operated right shoulder condition to which I attribute 20 percent permanent partial disability of the right shoulder (46.4 weeks).
I find the claimant's overall disability is greater than the sum of individual injuries and find the Second Injury Fund is liable for 18.8 weeks, the amount of enhanced disability.
The employer and insurer is therefore directed to pay the claimant $156.71 per week for 64 weeks, a total of $10,029.44, and the Second Injury Fund is directed to pay the claimant $156.71 per week for 18.8 weeks, a total of $2,946.15.
The employer is responsible for future medical care as needed for the claimant's knees, as directed by authorized medical providers.
There is evidence offered to suggest the claimant is unemployable, but I find more convincing the testimony that the claimant is employable with restrictions.
Claimant, with restrictions on standing and sitting, has use of his upper extremities and does not in this Court's opinion become permanently and totally disabled from knee injuries or the knee injuries alone in combination with the claimant's preexisting conditions.
I find claimant the claimant's attorney, Mr. Jerry Kenter, entitled to attorney fees of 25 percent of sums recovered.
Date: ______________________ Made By: ____________________________
Administrative Law Judge
Division of Workers' Compensation
Mark S. Siedlik
A true copy: Attest:
________________________________
Director
Secretary
