MEDLINEplus Health Information: A service of the National Library of Medicine and the National Institutes of Health Print this page Close this window To print this page, use the print option from your browser.
To close this window, click on the "x" in the upper right hand corner of the window.
Medical Encyclopedia: T (thymus derived) lymphocyte count
URL of this page: http://www.nlm.nih.gov/medlineplus/ency/article/003516.htm
Alternative names T cell counts; CD4 count; CD3 count; T-lymphocyte count
Definition A test that measures the amount of T-lymphocytes (a type of white blood cell) in the blood.
How the test is performed
Adult or child: Blood is drawn from a vein (venipuncture), usually from the inside of the elbow or the back of the hand.
The puncture site is cleaned with antiseptic, and a tourniquet (an elastic band) or blood pressure cuff is placed around the upper arm to apply pressure and restrict blood flow through the vein.
This causes veins below the tourniquet to distend (fill with blood).
A needle is inserted into the vein, and the blood is collected in an air-tight vial or a syringe.
During the procedure, the tourniquet is removed to restore circulation.
Once the blood has been collected, the needle is removed, and the puncture site is covered to stop any bleeding.
Infant or young child: The area is cleansed with antiseptic and punctured with a sharp needle or a lancet.
The blood may be collected in a pipette (small glass tube), on a slide, onto a test strip, or into a small container.
Cotton or a bandage may be applied to the puncture site if there is any continued bleeding.
In the laboratory, the white blood cells are separated from other blood cells.
A stain or other substance that "labels" the cells is added to help identify which type of white blood cells are present.
B and T lymphocytes look the same under an ordinary microscope.
However, they may be differentiated with an electron microscope.
B or T lymphocytes may also be counted using immunofluorescence or by flow cytometry.
T cells can also be differentiated by the E rosette test (Blood is mixed with sheep red blood cells.
The T cells will cling to the sheep cells and produce a distinctive rosette pattern).
How to prepare for the test Adults: No special preparation is necessary.
Infants and children: The physical and psychological preparation you can provide for this or any test or procedure depends on your child's age, interests, previous experiences, and level of trust.
For specific information regarding how you can prepare your child, see the following topics as they correspond to your child's age: * Infant test or procedure preparation (birth to 1 year) * Toddler test or procedure preparation (1 to 3 years) * Preschooler test or procedure preparation (3 to 6 years) * Schoolage test or procedure preparation (6 to 12 years) * Adolescent test or procedure preparation (12 to 18 years)
How the test will feel When the needle is inserted to draw blood, some people feel moderate pain, while others feel only a prick or stinging sensation.
Afterward, there may be some throbbing.
Why the test is performed A count of the T cells may be helpful in the diagnosis of immunodeficiency diseases and lymphocytic diseases.
It is also used to monitor the response to therapy for these type of diseases.
Lymphocytes are white blood cells that are part of the immune system.
T lymphocytes (T-cells) act directly (cellular immunity) to fight diseases or organisms, stimulate B lymphocytes (helper T-cells), or suppress some B lymphocyte functions (suppressor T-cells).
Normal Values
Lymphocytes make up 16-45% of white blood cells.
Of those lymphocytes, about half are T cells, a quarter are B cells, and another quarter are natural killer cells.
* Helper T-cells, also known as absolute CD4+ or T4 count: more than 400 per microliter, or 32-68% of lymphocytes * Suppressor T-cells, also known as absolute CD8+ or T8 count: 150-1000 per microliter
What abnormal results mean Greater-than-normal T-cell levels may indicate: * Infectious mononucleosis (sometimes) * Multiple myeloma * Acute lymphocytic leukemia
Less-than-normal T-cell levels may indicate: * Congenital T-cell deficiency (rare) * Congenital immunodeficiency disorders * Acquired immunodeficiency disorders * Leukemias * Cancer * Hodgkin's * Acute viral infection * Waldenstrom's macroglobulinemia * AIDS * Side effect of radiation therapy * Effect of aging
What the risks are Risks associated with venipuncture are slight: * Excessive bleeding * Fainting or feeling light-headed * Hematoma (blood accumulating under the skin) * Infection (a slight risk any time the skin is broken) * Multiple punctures to locate veins Note: This test is often performed on people with altered immune systems.
Therefore, the risk for infection may be somewhat greater than when venipuncture is performed on a person with a normal immune system.
Special considerations This test can be affected by: * Stress * Surgery * Chemotherapy medications * Corticosteroids * Immunosuppressive medications * X-rays
A flow cytometric measurement is more accurate than manual counts.
People with decreased T lymphocytes may not react to diagnostic skin tests.
Veins and arteries vary in size from one patient to another and from one side of the body to the other.
Obtaining a blood sample from some people may be more difficult than from others.
Update Date: 1/5/2002
Updated by: Camille Kotton, M.D., Infectious Diseases Division, Massachusetts General Hospital and Brigham and Women's Hospital, Boston, MA. Review provided by VeriMed Healthcare Network.
adam.com logo
The information provided herein should not be used during any medical emergency or for the diagnosis or treatment of any medical condition.
A licensed physician should be consulted for diagnosis and treatment of any and all medical conditions.
Call 911 for all medical emergencies.
Links to other sites are provided for information only -- they do not constitute endorsements of those other sites.
Copyright 2002 A.D.A.M., Inc.
Any duplication or distribution of the information contained herein is strictly prohibited.
