FAS Online logo Return to the FAS Home page [spacer.gif] FAS Logo II The following text is intended for general reference only.
It is currently under review for accuracy and completeness, as well as formatting.
Minister for International Trade [emblem] Ministre du Commerce International
Ottawa, Canada K1A 0G2
SEP -4 1997
The Honorable Charlene Barshefsky United States Trade Representative 600 17th Street, N.W. Washington D.C. 20508 USA
Dear Ambassador Barshefsky:
I would like to confirm the following understanding reached between the delegations of the United States of America ("United States) and Canada concerning, trade in refined sugar and sugar-containing products.
Beginning in the 1997-1998 quota period, the United States will allocate to Canada in accordance with Article XIII of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade 1994 ("Article XIII") a share in the in-quota quantity of the U.S. tariff-rate quota:
(a) for refined sugar provided for in Additional U.S. Note 2 ("refined sugar TRQ"); and
(b) for sugar-containing products provided for in additional U.S. Note 6 ("SCP TRQ") to chapter 17 of the Schedule of the United States annexed to the Marrakesh Protocol to the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade 1994 ("GATT 1994").
To this end, the United States will, consistent with Article XIII:
(1) The United States will allocate to Canada a share in the in-quota quantity of:
(A)
Where for any tariff-rate quota period Canada informs the United States that Canada will not supply the full amount of the share of the SCP TRQ allocated to Canada as described in paragraph (1), the United States will transfer expeditiously the quantity of the share that Canada will not supply to the quantity of the SCP TRQ that is not allocated among supplying countries.
the SCP TRQ of not less than 59,250 metric tons for sugar-containing products that are the product of Canada.
The United States will also permit access to the in-quota quantity of the refined sugar TRQ for sugar that is the product of Canada to any quantity of the refined Sugar TRQ that is not allocated among supplying countries, other than any quantity reserved for specialty sugar
.
With respect to any quantity of the refined sugar TRQ reserved for specialty sugar, the United States will permit access for specialty sugar that is the product of Canada for any amount of that reserved quantity that is not allocated among supplying countries.
The United States will not reserve for specialty sugar a quantity of the amount specified in Additional U.S. Note 2 to chapter 17 of the Schedule of the United States annexed to the Marrakesh Protocol to the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade 1994 greater than the quantity reserved during the 1995-96 quota period.
The United States will permit access for the unallocated amounts in a tariff-rate quota period without regard to whether the share allocated to Canada for that period has been filled.
(3) For the purposes of this understanding, the refined sugar TRQ does not include quantities made available under a preferential agreement with a supplying country.
(4)
Where for any tariff-rate quota period Canada informs the United States that Canada will not supply the full amount of the share of the SCP TRQ allocated to Canada as described in paragraph (1), the United States will transfer expeditiously the quantity of the share that Canada will not supply to the quantity of the SCP TRQ that is not allocated among supplying countries.
The United States will provide to Canada reasonable advance notice of the date upon which such a transfer will take effect.
Any transfer under this paragraph will not affect the amount of the share of the SCP TRQ allocated to Canada pursuant to paragraph (1)(B) in subsequent tariff-rate quota periods.
Canada will not pursue dispute settlement proceedings with respect to the sugar-containing products re-export program of the United States so long as this understanding is in effect.
This understanding will remain in effect unless terminated by either party.
Any termination will be effective no earlier than six months from the date on which a party receives written notice from the other party of such termination.
I have the honour of proposing that this letter and your letter of confirmation in reply constitute an understanding between our twogovernments.
Yours sincerely,
/S/
Hon. Sergio Marchi
EXECUTIVE OFFICE OF THE PRESIDENT OFFICE OF THE UNITED STATES TRADE REPRESENTATIVE WASHINGTON, D.C. 20508
SEP 4 1997
The Honorable Sergio Marchi, P.C., M.P. Minister for International Trade 125 Sussex Drive Ottawa, Ontario KIAOG2 Dear Minister Marchi: I am pleased to receive your letter of today's date, which reads as follows:
"I would like to confirm the following understanding reached between the delegations of the United States of America ('United States') and Canada concerning trade in refined sugar and sugar-containing products.
"Beginning in the 1997-1998 quota period, the United States will allocate to Canada in accordance with Article XIII of the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade 1994 (Article XIII') a share in the in-quota quantity of the U.S. tariff-rate quota:
(a) for refined sugar provided for in Additional U.S. Note 2 ('refined sugar TRQ'); and
(b) for sugar-containing products provided for in additional U.S. Note 6 ('SCP TRQ') to chapter 17 of the Schedule of the United States annexed to the Marrakesh Protocol to the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade 1994 ('GATT 1994').
"To this end, the United States will, consistent with Article XIII:
"(1) The United States will allocate to Canada a share in the in-quota quantity of:
(A)
the refined sugar TRQ of not less than 10,300 metric tons, raw value, for sugar that is the product of Canada; and
the SCP TRQ of not less than 59,250 metric tons for sugar containing products that are the product of Canada.
The Honorable Sergio Marchi Page Two "(2)
The United States will also permit access to the in-quota quantity of the refined sugar TRQ for sugar that is the product of Canada to any quantity of the refined sugar TRQ that is not allocated among supplying countries, other than any quantity reserved for specialty sugar.
With respect to any quantity of the refined sugar TRQ reserved for specialty sugar, the United States will permit access for specialty sugar that is the product of Canada for any amount of that reserved quantity that is not allocated among supplying countries.The United States will not reserve for specialty sugar a quantity of the amount specified in Additional U.S. Note 2 to chapter 17 of the Schedule of the United States annexed to the Marrakesh Protocol to the General Agreement on Tariffs and Trade 1994 greater than the quantity reserved during the 1995-1996 quota period.
The United States will permit access for the unallocated amounts in a tariff-rate quota period without regard to whether the share allocated to Canada for that period has been filled.
"(3) For the purposes of this understanding, the refined sugar TRQ does not include quantities made available under a preferential agreement with a supplying country.
"(4)
Where for any tariff-rate quota period Canada informs the United States that Canada will not supply the full amount of the share of the SCP TRQ allocated to Canada as described in paragraph (1), the United States will transfer expeditiously the quantity of the share that Canada will not supply to the quantity of the SCP TRQ that is not allocated among supplying countries.
The United States will provide to Canada reasonable advance notice of the date upon which such a transfer will take effect.
Any transfer under this paragraph will not affect the amount of the share of the SCP TRQ allocated to Canada pursuant to paragraph (1)(B) in subsequent tariff-rate quota periods.
"Canada will not pursue dispute settlement proceedings with respect to the sugar-containing products re-export program of the United States so long as this understanding is in effect.
"This understanding will remain in effect unless terminated by either party.
Any termination will be effective no earlier than six months from the date on which a party receives written notice from the other party of such termination.
"I have the honour of proposing that this letter and your letter of confirmation in reply constitute an understanding between our two governments."
The Honorable Sergio Marchi Page Three
I have the honor to confirm that the understanding referred to in your letter is shared by my Government, and that your letter and this reply constitute an understanding between our respective governments.
Sincerely,
[S]
Charlene Barshefsky
[spacer.gif]
[spacer.gif] Last modified: Friday, November 07, 2003
