DEPARTMENT OF TRANSPORTATION U.S. COAST GUARD STATEMENT OF
ADMIRAL JAMES M. LOY
ON
COAST GUARD SEARCH AND RESCUE EFFORTS BEFORE THE SUBCOMMITTEE ON COAST GUARD AND MARITIME TRANSPORTATION
COMMITTEE ON TRANSPORTATION AND INFRASTRUCTURE
U.S. HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
NOVEMBER 3, 1999
Good morning, Mr. Chairman and distinguished members of the Subcommittee.
I am Admiral James Loy, Commandant of the United States Coast Guard.
Thank you for the opportunity to appear before the Subcommittee to discuss the Coast Guard's search and rescue mission and capabilities.
Ensuring the safety of mariners, passengers, and the boating public, and particularly providing aid to them when they are in distress, has been a cornerstone mission of the Coast Guard throughout our long history.
Many young men and women are attracted to the Coast Guard because they believe our missions give them an opportunity to make a difference.
Nowhere is that connection clearer than in our commitment to saving the lives of mariners in distress.
In 1831, the Secretary of the Treasury authorized our predecessor, the Revenue Cutter Service, to patrol during the winter for the purpose of providing aid to mariners.
In 1848, Congress authorized and funded equipment for a few safety stations, and in 1878 the U.S. Lifesaving Service was established.
In 1915, the Revenue Cutter Service and Lifesaving Service merged to form the U.S. Coast Guard.
And since then, Coast Guard men and women have carried the title of "Lifesavers."
Throughout the nation's history, our national interest in saving life and property at sea has not fundamentally changed.
However, time and technology have changed the government's methodology for preventing maritime safety threats and responding to mariners in distress.
Along with all of these improvements has come an increased public expectation of government performance and safety in general.
Coast Guard Search and Rescue Efforts
Like calling 911, Americans expect the Coast Guard to respond to their calls for help at sea.
The Coast Guard responds to 40,000 calls for help from the maritime public each year.
Our responses include providing some form of emergency assistance to approximately 80,000 people, saving approximately 4,000 of those from imminent danger.
While most maritime casualties occur in near-coastal waters, it is certainly not true in every case.
In 1980, the Coast Guard coordinated the rescue of 519 passengers and crew from the passenger vessel PRINSENDAM 330 miles from Valdez, Alaska.
In November 1998, after refueling both in Bermuda and at sea aboard a U.S. Navy destroyer, a Coast Guard helicopter crew from Elizabeth City, North Carolina rescued all four crewmembers from the 42-foot sailboat KAMPESKA in 30-knot winds and 20-foot seas, approximately 400 nautical miles off the North Carolina coast.
In April of this year, crews aboard Coast Guard fixed and rotary wing aircraft risked winds up to 50 knots and seas as high as 30 feet to rescue two survivors, both experienced ocean sailors, from the overturned catamaran ACAPELLA approximately 800 nautical miles east-northeast of New York.
These and other offshore cases are clear indicators of the need for a deepwater search and rescue capability.
Our search and rescue efforts also transcend the bounds of the high seas and coastal waters.
The citizens of Grand Forks, North Dakota may never have considered how the Coast Guard touched their lives, but when the swollen Red River flooded their city, the Coast Guard was there to assist.
And very recently, Coast Guard air and boat crews tirelessly rescued over 500 people from New Jersey to North Carolina stranded by devastating floods left by Hurricane Floyd.
The dedicated professionals of the Coast Guard place themselves in harm's way every day by rendering assistance to others in distress.
International Leadership
Increased expectations not only come from the American public, but also from the international maritime community that looks to the Coast Guard as a world leader in the international field of search and rescue.
Maritime commerce and travel are global activities that require a global safety system, and a vital aspect of that safety system is an effective global search and rescue response capability.
The Coast Guard, along with some of our international partners in the search and rescue (SAR) community, are recognized as leaders in developing a family of international treaties, such as the International Convention on Maritime SAR and the International Convention for the Safety of Life at Sea, which help provide a global maritime search and rescue capability.
We are also leaders in helping the Unite Nations' International Maritime Organization (IMO) establish global SAR plans, procedures, techniques, and training.
Our efforts are aimed at integrating SAR Regions (SRRs) encompassing the globe by working with individual countries responsible for their assigned regions.
The SRR for which the U.S. Coast Guard is responsible encompasses about 50 percent of the North Atlantic Ocean and over 75 percent of the North Pacific Ocean, an area in excess of 28 million square nautical miles.
Based on this framework, we have established bilateral agreements with various countries including Russia, China, Japan, and Mexico.
We have also recently concluded a trilateral agreement among the United States, Canada, and the United Kingdom.
International Accomplishments
We have had some particularly noteworthy accomplishments in supporting the global SAR system.
One of the jewels of our International SAR system is the Automated Mutual-assistance Vessel Rescue System (AMVER), which last year celebrated 40 years of being a vital real-world, real-time segment of the maritime safety system.
Endorsed by IMO, AMVER is a global ship reporting system with 12,000 ships participating from 143 nations, which constitutes 40 percent of the world's merchant fleet.
On an average day, over 2,700 ships are on the AMVER "plot" that is maintained by the Coast Guard and are available to effect any necessary rescue or assistance in their transit area.
Although it cannot replace the need for dedicated SAR resources, it is an extremely valuable component of the overall SAR picture.
Despite our best intentions, we cannot possibly have the resources in place at all times when a very real, life-threatening circumstance calls for immediate action and relief.
AMVER has established an impressive lifesaving track record considering that more than 1,400 lives were saved between 1993 and 1998.
In just one case in 1994, six AMVER ships successfully rescued 504 passengers from the Italian cruise liner ACHILLE LAURO, ablaze off the coast of Somalia.
Though AMVER is administered and maintained by the United States Coast Guard, it is indeed a global system available as a very powerful and effective lifesaving tool to rescue organizations throughout the world.
The Coast Guard is also a primary supporter, and the world's largest user, of the multinational Cospas-Sarsat system, which is a satellite-based system credited with saving over 1,200 lives last year, 325 in the U.S alone.
The Cospas-Sarsat system is an extensive network that provides global satellite coverage for the detection of distress beacons on land or at sea, detecting Emergency Position Indicating Radio Beacons (EPIRBs) from ships and Emergency Locating Transmitters (ELTs) from aircraft.
Moreover, the Coast Guard was instrumental in contributing to a new International Aeronautical and Maritime Search and Rescue (IAMSAR) Manual that was recently developed and published by both IMO and the International Civil Aviation Organization (ICAO).
For the first time, this three-volume set provides consolidated guidance to nations on the administration, organization, and execution of search and rescue.
It is being heralded as a landmark document of international cooperation.
We are, in fact, adopting the IAMSAR Manual as the National Search and Rescue Manual of the United States.
In addition, our personnel are working closely with developing nations to help them model their maritime services after the U.S. Coast Guard, since their missions are more akin to ours than they are to those of a blue water navy.
U.S. Waterways
We also carry the leadership mantel at home: the Coast Guard is the maritime SAR authority for the United States.
America's waterways are dangerous places to work and play.
Commercial fishing continues to rank at the top of the most hazardous occupations in the United States, and recreational boating fatalities are second only to motor vehicle highway deaths.
Over 78 million Americans board over 12 million recreational vessels each year.
On average, 800 of these persons perish on the water.
Looking to the future, by 2020 it is estimated that 65 percent more Americans will seek recreational opportunities on the water.
This, in addition to a dramatic increase in high-speed passenger ferries and mega-cruise ships, exposes an increasing number of people to accidents on the water.
The challenges posed by these trends are already beginning to manifest themselves in certain crowded ports.
The Federal government has an abiding interest to protect the lives and property of its citizens and reduce risk through mitigation measures.
Challenges
I could provide heroic stories about search and rescue responses, such as the unbelievable efforts of the Coast Guard and Air National Guard during an incredible supercell storm in 1991, captured in the best-selling book The Perfect Storm; the fishing vessel LA CONTE case in the Bering Sea a couple of years ago, told so well in a series run in The Washington Post; and numerous cases where magnificent Coast Guard professionals saved lives at sea.
Sadly, though, we often learn more dramatic lessons when lives are tragically lost.
In the midst of these losses, we must take time to learn and to take action to prevent such tragedies from recurring.
Challenge: Distress Communications System
The first lesson can be drawn from the sinking of the sailing vessel MORNING DEW and the loss of four lives in the early morning hours of December 28, 1997.
Although a "Mayday" was issued on the radio, it was unintelligible and not perceived as such in the operations center of the local Coast Guard Group.
That is why we are investing to modernize our national distress communications system.
This new system will allow us to better locate the origin of distress calls and to replay enhanced audio messages.
Then, when we receive a position report such as "off Cape Hatteras," we will be better able to narrow our search area, depending on what other information we are able to learn.
This system will provide complete coverage of continental U.S. coastal areas, the Great Lakes, bays, inlets, and river systems.
Presently, local operational commanders have identified over 65 gaps in the lower 48 states and Hawaii.
The system will allow watchstanders to replay enhanced calls, slowing them down and adjusting the quality until the message can be understood, and to determine and preserve an electronic fix when a signal is received.
Since the Coast Guard-wide modernization is not expected to begin in the field until 2002, we are pursuing the installation of some limited short-term capabilities in the interim.
However, we continue to depend upon mariners to understand that voice distress communications to the Coast Guard must include the vessel name, position, and nature of distress for us to provide an effective response.
A significant challenge for us, and an urgent priority, is to upgrade our aging distress communications system.
Challenge: Coast Guard Readiness
In my State of the Coast Guard address earlier this year, I expressed concerns about the Coast Guard's overall readiness.
I would like to thank the Congress for fully funding the President's fiscal year 2000 budget for the Coast Guard.
Our readiness initiative will improve our ability to recruit and retain quality men and women by adding to our recruiter force, increasing enlistment and reenlistment bonuses, and providing targeted special raises to officers and enlisted personnel with certain critical qualifications and/or experience.
It will also allow us to fill critical positions at overburdened Coast Guard units.
To illustrate the second lesson, I'd like to share a sea story.
On Halloween of 1979, I brought CGC VALIANT to the pier in Galveston, Texas, after a long law enforcement patrol.
We granted liberty and I drove home with my family.
Just before 0530 the next morning, my phone rang.
The motor tanker BURMAH AGATE, inbound with a full load of fuel, both bunkers and cargo, had collided with the outbound freighter MIMOSA just outside the Galveston Bay Entrance Channel.
VALIANT was underway within an hour to assume the role of On Scene Commander.
The first 24 hours demanded frantic action to save lives and prevent the disaster from escalating.
When VALIANT arrived, the BURMAH AGATE lay aground, its superstructure aft completely engulfed in flames and other fires raging along its starboard side and on its forecastle.
The MIMOSA was also ablaze, but it was making way, not under command, carving huge circles about her starboard anchor, which she had somehow managed to drop.
Our heroic helicopter crews went on sortie after sortie to rescue crewmen from the burning decks.
The disaster had already killed more than thirty sailors.
It promised to get much worse as the slowly circling MIMOSA worked its way across the buoyed channel, heading inexorably toward a field of active and capped gas pipes and other anchored shipping.
We got our Rescue and Assistance team aboard the MIMOSA, but they could not stop its movement: up forward, the port anchor was frozen in place; back aft, the intensity of the fire kept them from reaching the emergency cut-off valves that would have denied fuel to the engines.
Finally, the combined efforts of a commercial tug and Coast Guard Group Galveston small boats succeeded in fouling her screw, and stopping the burning ship.
One disaster was averted, but we still had two ships on fire, one loaded with 400,000 barrels of oil.
It took six weeks for the fire on BURMAH AGATE to burn itself out, and the work to clean the beaches of Galveston Island lasted until Christmas.
The BURMAH AGATE incident taught me what readiness means to the Coast Guard.
Imagine an athlete so superbly conditioned as to be able to perform any track and field event with world-class proficiency.
This athlete could show up and be ready to pole vault, run a marathon, or throw a shot put with no time to tailor training or nutrition to peak for a certain event on a certain day.
Imagine an athlete who could be called anytime, day or night, even interrupted in the middle of another race, and immediately begin a new event--with no time to rest or prepare--and still maintain world-class standards.
If you can imagine such an athlete, you can imagine the readiness level expected of the U.S. Coast Guard.
Our people maintain the level of response demonstrated in BURMAH AGATE everyday.
Busy Coast Guard men and women successively transition from the high tempo of operations to the urgency of an emergency response.
Responding to a maritime emergency requires our crews to go into harm's way in a harsh and unforgiving environment.
This is painfully evidenced by the loss of three of our Coast Guardsmen in January 1997 when, while responding to a distressed sailing vessel, their 44-foot motor lifeboat rolled in relentless breakers off Quillayute River in Washington State.
Summary
It is very obvious that we must maintain our critical lifesaving capability, as well as maintain our stature as an international leader in SAR.
There are two essential areas.
We have discussed our National Distress and Response System Modernization Project and the vital capabilities that it will give us.
We also need to maintain the other segments of our communications infrastructure.
This includes the Global Maritime Distress and Safety System (GMDSS).
We must also look at the most effective means of distress alerting and response coordination, including the use of satellite communications capabilities.
Our search and rescue planners must make use of computer technology, now and in the future.
It is also obvious that we must look after the health of our ships, boats, and aircraft.
I would like to thank the Congress for its support of our coastal patrol boat and 47-foot motor lifeboat acquisition projects, which recapitalize some of our principal near-shore surface search and rescue assets.
The second essential area that we must focus on is the readiness of our people, the human factor that is so vital in SAR response.
We must attend to getting people with the right skills and experience, and provide them with the right level of training and leadership so that they cannot just succeed, but excel, in our mission of bringing mariners safely home from the sea.
I am proud of what the Coast Guard does every day to ensure the safety of the maritime community and assist those in distress.
Thank you for the opportunity to discuss this important issue with you today.
I will be happy to answer any questions you may have.
