A r c h i v e d I n f o r m a t i o n Achieving the Goals: Goal 8 - Parental Involvement 
The approach in this initiative is to study and evaluate models for partnership development that: * encourage community leaders, diverse organizations and/or interest groups to more effectively coordinate prevention programs and to develop prevention initiatives * to demonstrate that the development of broad-based support within the community can substantially contribute to the reduction of ATOD; and * the encouragement and stimulation in the target community of self-sustaining multifaceted prevention and early intervention programs.
Grants are used to promote and evaluate the development of long-range, comprehensive, multidisciplinary community wide alcohol and other drug abuse coordination and program models through the formation and support of coalitions or partnerships of public, local, and private organizations, agencies and institutions, and consortia and partnerships within local communities.
The partnership should be designed and structured as a community development services coordinating body to enhance, promote, and improve effective prevention program implementation at the local level.
Sub-task groups comprised of representatives from different disciplines, community sub-sets (ethnic or geographic) or organizations are encouraged to be included as a part of the partnership.
Local governments and/or local private non-profit organizations/agencies designated to act on behalf of the larger coalition may apply for funding.
A coalition or partnership is expected to consist of at least seven organizations or agencies.
The community must demonstrate need for prevention services by documenting greater prevalence of alcohol and other drug abuse problems than national averages.
Dave Robbins Division of Community Prevention and Training Center for Substance Abuse Prevention Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration Public Health Service Rockwall Building II 5600 Fishers Lane Rockville, MD 20857 (301) 443-0369
Cooperative Agreements for Drug Abuse Treatment Improvement Projects in Target Cities
This program's objective is to improve the quality and effectiveness of drug treatment services in targeted cities; and to develop drug treatment systems providing high quality, patient-oriented, coordinated, and accessible treatment which should be replicated by other cities.
Under this program, funds may be used to assist in meeting the costs of planning, developing, coordinating and improving the quality and effectiveness of current drug treatment services.
Grant funds must supplement, not supplant, non-federal funds available in the city in which the drug treatment programs exist.
These monies are intended to augment existing programs, and as seed monies to initiate activities whose funding will later be assumed by other sources.
States are allowed to request actual costs up to 5 percent of the total amount awarded for administrative expenses related in to the Treatment Improvement Project.
Eligibility is limited to states requesting support on behalf of only one city with a population of over 266,000, based on 1986 data published in the Statistical Abstract of the United States, 1989 (109th edition) by the U.S. Department of Commerce, Bureau of the Census.
A single state agency for drug abuse treatment (as designated in writing by the governor) may apply.
All programs must have been in existence for two or more years prior to submitting an application.
Ms. Mary Louise Anderson Public Health Advisor Systems Improvement Branch Center Substance Abuse Treatment Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration Public Health Service, Suite 740 Rockwall Building II Rockville, MD 20857 (301) 443-8802
Drug-Free Schools and Communities--National Programs
This program is designed to assist in drug and alcohol abuse education and prevention activities as authorized by the Drug-Free Schools and Communities Act of 1986.
Projects funded under this program assist drug and alcohol abuse education and prevention, curriculum development, and model demonstration activities that address a national concern to reduce the use of drugs throughout the nation.
Institutions of Higher Education, SEAs, LEAs, and non-profits are eligible to apply for funding under this program.
Seledia Shepherd and Gail Beaumont Division of Drug-Free Schools and Communities Department of Education 600 Independence Avenue, SW Washington, DC 20202-6439 (202) 260-2844
Gang-Free Schools and Communities; Community-Based Gang Intervention
The primary objective of this program is to prevent and reduce the participation of juveniles in the activities of gangs that commit crimes.
Such programs and activities may include: * individual, peer, family, and group counseling, including provision of life skills training and preparation for living independently, which shall include cooperation with social services, welfare, and health care programs * education and social services designed to address the social and developmental needs of juveniles * crisis intervention and counseling to juveniles, who are particularly at risk of gang involvement, and their families * the organization of neighborhood and community groups to work closely with parents, schools, law enforcement, and other public and private agencies in the community; and * training and assistance to adults who have significant relationships with juveniles who are or may become members of gangs, to assist such adults in providing constructive alternatives to participating in the activities of gangs.
The program is designed to: * develop within the juvenile adjudicatory and correctional systems new and innovative means to address the problems of juveniles convicted of serious drug-related offenses * provide treatment to juveniles who are members of such gangs, including members who are accused of committing a serious crime and members who have been adjudicated as being delinquent * to promote the involvement of juveniles in lawful activities in geographical areas in which gangs commit crimes; * to promote and support, with the cooperation of community-based organizations experienced in providing services to juveniles engaged in gang-related activities and cooperation of local law enforcement agencies, the development of policies and activities in public elementary and secondary schools which will assist such schools in maintaining a safe environment conducive to learning; * to assist juveniles who are or may become members of gangs to obtain appropriate educational instruction, in or outside a regular school program, including the provision of counseling and other services to promote and support the continued participation of such individuals in such instructional programs * to expand the availability of prevention and treatment services relating to the illegal use of controlled substances by juveniles, provided through state and local health and social services agencies * provide services at a special location in a school or availability of treatment and services for which financial assistance is available.
Overall, the program is designed to reduce the participation of juveniles in the illegal activities of gangs, develop regional task forces involving state, local, and community based organizations to coordinate enforcement intervention, and treatment efforts for juvenile gang members and to curtail interstate activities of gangs.
To be eligible for an award or contract, an applicant must: * respond to legislative requirements and specific program guidelines issued by the Office of Juvenile Justice and Delinquency Prevention (OJJDP) * be consistent with the objectives and priorities of the OJJDP * provide for adequate program administration, evaluation, and fiscal reporting * demonstrate, in the overall quality of the proposal, that the program is technically sound and will achieve the required program objectives at the highest possible level; and * respond to clear and documentable needs.
Emily Martin, Division Director Office of Juvenile Justice and Delinquency Prevention Office of Justice Programs Department of Justice Washington, DC 20531 (202) 616-3633
Interventions with Drug Abusing Parents--Drug Courts
The Drug Courts Program Office funds adult and juvenile drug courts.
Adult drug courts often include parents whose substance abuse affects their children in a variety of ways.
Drug court treatment for adults and juveniles may include family members.
The drug court program for adults may produce drug free babies and more responsible parents for infants and other children of the family.
The Drug Courts Program Office (DCPO) has a cooperative agreement with the American University-Justice Programs Office for the purpose of operating the Drug Court Clearinghouse.
The Clearinghouse collects data on the drug free babies born to drug court participants, as one of their functions.
Based on the data collected by the clearinghouse a total of 254 drug free babies have been born to participants of drug court programs funded by DCPO.
Marilyn Roberts Office of Juvenile Justice and Delinquency Participation Department of Justice Washington, DC 20531 (202) 616-9055
Model Comprehensive Drug Abuse Treatment Programs for Critical Populations
This program is designed to enhance existing drug abuse treatment programs for specific populations called critical populations; adolescents, juvenile justice and residents of public housing, and homeless women and children, racial/ ethnic minorities, and individuals living in rural areas with the ultimate goal of improving treatment for these populations.
Funds may be used by the states to improve existing programs.
New programs are not funded under this program.
States may use funds only to support the particular projects for which funding is provided.
Funds may not be re-budgeted among projects.
No less than 98 percent of the total amount awarded must be allocated for treatment improvement projects performed by sub-recipients.
From any remaining funds, the state may recover up to its actual costs (but in no case for more than 2 percent) of the administration (direct and indirect costs) of the grant.
Funds may be used for expenses clearly related and necessary to carry out the described project, including both direct costs which can be specifically identified with the project and allowable indirect costs of the organization.
Thomas Edwards Center for Substance Abuse Treatment Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration Rockwall II Building, Suite 618 5600 Fishers Lane Rockville, MD 20857 (301) 443-6533
Public Information on Drug Abuse--Information
This program provides leadership, coordination, and facilitation for the involvement of law enforcement in drug prevention and education programs.
Technical assistance publications and information are provided to law enforcement agencies and the general public to assist in drug abuse prevention programs through DEA field offices.
DEA is not a granting agency and does not fund outside programs.
Persons are encouraged to communicate with the field offices of the Drug Enforcement Administration (Appendix XIII) for publications.
Headquarters contact:
Linell Broecker Congressional and Public Affairs Staff Drug Enforcement Administration, Demand Reduction Section Washington, DC 20537 (202) 307-7936
Safe and Drug-Free Schools--State Grants
This program is intended to establish state and local programs of alcohol and drug abuse education and prevention coordinated with related community efforts and resources.
Allocations are made to states and territories.
Each state receives funds based on the state's school-age population and Chapter 1 allocations.
Most of the allocation is administered by state education agencies (SEAs) for drug and alcohol abuse education and prevention programs in local school systems.
The majority of the funds received by an SEA must be granted to local education agencies (LEAs).
The remainder of the amount paid to a state is used by the governor's office for grants and contracts with community-based organizations for the development and implementation of broadly-based programs of violence and drug prevention.
Governors' offices, SEAs, LEAs, and the Insular Areas may apply.
Governor's offices, SEAs, LEAs, Insular Areas, and other public and private non-profit organizations (including parent groups, community action agencies, and other community-based organizations) will benefit as will students and teachers in public and private schools in each state.
Debbie Rudy Safe and Drug Free Schools Program Office of Elementary and Secondary Education U.S. Department of Education Room 604, Portals Building 600 Independence Avenue, SW Washington, DC 20202-6123 (202) 260-3954
Weed and Seed/Safe Havens
Operation Weed and Seed is a comprehensive, multidisciplinary approach to combating violent crime, drug use, and gang activity in high crime neighborhoods.
The goal is to identify drug activity in high crime neighborhoods and then to `seed' the sites with a wide range of crime and drug prevention programs, human service resources, and neighborhood restoration activities to prevent crime from reoccurring.
The strategy emphasizes the importance of a coordinated approach, bringing together federal, state, and local government, the community, and the private sector to form a partnership to create a safe, drug-free environment.
Neighborhoods participating in the Weed and Seed program are required to develop Safe Havens for their communities.
A Safe Haven is a multi-service center where a variety of youth and adult services are coordinated in a highly visible, accessible facility that is secure against crime and illegal drug activity.
It is a place where youth, their parents, and other residents can access needed services, develop relationships, find opportunities to be productive and successful, and enhance skills.
A Safe Haven provides an environment for residents and service providers to revitalize their neighborhood.
Robert M. Samuels Assistant Director Executive Office for Weed and Seed 633 Indiana Avenue, NW, Room 304 Washington, DC 20531 (202) 616-1152 -###- __________________________________________________________________
[Parent Involvement and Input in Department of Defense Schools] [Table of Contents]
