ODJFS Helping Ohioans: The Services and Assistance Programs of ODJFS General Topics (to the right) News 
ODJFS-Women's Programs - Resources
WOMEN IN POLITICS [2by2HorizBar.gif ]
Disclaimer: Links to external websites are for informational purposes only.
The information on external websites is believed accurate but not guaranteed.
ODJFS disclaims liability for any errors or omissions.
Acknowledgement of these websites does not constitute endorsement by ODJFS.
Center for American Women in Politics [8by11DividerYw.gif] www.cawp.rutgers.edu/ The Center for American Women in Politics (CAWP) is a university-based research, education and public service center.
The mission of CAWP is to promote greater understanding and knowledge about women's participation in politics and government and to enhance women's influence and leadership in public life.
This site offers facts about women in U.S. Congress and statewide offices, research and education sources including U.S. public policies and laws, comparative and feminist theory.
Center for Women's Global Leadership [8by11DividerYw.gif] www.cwgl.rutgers.edu/ The Center for Women's Global Leadership (Global Center) develops and facilitates women's leadership for women's human rights and social justice worldwide.
This site offers information about policy and advocacy, leadership and development and women's human rights education.
Global center publications resources, additional women's human rights resources.
The Global Center's programs promote the leadership of women and advance feminist perspectives in policy-making processes in local, national and international arenas.
Since 1990, the Global Center has fostered women's leadership in the area of human rights through women's global leadership institutes, strategic planning activities, international mobilization campaigns, UN monitoring, global education endeavors, publications, and a resource center.
Democracy Net [8by11DividerYw.gif] www.dnet.org DemocracyNet is a public interest site for election information.
Dnet is an interactive website designed to improve the quality and quantity of voter information and educate the public.
The goal of Dnet is to "increase voter understanding of important public policy problems, allow candidates to debate their positions in an "electronic town hall" before on-line audiences, reduce the pressure on candidates to raise campaign funds, foster greater civic participation."
Enter your zip code to find out who's running for offices on your ballot and where the candidates stand on issues you care about.
There is a link to League of Women Voters.
League of Women Voters [8by11DividerYw.gif] www.lwv.org/ The League of Women Voters is a nonpartisan political organization which encourages the informed and active participation of citizens in government, tools to enhance the understanding of public policy and influences public policy through education and advocacy.
This site offers information about voter information, civic participation, or current public policy issues such as election reform, campaign finance reform and health care.
There is an interactive center where you can get information about your elected officials and media representatives.
National Foundation for Women Legislators [8by11DividerYw.gif] www.womenlegislators.org The mission of the National Foundation for Women Legislators is to provide strategic resources to women leaders for leadership development and effective governance through conferences, effective seminars, issue education materials, professional and personal relationships, and networking at both the state and federal levels.
As a non-profit, non-partisan 501I(3), the NFWL does not take ideological positions on any current issue, but rather exists to assist women leaders in the process of legislative debate, networking, re-elections, public opinion molding and leadership.
The website contains information about National Policy Committee, including Business, Housing and Economic Development; Communications, Media and Info Technology; Health and Empowerment, et cetera.
National Women's Political Caucus [8by11DividerYw.gif] www.nwpc.org Founded in 1971, the National Women's Political Caucus (NWPC) is a grassroots membership organization dedicated to increasing the number of pro-choice women in elected and appointed office regardless of party affiliation.
The purpose of the National Women's Political Caucus is to increase women's participation in the political process and to identify, recruit, train and support pro-choice women for election and appointment to public office.
While in pursuit of this goal, NWPC will strive to win equality for all women: to ensure reproductive freedom; to achieve quality dependent care; and to eradicate sexism, racism, ageism, ableism, violence, poverty, and discrimination on the basis of religion or sexual orientation.
This website contains information about the history of the organization, programs, news and opinions, top stories, events, membership, political action, convention info, endorsements and links.
National Women's Political Caucus [8by11DividerYw.gif] www.nwpc.org/ The mission of the National Women's Political Caucus is to increase women's participation in the political process and to identify, recruit, train and support pro-choice women for election and appointment to public office.
While in pursuit of this goal, NWPC strives to win equality for all women: to ensure reproductive freedom; to achieve quality dependent care; and to eradicate sexism, racism, ageism, ableism, violence, poverty, and discrimination on the basis of religion or sexual orientation.
This site offers information about history of the organization, programs, news and opinions, top stories, events, membership, political action, conventions, leadership, endorsements, donations and links to state and local affiliates, organizations, political and media.
Women's Campaign Fund [8by11DividerYw.gif] www.wcfonline.org/ This site has a list of
Women's Campaign Fund (WCF) was founded in 1974 after Roe vs. Wade.
It is the oldest non-partisan political action committee dedicated to electing pro-choice women running for office at all levels.
Since 1974, the Fund has contributed to over 2000 campaigns for local, state and federal office; to Republicans, Democrats and Independents; to fledgling candidates and veteran politicians.
Women's Campaign Research Fund [8by11DividerYw.gif] www.womenlead.org The Women's Campaign Research Fund (WCRF) is the nonprofit leadership training and political education arm of the Women's Campaign Fund.
For more than a decade, WCRF has played an integral role for female office holders, providing leadership training to scores of women.
This site offers information about WCRF, board members, candidates, links and information about contributions.
Women in Congress [8by11DividerYw.gif] clerk.house.gov Biographies of the women who have served in the U.S. Congress, indexed alphabetically, chronologically, or by state.
Women in Politics Institute [8by11DividerYw.gif] www.rci.rutgers.edu/~cawp/ This website lists election summary results for 2002; women serving in 2003 for U.S. Congress and statewide elective office, as well as state legislative results, and 2003 fact sheets.
It also lists current and historical information about women officeholders and candidates, state-by-state facts about women officeholders, data on the gender gap and voting patterns, a list of women's PAC and donor networks.
Women in Politics Institute [8by11DividerYw.gif] www.american.edu/oconnor/wandp/aboutus/aboutus.html Located in the School of Public Affairs at American University, the Women in Politics Institute is dedicated to advancing the study and discussion of women and politics.
The site offers information and links for academic programs, certificate programs, leadership programs and events that highlight women's political leadership.
Women and Public Policy Program [8by11DividerYw.gif] www.ksg.harvard.edu/wappp/ The mission of the Women and Public Policy Program (WAPPP) is to analyze and respond to public policies that impact women, to inform and learn from women who shape public policies, and to create a world both more balanced in opportunity and more secure.
Within the site are history, program areas, events, newsletter, fellowships and research.
[shim.gif] [shim.gif]
