Testimony of Bernard P. Horn, Director of Political Affairs
National Coalition Against Gambling Expansion
in support of H.R. 316
the Cruises to Nowhere Act of 1999
before the
Subcommittee on Coast Guard and Maritime Transportation
of the U.S. House Committee on Transportation and Infrastructure
July 28, 1999
Chairman Gilchrest and distinguished Members of the Subcommittee:
I am Bernard Horn, Director of Political Affairs of the National Coalition Against Gambling Expansion (NCAGE), a grassroots coalition of citizens and groups.
We are Republicans and Democrats, conservatives and liberals, from every area of the United States.
NCAGE is not an organization of moralists.
We are not trying to stop Americans from gambling.
We do not seek to close down Las Vegas or Atlantic City.
Rather, we oppose the expansion of legalized gambling because it is bad public policy C the costs of gambling far exceed the benefits.
On behalf of our coalition, I urge you to support H.R. 316, the Cruises to Nowhere Act of 1999 because the form of gambling known as Acruises to nowhere@ is one of the worst types from a public policy perspective.
This form of gambling multiplies the economic and societal costs of gambling while virtually eliminating its benefits.
National Gambling Impact Study Commission Favors This Legislation
In 1996, Congress enacted legislation creating the National Gambling Impact Study Commission (NGISC) to conduct an in-depth study of both the costs and benefits of gambling in America.
The NGISC worked for two years, took testimony from hundreds of witnesses, and commissioned millions of dollars of ground-breaking research.
On June 18, 1999, the NGISC issued its final report.
It includes a strong recommendation, adopted unanimously by both pro- and anti-gambling Commissioners, which calls on Congress to pass legislation exactly like H.R. 316.
That recommendation states:
A The Commission recommends that gambling Acruises to nowhere@ should be prohibited unless the state from which the cruise originates adopts legislation specifically legalizing such cruises consistent with existing law.@ (Recommendation 3-3)
There are two major reasons why cruises to nowhere should be stopped: (1) unregulated gambling fosters cheating and aids crime, and (2) this type of gambling tends to maximize social costs while minimizing economic benefits.
Unregulated gambling inevitably brings cheating and crime
One conclusion that runs through the entire report of the NGISC is that, if gambling is to be allowed, there must be a Arigorous background check and licensing process.@ Government authorities are needed to ensure that the owners and operators of gambling establishments are law-abiding individuals and that the games themselves are operated fairly.
But cruises to nowhere are completely unregulated.
And because they operate their games in international waters, these cruises are virtually unregulatable
As a result, there is no way to know if the future owners of cruises to nowhere will be law-abiding people, or whether they may be involved in organized crime.
It is commonly understood that organized crime used to have a heavy stake in the casino business.
The NGISC found that Aeffective state regulation@ pushed Aorganized crime from the direct ownership and operation of casinos.@ The lack of regulation makes cruises to nowhere both an attractive investment for crime syndicates and a natural forum for money laundering.
(Without strong government oversight, we can never know who really owns the boats.)
In addition, there is no way to know if the on-board gambling games are honest or not.
I think we all understand that mechanical (roulette, wheel of fortune), card (blackjack, poker) and dice (craps, baccarat) games can be rigged.
That is why state regulatory agents regularly inspect the gambling equipment C something which does not happen on cruises to nowhere.
But most of the money lost in casinos today is lost in gambling machines (reel slots, video poker).
And it is not generally understood that gambling machines also can be rigged.
This is because these machines, even slots where wheels go around, are controlled by computer programs which can be changed.
Computers inside slot machines are not Ahard wired,@ instead their memories are erasable and programmable.
So, like notorious slot cheat Ron Harris, anyone with access to the chip and the source codes can change the programming.
Jackpots, for example, can be programmed out.
State regulators open up the backs of gambling machines and periodically check the computer programs.
In fact, in order to maintain the integrity of the games, the State of New Jersey doesn =t allow casinos to go inside the gambling machines at all without supervision.
This wise rule is obviously impossible on cruises to nowhere.
As the NGISC said, Agovernment is best suited to protecting the integrity of gambling games, including keeping organized crime out of gambling . . .
@ But government can=t play that essential role on cruises to nowhere.
Gambling expansion brings increased social costs of gambling addiction
Mental health authorities testify that the prevalence of gambling addiction is closely linked to the accessibility and acceptability of gambling in society.
Like alcoholism, only a small percentage of Americans are susceptible to this disorder.
But as more people try gambling in its various forms, more of those prone to the illness are exposed.
We have seen this demonstrated again and again C the more legalized gambling a state makes available, the more pathological behavior is triggered.
For example, in Iowa, the introduction of riverboats more than tripled the problem, causing the percentage of residents who were lifetime pathological or problem gamblers to rise from 1.7% in 1989 to 5.4% in 1995.
And in Minnesota, as sixteen Indian casinos opened across the state, the number of Gamblers Anonymous groups shot up from one to forty-nine.
As the NGISC pointed out, gambling addicts Acommit crimes, they run up large debts, they damage relationships with family and friends, and they kill themselves.@
Cruises to nowhere increase gambling addiction by expanding accessibility to the most addictive, fast-paced types of wagering, and according to some legal authorities, most state governments are currently powerless to stop it.
Cruises to nowhere virtually eliminate economic benefits
Money spent on gambling does not float out of the air, it is money that would otherwise have been spent on other products or services, usually money that would have been spent at restaurants, theaters and retail stores.
As Donald Trump candidly explained to the Miami Herald, APeople will spend a tremendous amount of money in casinos, money that they would normally spend on buying a refrigerator or a new car.
Local businesses will suffer because they'll lose customer dollars to the casinos.@
When a casino diverts revenues from local businesses, those businesses are forced to lay off workers.
Unlike some forms of gambling, cruises to nowhere have the potential to take huge sums out of the entertainment/retail economy without creating any substantial number of replacement jobs.
In this case, federal preemption is anti-democratic
Many states and jurisdictions have turned down casinos or other types of gambling because they want to avoid the social costs of gambling.
For example, as the Chairman knows, bills to legalize casino and slot machine gambling have been rejected by the Maryland General Assembly for each of the last five years.
In fact, proposals to expand gambling have been defeated in legislative and referendum battles in more than two dozen states since 1994.
The long-held position of the federal government has been to allow states to permit gambling if they want it, but to protect the policies of states that don =t want gambling.
Thus, for example, federal law allows lottery ads to be broadcast in states where lottery is legal but not in states where it is illegal (18 U.S.C. '1304, 1307).
The best way to preserve the federal policy of keeping gambling a local decision is for Congress to make it clear that federal law does not preempt state law in the matter of cruises to nowhere.
Enact H.R. 316
On behalf of the National Coalition Against Gambling Expansion and its thousands of supporters, I ask you to enact the Cruises to Nowhere Act of 1999.
Mr. Chairman, thank you.
_____________________________________________________________________
Bernard P. Horn is the Political Director of the National Coalition Against Gambling Expansion (NCAGE), Communications Director of the National Coalition Against Legalized Gambling (NCALG), and Executive Director of NOcasiNO/Maryland.
He is also an attorney and President of Strategic Campaign Initiatives, Inc., a political consulting firm that has worked for dozens of candidates and causes.
From 1988 to 1994, Bernard served as a legislative director, lobbyist and strategist for Handgun Control, Inc. in Washington, D.C.
He is a graduate of the Johns Hopkins University and the Georgetown University Law Center.
Neither NCAGE/NCALG nor Mr. Horn are the beneficiaries of any federal grants, subgrants, contracts or subcontracts.
