Mr. Chairman and Members of the Subcommittee:
I am Paul Donheffner, Boating Law Administrator for the State of Oregon, and current President of the National Association of State Boating Law Administrators.
The National Association of State Boating Law Administrators (NASBLA) is a professional association consisting of state officials having responsibility for administering and /or enforcing state boating laws.
Our Association is recognized for its stewardship of ARecreational Boating Safety@.
We have, over the years, worked closely with the U.S. Coast Guard, the States, and others to insure that the intent of Congress to promote uniformity and reciprocity among the various states was given high priority.
Testimonial of this are the many standards, resolutions and model acts that have been generated by our Association and adopted by the majority of the states and territories.
In doing this we bring to the table highly qualified personnel in the field of boating law enforcement, education, boating safety, and on the water search and rescue.
Our membership takes pride in their accomplishments and the many words of praise we have received from the Commandant, U.S. Coast Guard, and the Chairman, National Transportation Safety Board over the years.
My testimony today will focus on our Association =s partnership with the Coast Guard in search and rescue and boating safety in general.
The need for an evolving, capable and comprehensive Federal/State boating safety partnership has never been greater.
Most of the waters we operate on are joint jurisdictional and in almost every way, each state must perform the exact tasks as those traditionally given or assumed by the Coast Guard.
It is imperative then, that a firm partnership exist between the Coast Guard and the States for expeditious use of resources, better service to the boating public, and to minimize compliance conflicts as boaters move from one jurisdiction to another.
Significant effort toward that goal is evidenced by the working Amemoranda of understanding@ which are in place between each State and the Coast Guard Commander of their respective districts.
These MOU=s define our relationship with the Coast Guard in a variety of areas, including search and rescue, law enforcement, and boating accident reporting.
Unfortunately, there are times when the spirit of these agreements does not always translate to proper action in the field where it counts the most.
To be candid, there are examples where we have not been able to agree on protocols for notification and reporting of boating accidents, particularly when the Coast Guard is the sole responder.
On the other hand, some states have worked out close relationships, especially one-on-one between local authorities and individual Coast Guard stations.
Unfortunately, relying on those local ties, with the problems of personalities and personnel turnover (both federal and state) doesn =t ensure that proper coordination and communication is taking place.
We concur with the National Transportation Safety Board =s Marine Accident Report Sinking of the Recreational Sailing Vessel AMorning Dew@.
And the recommendation (Number 15) to the Coast Guard and the States to:
A Within six months, revise statements and memoranda of understanding that
define the relationship between the States and the Coast Guard to accurately
reflect current responsibilities and jurisdictions....in such areas as boating
casualty accident investigation and reporting, search and rescue, and related
boating safety issues @.
Beyond that, the Coast Guard and States need to incorporate the intent of these MOU =s into standard operating procedures so they survive turnovers in personnel and station command.
Currently, we do not believe that small boat stations are fully aware of these MOU=s and what they contain.
Our Association supports all measures to prevent accidents from occurring.
State interventions through education and enforcement play a significant role in preventing accidents and reducing SAR.
This includes all public boating safety education and awareness activities and all boating patrol activities.
These activities are performed collectively by the State boating programs, the Coast Guard, other federal agencies, local units of government, private businesses and various volunteer organizations.
One of the most essential partners in these activities is the State boating programs.
Their jurisdictional boundaries are the most comprehensive in the country and as per federal law and Congressional financial support provided through the Aquatic Resources Trust Fund program, the States have assumed the lead roll in boating law enforcement efforts nationwide.
They also serve as the focal point for approval of the boating safety courses and they are a key partner in providing boating safety courses and public awareness campaigns themselves.
In 1997 a milestone was reached on the national scene when the Coast Guard and NASBLA entered into the first ever memorandum of understanding (MOU) between our two organizations.
And, of course, also, there is the Federal Boat Safety Act of 1971 which acts as our guiding document toward our mutual goal of uniformity and reciprocity.
With the federal financial support provided to the States in the form of Boating Safety Grants, the national boating fatality rate has plummeted over the past 27 years, demonstrating the incredible success of the program.
Since 1973 we have cut the number of fatalities in half despite the doubling of boats in use on our waters in a wider diversity of craft than ever before.
However, when preventative measures have not been successful, and an accident occurs, an effective search and rescue program must be in place.
To improve upon the current system, measures need to be taken that bring the Coast Guard, the States and local units together to provide a collective approach that excels over an independent response.
First, the Coast Guard, States and local units should implement the Incident Command System, originally developed for response to fires, but now adopted by the National Association for Search and Rescue to be utilized for all forms of responses.
Second, all Coast Guard search and rescue field staff, all state boating program search and rescue field staff, and other local boating program search and rescue field staff should perform annual (or more frequent) joint training sessions on the Incident Command System including actual practice search and rescue responses.
Third, the Coast Guard, States and local units should immediately notify each other upon the initial awareness of a boating accident having occurred in order to initiate a search and rescue response, beginning investigation of the incident, or both, as appropriate to the situation.
Fourth, the Coast Guard, States and local units should fully and immediately share all information relative to the investigation of an accident with the responsible agency to complete such investigation and submit the information to the Coast Guard =s Recreational Boating Safety Program for inclusion in the Boating Accidents Statistics Report.
The four items above should be included in all Coast Guard-State Boating Safety Agreements and should be established as formal standard operating procedures for Coast Guard and State field personnel.
To help the Coast Guard in reducing their search and rescue cases, the States are heavily involved in prevention of Coast Guard search and rescue through a comphrehensive boating safety education program.
We carry out a boating safety education training program in the schools, through home study courses, selected short courses to special interest groups (ie) duck hunters, fishermen, etc.
The States have their own boating safety course books that meet the minimum requirements as established by our Association.
We print and distribute boat safety literature and provide radio and television spots on drinking and boating, wearing PFD =s, hypothermia, weather, float plans, staying clear of large ships, duck hunting safety and local notices on dangers to navigation.
The States provide courtesy boat examinations and post boating safety information in the field, usually at marinas, boat dealers and boat access ramps.
This comprehensive boating safety training program saves the Coast Guard money when we prevent an accident from happening.
As the old saying goes,@an ounce of prevention is
worth a pound of cure @.
The States have willingly accepted the greater responsibility for boating safety.
However, we must point out that adequate funding to the States is essential to our joint efforts and partnership with the Coast Guard.
We very much need the Coast Guard to join ranks with NASBLA in seeking maximum funding authorized for the States = boating safety program.
That can only realistically happen if the Coast Guard budget scoring problems associated with dollars appropriated to the States is corrected and when the Coast Guard supports full funding through the annual budget process.
Sadly, we are currently pitted against the Coast Guard over this funding issue in a win-lose situation.
This is extremely frustrating and counter-productive for boating safety.
It is a well known problem that demands a solution, either administratively or legislatively, so safety can be more adequately addressed.
Noteworthy is the fact that the Wallop-Breaux Trust Funds are derived from the tax boaters pay on gasoline fuel used in motorboats and do not cost the general taxpayer one cent.
We ask this Subcomittee to help the states not only to receive funding as authorized, but also to see that our funding is increased to keep abreast of inflation.
I hope the Subcommittee would agree that if we remain at level funding we are, in reality, slipping behind each year in total funds.
Mr. Chairman, our Association is pleased to offer our comments at this hearing on the Coast Guard Search and Rescue Mission.
If we can be of assistance to you or your staff, please let us know.
Thank you,
Attachment: NTSB Amost wanted@
Transportation Safety Improvements.
