Statement of Esther Canja, Vice President American Association of Retired Persons Testimony Before the Subcommittee on Social Security of the House Committee on Ways and Means Hearing on "The Future of Social Security for this Generation and the Next" - the Findings of the 1997 Board of Trustees and Different Generational Perspectives on Social Security Reform May 22, 1997 AARP appreciates the opportunity to present its views regarding options to restore the long-term solvency of the Social Security system.
Americans of all ages have a stake in the future financial strength of this critical family program.
We hope today's hearing will facilitate a national dialogue on options for assuring Social Security's long-term financial health and help allay fears that the program is in imminent fiscal danger.
Last month the Social Security trustees reaffirmed that the program is not in, or near, crisis but does have a long-term problem.
In order to help find solutions, it is important for the American people and their elected officials to engage in an inclusive national dialogue about how Social Security works and the many options to restore the program's long-term financial stability.
An early discussion of the options will allow workers and beneficiaries adequate time to voice their preferences and concerns.
And, if changes are enacted in the near future, they will be less painful than those made later.
Early action also would provide workers with adequate notice and the opportunity to plan accordingly.
I. PUBLIC OPINION
Public opinion polls consistently demonstrate that Americans of all ages strongly support the Social Security program and believe society should honor the long-term commitment that Social Security be there for people when they retire.
Nevertheless, many people, particularly younger workers, lack confidence in the program's long-term viability.
This lack of confidence has many sources, some having little to do with Social Security per se: a lack of confidence in all institutions, particularly government; a widespread perception that the Social Security trust funds have been "raided"; and a pervasive belief that benefit levels are too low -- a view held particularly by the "Boomers."^(1) Finally, the lack of confidence reflects the widely held idea that the program will not have the resources to finance the Boomers' retirement.
Despite a lack of confidence in Social Security, most Americans (88 percent of all individuals according to DYG, Inc.) still want to know that Social Security will be there for them "just in case" they need it.
In order to ensure that benefits will be there, the public will need to become more engaged in the solvency debate.
A discussion of solvency options will not be fruitful, however, unless the public's understanding of Social Security improves.
Millions of Americans, convinced that the trust funds have been stolen, are unaware that even after 2029 the system can honor all but about 25 percent of the benefits currently promised, i.e., if Congress does nothing to change Social Security.
The American people not only need better information about Social Security, but they also require time to work through some of the policy tradeoffs that are a necessary part of the national debate.
Right now, the public opposes most solvency options in isolation and is particularly resistant to options that require much "pain."
Fortunately, there is sufficient time to engage in a meaningful dialogue that can lead to greater public support for enactment of an acceptable solvency package.
II.
STATUS OF SOCIAL SECURITY TRUST FUNDS
Social Security is the nation's most closely monitored federal program and the only one that projects future income and costs over 75 years.
In April 1997, the trustees reported that Social Security will be able to pay full benefits on time until 2029 -- the same as in last year's forecast.
The combined Old Age and Survivors Insurance (OASI) and the Disability Insurance (DI) trust funds (OASDI) will take in more tax revenue annually than is needed to pay benefits until 2011.
From 2012 through 2018, revenue to the trust funds plus interest earnings will exceed expected benefit payments.
Starting in 2019, annual outgo will exceed annual income, and the trust funds' reserves will be gradually drawn down until they are exhausted in 2029.
Even in 2029, without any change in current law, incoming revenue will cover about 75 percent of the benefits currently promised.
(See Chart 1)
The annual trustees' report serves as an early warning system of impending problems.
Throughout the program's history, changes have been enacted to improve solvency; many were adopted with considerably less lead time than we have now.
The major factors contributing to the projected shortfall have been apparent for some time.
One of the largest is demographics.
We know that the retirement of the roughly 77 million people born between 1946 and 1964, the Boomer generation, will be costly.
However, our nation has adapted to the Boomers as they moved through life's other life landmarks -- when they entered school, college, the work place, and the home-buying market.
Reasonable accommodations were made then, and adjustments can be made to Social Security and other retirement systems to deal with the Boomers' retirement and that of the generations to follow.
III.
REPORT OF THE 1994-1996 SOCIAL SECURITY ADVISORY COUNCIL
A 13 member advisory council was appointed in 1994 to recommend a solution to Social Security's long-term problem.
The Council, which delivered its report this January, did not reach consensus on a single approach for restoring long-term solvency.
However, it did agree on key principles and features of the current system that should be retained, such as maintaining full cost-of-living adjustments (COLAs) and rejecting means-testing.
It did recommend some modest changes to the program that considerably reduce the projected shortfall.
The Council also emphasized the importance of early action to restore long-term solvency.
Generally, long-term solvency can be restored by increasing revenue, reducing benefits, or some combination of the two.
The last reform package, the Social Security Amendments of 1983, included revenue and benefit changes and sacrifices were asked of all who participate in the program: workers, employers, and beneficiaries.
AARP believes the 1983 approach of shared sacrifice and balanced changes within the program should serve as a model for the future.
A. Principles That Should Be Maintained
The Council highlighted numerous principles of the Social Security program that should be retained.
In 1995, AARP adopted a set of principles which we believe should be reflected in any solvency plan (see appendix for the complete list).
AARP and the Council agree on the following principles: * Social Security should be self-financed; * Social Security should be compulsory; * Social Security benefits should bear a reasonable relationship to contributions, plus interest; * "Conventional" means testing should be rejected; and * Social Security should continue to protect low income retirees by paying benefits that keep them from relying on means tested benefits.
The above principles have been largely responsible for the enormous support Social Security enjoys among Americans of all ages.
The Social Security benefit blends the concepts of "individual equity" (a reasonable relationship between contributions and benefits) and "social adequacy" (providing an income floor).
To preserve the concept of equity, benefits are computed using an individual's work history and payroll tax contributions.
To provide adequacy, however, the formula is weighted so lower-wage workers receive a benefit that replaces a higher percentage of their pre-retirement wages than for average or higher earners.
This weighting provides lower income workers and their families with a benefit that helps protect them from destitution when a wage earner leaves the workforce and provides a measure of dignity and independence.
The progressive benefit formula is critical to lower-wage workers since they generally do not accumulate sufficient financial resources, such as a private pension or savings, to help replace wages lost when they retire or become disabled.
If Social Security benefits were conditioned solely upon need, i.e., means tested, public support would drop precipitously.
And, if benefits were denied to high-income workers, they would be far less willing to support and participate in the program.
Since the Social Security formula represents an implicit income transfer from higher earners to lower earners, Social Security's progressive benefit structure would not be possible in its current form if high earners opted out of the system.
The Council also endorsed, and AARP supports, the following principle: * The goal of universal coverage should be achieved.
In order to attain universal coverage, the Council recommends extending mandatory coverage to newly hired state and local workers.
Although Social Security covers about 96 percent of the workforce, some state and local employees remain outside the program.
Mandatory coverage for all newly hired state and local workers would better serve both the excluded employees and the financial health of the Social Security trust funds.
Universal coverage is desirable in a social insurance program to ensure public cohesiveness.
It also makes sense because Social Security provides excellent protections.
For many Americans, Social Security is the only source of survivor, dependent and disability benefits, and it is their only income source that is adjusted annually for inflation.
Additionally, Social Security's progressive benefit formula means lower-income workers often receive higher benefits under Social Security than under public plans.
Equity considerations also suggest that universal coverage is preferable.
Some state and local employees who have also worked in Social Security-covered employment or who marry a covered employee gain a Social Security benefit with fewer contributions than other beneficiaries.
Although their benefits are smaller, their overall return on the payroll taxes paid is greater.
AARP believes all workers should be covered; states and localities wishing to supplement Social Security coverage should be encouraged to do so, similar to private employer pension plans.
B. Important Benefit Features to Retain or Improve
The Council concurred on numerous features of the current benefit structure that should be maintained or improved.
AARP believes that one of the most important is: * Social Security should continue to provide full cost-of-living adjustments (COLAs).
The Council affirmed that full cost-of-living adjustments are one of Social Security's most important contributions to the income security of retirees.
Today, Social Security remains the dominant income source for 3 of 5 beneficiaries and virtually the only source of income for 1 in 4 beneficiaries.
Given this widespread reliance on Social Security, any reduction in COLAs would mean that millions of beneficiaries would face economic hardship.
Annual COLAs are the only means that most older Americans have to keep up with the rising costs of goods and services.
In fact, most of the reduction in the poverty rate for those age 65 and over in the early 1970s was due to the large ad hoc increases in Social Security that occurred prior to automatic cost-of-living adjustments.
And, since then, the poverty rate for the elderly has stabilized because annual COLAs have prevented the more than one in five older Americans -- mostly older single women -- who hover within 125 percent of the poverty line from falling further behind economically.
COLAs are not intended, nor do they function, as a benefit increase.
COLAs help ensure that beneficiaries, particularly the oldest ones, will not outlive their resources.
In an ironic twist, proposals to permanently reduce COLAs mean that as beneficiaries age, the real value of their benefits would decline.
In effect, beneficiaries would be paid higher real benefits at age 65 than at age 80 although their other income has likely declined and their health care costs will have risen sharply.
Some advocate reducing COLAs by legislatively changing the Consumer Price Index (CPI), which is used to adjust benefits, or by providing partial COLAs.
Those who want to reduce COLAs by changing the CPI contend the index overstates inflation.
It is not clear to what extent this may be true.
The Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS) determines the CPI, revises the CPI market basket every ten years, and makes technical adjustments to the index on an on-going, as-needed basis.
AARP believes that the experts at BLS, not Congress, should continue to make adjustments to the current index.
We are pleased that the House overwhelmingly adopted House Resolution 93, which supports leaving the determination of the CPI to the BLS.
Others suggest limiting COLAs for beneficiaries whose Social Security benefit or Primary Insurance Amount exceeds a specified threshold.
Affected beneficiaries (all those above the cut-off point) would receive a flat dollar amount of no more than the COLA provided to a beneficiary at the threshold.
A "capped" COLA is a form of means testing the basic benefit package.
But, Social Security is a social insurance program that provides lifetime protection for workers and their families as an earned benefit, rather than a benefit contingent upon income.
Those who advocate means testing, in any form, ignore the insidious message it sends to workers: if you do well, if you work hard, if you save, you are penalized.
A "capped" COLA also incorrectly assumes Social Security benefits are an indicator of comparative wealth.
Some individuals have low benefits because they spent only a brief period working in Social Security-covered employment and the rest of their career in non-covered employment.
Many of them may be eligible for other types of pensions (typically public employee pensions and/or military benefits) or may have accumulated additional financial resources for their retirement.
Yet, other beneficiaries with larger Social Security benefits may have no other income sources.
To more accurately assess wealth would require beneficiaries to give a full accounting of their income and assets, which if feasible, is administratively complex and inconsistent with the concept of an earned benefit.
In addition, a portion of the COLA is recaptured through the tax system for beneficiaries who pay taxes on their Social Security benefits.
Finally, AARP rejects a capped COLA because it could lead to further reductions in this critical part of the Social Security benefit if the initial threshold is unindexed or actually lowered.
The Advisory Council also stated that we should: * Increase benefits for widow/ers.
Council members recognized that widow/ers benefits are critical to the income security of millions of single beneficiaries.
They proposed to finance the improved widow/ers benefits by a reduction in spousal benefits.
Clearly, the loss of a spouse increases the probability of poverty in old age, particularly for women.
This proposal would reallocate benefits throughout the expected lifetimes of both spouses by lowering joint benefits and raising survivor benefits an equivalent amount.
This change may be worthwhile, but it deserves to viewed in the larger context of the relative needs of married couples and survivors for retirement income.
Any changes should be based on findings that better adjust Social Security benefits to the actual needs of its beneficiaries.
C. Increasing Social Security's Rate Of Return
The Council members agreed that the rate of return on Social Security investments should be increased, but they differed on how to achieve an increased rate of return and who should benefit from any improvement.
These differences produced the three plans that divided the Council.
The Maintenance of Benefits plan (MB), or the Ball Plan, includes five modifications to the program that restore about two thirds of the shortfall.
Ball proponents believe that in order to eliminate the remainder, serious consideration should be given to investing up to 40 percent of the trust funds' assets directly in common stocks indexed to the broad market.
Since the investments are being made on behalf of the trust funds, any increased returns would be credited to the trust funds collectively.
Individual benefits would not be directly affected by changes in the market.
The Individual Accounts (IA) plan, or Gramlich plan, creates individual accounts alongside a pared back Social Security system.
Workers would invest an additional 1.6 percent of wages -- that is, in addition to their current payroll tax contributions -- in individual accounts held by the government.
Investment choices would be made by individuals but options limited to a "menu" of those selected by the trustees.
The return on these individual accounts is intended to augment the reduced basic Social Security benefit.
The Personal Security Accounts (PSA), or Schieber/Weaver plan, creates larger individual accounts designed to replace a significant portion of the Social Security benefit.
Workers age 54 and under would direct 5 percentage points of the current payroll taxes into these accounts, which would be individually managed and invested in financial instruments of the individual's choice.
The investment yield would be added to a basic flat Social Security benefit, which is roughly equivalent to two-thirds of the poverty line in 1996, or $410 per month.
In order to finance the transition to this new system, payroll taxes would be increased by 1.52 percent and over $1.9 trillion in new borrowing would be needed.
The IA and PSA plans require individuals to make investment decisions and bear the risks associated with their investment choices.
The larger the portion of Social Security's defined benefit that these accounts replace, the greater the risk to individuals, and the greater the change to our nation's current retirement income structure.
1.
Three Legged Stool
Retirement income has been compared to a three legged stool, with Social Security, pensions and private savings representing the three legs.
(The Advisory Council describes retirement income as a tiered structure and adds a fourth level: means tested programs).
This diversity is a source of strength that provides beneficiaries with an array of protections through the balanced distribution of risk among Social Security, employer based pensions and individual savings.
Social Security serves as the base of retirement income to be supplemented by the other two legs.
In practice, for many retirees, the other two legs are weak or nonexistent.
Currently over 3 in 5 older Americans count on Social Security for at least 50 percent of their total income, and 16 percent have no other income.
This trend is not likely to change significantly for the next generation of retirees.
Social Security is a social insurance program with compulsory and near-universal participation.
It was never intended to be a personal investment plan.
In a social insurance program, workers pool their resources in a government-sponsored program to "buy" protection that they might not otherwise have purchased (or afforded) on their own or received from their employer.
As social insurance, the program is shaped by societal decisions about who should receive benefits and the amount of those benefits relative to a worker's contributions.
Since Social Security's progressive benefit formula deliberately blends the concepts of equity and adequacy, the program should not be evaluated solely with regard to one purpose -- the level of return on one's investment.
Pensions are the second leg of the income stool.
Pensions are retirement benefits earned in voluntary, employer-sponsored plans.
Only half of all workers today are covered by a pension plan.
Highly compensated individuals are more likely to be covered by such plans and accrue higher benefits.
However, private sector pension plans are undergoing a shift in design that places greater responsibility and risk on the employee.
At a time when pension plans are becoming more individual-account oriented, it is even more important to maintain Social Security's social insurance design and defined benefit promise.
Savings, the third leg, are individually held assets and investments.
Like pensions, higher earners are most likely to accumulate savings and in far greater amounts.
Many households have no retirement savings or use those that they do accumulate for non-retirement purposes.
It seems therefore probable that many future retirees will have inadequate savings to meet their income needs.
2.
The Risks of Individual Accounts
Individual investment accounts are touted not only as a mechanism to improve Social Security's solvency but also as a way to improve individuals' rates of return and to increase national savings.
AARP agrees with the need for increased national savings, but we believe that this outcome should be achieved in a way that does not interfere with the goal of a secure retirement income, particularly for low wage workers and their families.
Moreover, as the Congressional Budget Office (CBO) concluded in 1994, individual accounts funded through existing payroll taxes are unlikely to increase national savings.
Worker controlled accounts should not be substituted for Social Security benefits because they would shift to the individual a larger portion of the nation's commitment to assure a foundation of retirement, disability, and survivor income for workers and their families.
Individual accounts would gradually transform Social Security from a universal defined benefit plan to a non-guaranteed, defined contribution or individual savings plan.
Social Security's design as a secure base of retirement income -- to be supplemented by pensions and private savings -- would become less predictable and not be guaranteed.
Indeed, the distinction between Social Security and the other legs of the retirement stool would be blurred, and the differing purposes each leg serves could be jeopardized.
The shift to individual accounts poses special risks for low wage earners.
First, if individuals receive back a portion or all of their current contributions, less revenue would be available to the system to finance the progressive benefit formula that helps low wage workers.
Furthermore, since low earners would be investing relatively small amounts, they would be less able to adequately diversify their holdings to shield against risk and would face proportionately larger administrative costs and higher fees that would, in turn, lower the return on their investments.
Some of the touted financial advantages of individual accounts are dubious.
The rates of return are often overstated by many proponents of privatization.
Stated annual rates of return represent an average, and few, if any, actually receive the "average."
In fact, many receive less.
Also, proponents overlook the possibility of poor investments, failed financial institutions and failed businesses.
Ultimately, investment success requires considerable knowledge of investment options and strategies, a properly diversified portfolio and a willingness and the resources to bear some risk.
On the other hand, people who invest conservatively -- many are lower wage earners -- will see more modest returns that are unlikely to outpace the current rate of return to the trust funds.
Yet, encouraging workers to invest in riskier ventures only invites hardship for those whose investments do not do well -- hardships that might have to be offset through other government programs.
And, unless early withdrawals and borrowing from these accounts are prohibited, workers may not wait until they retire before tapping into these accounts, thus diminishing the base of their retirement income security.
The current move in Congress to allow easier access to Individual Retirement Accounts (IRA) suggests that early withdrawals from individual accounts would eventually be permitted.
Moreover, there is no guarantee that historical patterns of return on assets will continue in the future.
(In fact, historical patterns represent average annual returns, which do not apply to everyone.)
And, many of those with dramatic paper gains today may not realize them tomorrow when large public and private retirement programs will be selling off assets in order to finance their commitments to the retirement of the Boomers.
This simultaneous unloading could drive down the price of a worker's holdings.
Also, the significant administrative costs of millions of individual accounts will reduce returns.
In addition, moving from the current system to a partially privatized one poses large transitional problems.
If benefit levels for those now in and those near beneficiary status are protected, then workers will have to pay to finance two benefits: those of current recipients and their own.
Current beneficiaries and those nearing retirement face added risks.
The deterioration in the trust funds resulting from the draw-down to finance individual accounts is likely to generate pressure to cut benefits for current retirees and those nearing retirement.
Yet, for those nearing retirement the opportunity to offset any lost income with individual investments is limited.
Similarly, younger workers who become disabled or die shortly after individual accounts are inaugurated may face lower benefits for themselves and their families.
They may not have accumulated enough in their individual accounts to provide benefits that are the same as they would receive under current law.
For all of these reasons, AARP believes Social Security should not be replaced with individually controlled accounts.
While individual accounts have a legitimate role to play in overall retirement income security, these accounts are best left -- and should be encouraged -- for the two private legs of the 3-legged stool.
Given the shift to individual accounts in the private pension system, the secure defined benefit promise in Social Security takes on greater importance.
Indeed, if pension coverage continues to stagnate at under 50 percent of the workforce and savings rates continue at current low levels, Social Security could, in the future, be responsible for an even greater portion of retirement income security.
If greater individual control over investment decision-making is the desired goal, then public policy could encourage greater savings in existing vehicles (e.g. IRAs, 401(k) plans, etc.) that already provide for individual control.
We do not have to undermine Social Security to achieve that goal.
3.
Rates of Return
The Advisory Council's solvency proposals are also designed to improve the "money's worth return" for future generations.
Money's worth is one way of assessing the program's fairness across generations.
"Fairness," however, does not necessarily mean every generation or every individual within a generation will have exactly the same rate of return.
Given the variability in birth cohort size, life expectancy, changes in the economy, and Social Security's evolving nature, fairness will always be a relative measure.
Money's worth analyses often underestimate the value of Social Security by excluding disability and, in some cases, survivor and dependent benefits.
Yet, Social Security is the only long-term disability insurance for 3 out of 4 workers, and its life insurance features provide income protection for 98 percent of the children in this country.
According to the Social Security Administration, the Social Security survivor benefit is equivalent to a $295,000 life insurance policy for the spouse and two children of a deceased worker with an average earning history, and the disability protection is equivalent to $203,000 for that worker and his/her family.
Moreover, Social Security provides disability and survivor benefit coverage for workers with pre-existing conditions, whereas in the private market they are often excluded.
When these critical factors are taken into account, the full lifetime value of Social Security becomes even more apparent.
Another caveat regarding money's worth analyses is that most workers' situations change over the course of a lifetime.
Few workers have close to average earnings throughout their lives, and some workers may be single for only part of their lives.
Moreover, many workers have periods of unemployment or reduced earnings.
Social Security protects these workers by providing "dropout years."
(The Social Security benefit formula assumes a forty-year work history, but calculates the worker's benefit on the thirty-five highest earning years, thus allowing five "drop-out" years.)
Many of the money's worth studies do not allow for these variations.
IV.
OTHER OPTIONS FOR CHANGE
1.
Raising the Normal Retirement Age
The 1983 Social Security Amendments included a phased-in increase in the age of eligibility for collecting full benefits (the Normal Retirement Age) from age 65 to age 67, beginning with those born after 1937 and becoming fully effective for people born after 1959.
In order to improve Social Security's long-term solvency, some propose further changing the age for collecting full benefits.
These proposals range from accelerating the twelve-year hiatus in the current timetable, as recommended by many on the Advisory Council, to raising the full retirement age to 70 years old.
Proponents of increasing the retirement age point out that increased longevity means future beneficiaries will live longer and collect Social Security for a longer period of time.
If people live longer, proponents argue, they could reasonably be asked to work longer and postpone receiving benefits in order to improve Social Security's long-term solvency.
While many policy experts support raising the retirement age, the public soundly rejects the idea.
Many polls show that Boomers and the following generation, the Baby Busters, intend to stop working before age 62.
Their anticipated retirement ages reflect the reality of the current labor market in which the retirement age has now dropped to about age 62.
The polls also strongly suggest that most workers are unaware of the existing increase in the age of eligibility for unreduced benefits.
Current trends affecting older workers suggest that raising the retirement age could exacerbate existing problems in the labor market.
Many willing older workers are unable to find employment, and some older workers have physically demanding jobs or health conditions that make continued work difficult.
Despite the elimination of mandatory retirement in 1986, age discrimination remains a significant factor in today's work place.
Studies show that older workers continue to have the longest spells of involuntary unemployment, and many employers remain reluctant to hire older workers.
Also, many employers have policies in place to move out their older workers, such as early retirement incentives, that younger workers tend to support.
In short, age bias, health problems and limited job opportunities for older workers could mean that an increase in the Normal Retirement Age will result in lower benefits, not additional work.
AARP believes that any increase in the Normal Retirement Age should be accompanied by policies promoting expanded job opportunities for older workers and incentives that encourage older workers to extend their working careers.
We are pleased that the Advisory Council agreed on the need for improved work incentives for older workers.
These incentives would encourage older workers to remain in the workforce and also provide overall benefits to our economy.
2.
Changing Number Of Years In Benefit Calculation
The majority of Council members support increasing the indexing period for computing benefits from the current 35 years to 38 years.
This change would result in an average benefit reduction of 3 percent.
While this may be a preferable alternative to any increase in the retirement age, it particularly disadvantages women who spend more years out of the labor force caring for family members.
In evaluating this and other options, it will be critical to assess the compounding effects of multiple options on particular groups, such as older women.
3.
Raise Early Eligibility Age (EEA)
Some not only want to increase the age for collecting full benefits, but also to raise the age -- currently 62 -- for first collecting benefits.
AARP believes we should maintain an early eligibility age because of the conditions in the labor market discussed above, and because many individuals are unable to work past age 62 due to ill health or physically demanding jobs.
Without these protections, many older Americans would face serious economic hardship while they wait to collect benefits as well as throughout retirement.
If we did raise the early retirement age, disability benefits should be expanded to protect those physically unable to work longer.
4.
Increase the Taxation of Benefits
The taxation of Social Security benefits was introduced in the Social Security Amendments of 1983.
Single taxpayers with modified adjusted gross incomes (MAGI) over $25,000 (adding in tax exempt interest and half of their Social Security benefits to their adjusted gross income) and joint filers with MAGIs in excess of $32,000 were to be taxed on the lesser of half of their benefits or half the amount by which their MAGI exceeds these thresholds.
The maximum percentage of benefits subject to federal income taxation was set at 50 percent of benefits because employees contribute half of the Social Security payroll taxes and employers contribute the other half.
Since the provision was enacted to help restore Social Security's long-term solvency, the revenue has been credited to the Social Security trust funds.
The 1983 thresholds deliberately were not indexed in order to provide Social Security with increasing revenue in the future when the number of beneficiaries will rise dramatically and the ratio of workers to retirees will decline.
Initially, about eight percent of beneficiaries were taxed on up to 50 percent of their Social Security; today, almost one in four beneficiaries are affected.
Without any change in current law, by the turn of the century almost one in three beneficiaries will be taxed on their Social Security.
Effective taxable year 1994, single beneficiaries with MAGIs over $34,000 and couples with MAGIs above $44,000 are taxed on up to 85 percent of their benefits.
The revenue from taxing the additional 35 percent, unlike the revenue from taxing 50 percent of benefits, is credited to the Medicare Hospital Insurance (HI) Trust Fund.
The rationale for taxing up to 85 percent of benefits was to more closely conform the tax treatment of Social Security benefits to the taxation principles that apply to private pensions.
However, Social Security is fundamentally different from a private pension.
Social Security is a mandatory, almost universal social insurance program established by the government to provide income protection to workers and their families if the wage earner retires, becomes disabled, or dies.
Given Social Security's unique features, it is not necessary to have parallel treatment to private pensions.
Members of the Advisory Council and others support increasing the amount of Social Security that is taxed in order to help restore long-term solvency.
Options range from lowering the 1993 thresholds for taxing 85 percent of benefits (e.g. to levels that apply for the 50 percent rate) to fully taxing Social Security for all beneficiaries with taxable income.
AARP recognizes that the additional taxation of benefits (assuming the receipts are deposited in the OASDI trust funds) could improve Social Security's long-term health, but we remain concerned that any further increases will result in an unanticipated heavy tax burden for many already retired middle and moderate income beneficiaries.
Also, fully taxing benefits could bring millions of older Americans who currently do not pay any income taxes back onto the tax rolls.
Since moderate income beneficiaries rely heavily on Social Security, the increased tax burden would be significant, and many of those affected would be unable to recoup lost income.
Also, since the current thresholds are not indexed, additional taxation of Social Security will already gradually occur over time.
5.
Payroll Taxes
Historically, payroll taxes have been increased as part of legislation to improve long-term solvency.
Although the payroll tax is considered regressive by some, they neglect the fact many low-income workers are eligible for the Earned Income Tax Credit (EITC), which offsets some of the initial payroll tax contributions.
In addition, Social Security's progressive benefit formula provides low earners with a larger portion of their pre-retirement earnings than average and high earners.
Despite criticisms of the payroll tax, most workers consider it fairer than the income tax because they believe few can avoid paying the tax and because they know it is used to pay Social Security benefits.
(Seventy-one percent consider it a fairer tax than the income according to DYG, Inc.)
Any payroll tax increase, however, should not be a first choice and should be limited in order to protect the standard of living of younger working families.
6.
Benefit Changes
Some policymakers suggest modifying the "bend points" in the Social Security benefit formula, particularly for average and higher earners.
Significant reductions in benefits for average and high earners could undermine support for the program, particularly among highly compensated workers, but proposals to modify the Social Security benefit formula for high earners should be distinguished from means testing benefits -- which the Association opposes -- since workers would continue to receive benefits under a modified formula.
Significant changes in any aspect of the benefit formula would affect today's workers once they retire, while increasing payroll taxes affects them while they are in the workforce.
AARP believes today's workers should be given the opportunity to voice their views about the timing and desirability of any additional financial sacrifices they will bear.
V. CONCLUSION
Americans of all ages need to be better informed about the Social Security system so they can participate in the debate about its impact on their future.
The program has been, and should continue to be, an important part of our nation's commitment to ensuring that workers who retire, die, or become disabled, and the families and the survivors of those workers will be protected from "the hazards and vicissitudes of life."
Fortunately, Social Security has over $550 billion in its trust funds, so we have time to conduct a national dialogue that will lead toward consensus.
AARP is encouraging this dialogue in our publications and in conversations with our members and other interested people of all ages.
The Advisory Council proposed three solvency packages, and there are many other options that have been suggested.
AARP believes these proposals and others that will emerge should be part of the public debate.
It is important to recognize that while some options may have little support in isolation, modest changes that are incorporated into a broad solvency package may be acceptable to most Americans.
We agree with the Advisory Council that solvency packages should spread the responsibility for bringing the system into balance among all who are part of the system.
As we continue our dialogue with our members, one-third of whom are still in the work force, and most of whom have children and grandchildren about whom they are concerned, we will be mindful of our principles and the need to preserve Social Security for future generations.
Maintaining Social Security's long-term solvency and improving the overall retirement income of future generations is vital to our nation's economic well-being.
The Association looks forward to working on a bipartisan basis with our nation's elected officials to achieve a solution to Social Security's long-term problems that maintains the program's guiding social insurance principles, achieves solvency in a fair manner and ensures an adequate benefit for all.
___________________________________
^1 These findings are based on over ten years of analyses of public attitudes done for the Association by DYG, Inc. ___________________________________
[canja1.gif] ___________________________________
[canja2.gif] ___________________________________
[canja3.gif] ___________________________________
[canja4.gif] __________________________________________________________________
