[sun_34.jpg] Sunflower Research Unit Goals [sun_30.gif]
Profitable and sustainable sunflower production through science and technology, resulting in affordable, quality products.
[sun_30.gif]
STRATEGY 1
Enhance Genetic Diversity Utilizing Wild Species, Populations, and Introductions to Decrease Production Risks, and Produce a Quality Consumer Product.
Wild sunflower species served as the genetic base for the modern sunflower.
Cultivated sunflower has been selected for a very narrow genetic base.
Broadening the genetic base will allow it to be better adapted and efficient in production.
This will result in healthy, abundant, and quality sunflower products.
Goals Are:
Collect and evaluate wild species of the genus Helianthus for the enhancement of genetic diversity in cultivated sunflower.
Develop germplasm lines of sunflower with specific characteristics having high combining ability for yield and oil, resistance or tolerance to pests, and adaptation to U.S. environments.
Enhance oil quality leading to healthier diets.
[sun_30.gif]
STRATEGY 2
Develop Methods to Transfer Useful Traits From Wild Sunflower Species and Other Sources into Cultivated Sunflower.
Many native wild sunflower species have been used in the past to introduce useful traits such as disease resistance and cytoplasmic male sterility to the cultivated crop through intercrossing.
However, the utilization of many wild species is restricted because of their limited crossability with the cultivated crop.
The continued development of new interspecific crossing methods must be pursued to overcome crossability barriers
.
Goals Are:
Improve methods of interspecific and single gene transfer into cultivated sunflower and to produce germplasm with maximum genetic diversity.
Conduct inheritance studies for male sterility and fertility restoration, for morphological characteristics, and major disease resistance genes.
Construct a sunflower genetic map using classical and molecular markers.
Develop a set of trisomic lines (that possess an extra chromosome) for the study of sunflower genetics and to facilitate genetic mapping.
Use biochemical approaches to identify genes involved in plant defense.
[sun_30.gif]
STRATEGY 3
Develop Management Techniques to Minimize Impact and Losses Caused by Insects and Diseases.
Sunflower is the only row crop in North America coexisting with its native ancestors.
Wild sunflower, a complex of Helianthus species native to all areas of North America, evolved with a large number of insects and disease organisms.
Many of the insects and diseases are specific to sunflower and thus must be managed separately from problems on other crops.
Although a potential of over 150 insects and over 50 disease organisms occur on wild sunflower, less than a dozen insects and diseases have adapted to cultivated sunflower and have become economic pests in the northern and central Great Plains.
Investigations are focused on broad integrated approaches to the management of insects and diseases of sunflower.
Goals Are:
Identify insects and diseases affecting sunflower in the Northern and Central Plains, determine their relative economic impact, and monitor changes in their distribution and incidence.
Develop an understanding of the biology and ecology of the sunflower beetle, sunflower stem weevil, red sunflower seed weevil, sunflower moth, and banded sunflower moth.
Determine the most effective management strategies, including cultural controls, plant resistance, and the use of natural enemies to reduce economic losses.
Assess disease resistance of cultivated and wild sunflower for incorporation into agronomically useable germplasm, and explore the utility of biological, cultural, and chemical controls, with emphasis on the major diseases including Sclerotinia wilt, head rot, and Phomopsis stem canker.
Top of Page
[sun_1.gif]
Sunflower Homepage | Fun Stuff | Other Links/Acknowledgments Personnel | Photos | Projects | Upcoming Events
Page Last Updated 12/28/00
