Home About Constituent Services Voting Record News Issues Students Contact Home
"Mr. Chairman, I rise in support of the Senate-passed legislation to federalize the nation's airport security that we will have the opportunity to vote on as a substitute to H.R. 3150.
"There are 31 families today in our area in northern Virginia devastated by grief from the September 11 attack on the Pentagon.
"In the wake of the terrorist attacks on American soil when terrorists turned commercial airliners into missiles of destruction to perpetrate their heinous acts, the people of America are looking to this Congress to make our airports safe and to secure the airplanes that fly across America's skies.
"In the aftermath of September 11, we are now waging war against terrorism and America's airports are on the front line.
We need to change the way security is handled at our nation's airports.
We cannot continue to contract out to the lowest bidder the safety and security of America's airports and airways.
"We must restore confidence in air travel and elevate aviation security to its proper role as a law enforcement function.
We must place the security of our airways in the hands of a federal aviation security force under the jurisdiction of the nation's top law enforcement agency - the Department of Justice.
The American public deserves nothing less.
"Mr. Chairman, good intentions surround both the House and Senate versions of airline safety legislation.
The ultimate goal of this legislation from both sides of the aisle and both sides of the Capitol is to elevate safety to the highest level as quickly as possible.
But the current way of doing business through privatized security, I believe, has failed to meet safety expectations.
We need to make a change.
"The Federal Aviation Administration does a good job at air traffic control.
That's its function and where its focus should be.
But if you ask the Department of Transportation inspector general's office about the FAA's current role in aviation security oversight, you'll get a report card that's woefully inadequate.
"If you also ask the DOT inspector general's office about the shortcomings of the current system of private airport security screening operators across the nation, you'll hear horror stories about inadequate background checks, the hiring of illegal aliens, screeners with criminal records, screeners who can't pass basic skills tests required for employment, screeners who can't speak English, screeners who fail to spot dangerous objects.
You'll also hear that 87 percent of the baggage screeners at Washington Dulles International Airport aren't U.S. citizens
.
"You'll also hear the name Argenbright Security.
The foreign-based corporation is the largest airport security screener in our nation and is responsible for security at the majority of America's busiest airports.
The second and third largest screening contractors also are foreign-owned.
"Argenbright was recently ordered to pay over $1 million in fines and placed on three years probation because it either failed to conduct background checks on convicted felons or forged the actual background checks on checkpoint screeners at Philadelphia International Airport.
Just last week a federal judge extended the company's three-year probationary period to five years for violating terms of its probation, including continuing to hire convicted felons, despite certifying that it had conducted new background checks, and violating FAA regulations.
"It is interesting to note that Argenbright left the Philadelphia airport last week, a year before its contract was to have expired.
In another development, Sky Harbor International Airport in Phoenix evicted Argenbright on October 13 citing criticism of its hiring standards since the September 11 terrorist attacks and the scandal involving Argenbright's activities in Philadelphia.
"Argenbright also staffs both Washington Dulles International Airport and Logan International Airport in Boston - two of the airports where hijacked planes took off on September 11.
Dulles continues to grow and is presently the fifth busiest airport in America with 1,400 daily takeoffs and landings.
"
According to the FBI, Argenbright also had the roommate of convicted CIA killer Amal Kansi on its payroll.
Kansi was responsible for the bloody CIA shootings in 1993 on Route 123 in northern Virginia outside CIA headquarters, where two people were killed and three were wounded.
"His roommate, Zahid Mir, worked for Argenbright from August 1992 to February 1993 in a variety of security positions until he was arrested on immigration charges which ultimately resulted in six months confinement.
As an Argenbright Security employee at Dulles Airport, Mir had access to luggage and restricted access areas.
It would seem that even a cursory check on Mir would have flagged authorities about his questionable background.
"I also find it surprising that when a recent head of FAA security left his job, he soon wound up on the Board of Directors of Argenbright Security.
What kind of relationship is there between those who are regulating security and those who are performing security?
"That question may have been answered in a revealing memo sent this past May from the chief of the FAA's Civil Aviation Security Division - who is leaving his post after being there for less than a year - to FAA managers about the agency's compliance and enforcement philosophy.
He said, in part, "...the safety and security of the flying public will depend upon the FAA and industry maintaining a candid, respectful and mutually responsive business relationship.
To be effective in this relationship, we need to be flexible."
"He continued, "While I expect regulated parties to comply with regulatory requirements, there will be times when we find areas of noncompliance.
When we do, I want to fully consider the actions the party has taken to fix the problem.
I want to work with the industry to develop action plans to permanently correct problems that have resulted in violations.
To encourage industry to join us in this effort I do not expect us to impose a civil penalty against a regulated party for certain unaggravated violations, if we believe the party has successfully implemented a permanent fix that will resolve the security problem and preclude recurrence of future violations...."
"If we learned anything from the devastating attacks of September 11 it is that there is absolutely no room for flexibility, no room for compromise, no room for second chances when it comes to the safety of the flying public.
"The track record of private airline screening companies shows they have not performed the job that is demanded.
According to a 1998 GAO report, security checkers at Dulles Airport experienced a turnover rate of 90 percent, which was lower than the national average of 126 percent
.Boston's Logan Airport had a turnover rate of 207 percent and Atlanta's Hartsfield Airport topped the chart at 375 percent.
At these rates, screeners were turning over every couple of months.
"As long as security is contracted out, it will always go to the lowest bidder with the cheapest labor pool filling what we can describe today as among the most important security jobs in our country.
We must put federal professionals on the front line of air security to ensure a workforce which can enforce total compliance with aviation security laws.
"I've heard the arguments that federalizing airport security will create another unnecessary federal agency and that what is needed is just federal supervision of private contractors.
In response, I ask our colleagues to consider that in the aftermath of September 11, there is a critical need today more than ever for intelligence sharing among federal agencies.
The FBI, the DEA, and the INS already operate under the Department of Justice.
"I believe most people would want airport security under the Justice Department where these agencies could share their information in the present climate of heightened security alerts.
"I don't believe most people would want federal law enforcement and intelligence agencies to reveal sensitive security information about the national airspace to private contractors.
"The best security and law enforcement in the world can be found in our armed forces, the Secret Service, and the FBI - all under the jurisdiction of United States government.
"We owe it to the American people to pass the kind of legislation unanimously approved by the U.S. Senate by a vote of 100-0 which assigns the job of enforcing the security laws for our nation's airways to a federal aviation security agency accountable to the public and under the jurisdiction of the Department of Justice.
"The events of September 11 have changed us all.
The dozens of families in the Washington region who lost loved ones and the thousands in New York, Boston, and Newark and all over the world who also grieve for their mothers and fathers, brothers and sisters, friends and neighbors remind us that we should do everything possible to try to prevent a similar tragedy."
### Home | About | Constituent Services | Votes | News | Issues | Students | Contact
