Skip to page content.
State Agency List Calendar Newsroom Site Map Help Center Advanced Search ______________________________ Search
Kentucky.Gov, Click to return to homepage.
Default Heading Graphic Home 
bullet Government bullet Residents bullet Education bullet Business bullet Recreation 
Newsroom Parks, Department of Headlines All Headlines
State Seal Department of Parks Enjoy Fall Colors at Kentucky Parks
Press Release Date: 09/23/03 Contact:
Jim Carroll
(502) 564-8110, ext. 307
KENTUCKY STATE PARKS
OCTOBER 2003 SPECIAL EVENTS
Media Contact: Chris Head
Kentucky Department of Parks
(502) 564-4940, ext. 247
chris.head@mail.state.ky.us
http://www.kystateparks.com
Frankfort, KY (September 22, 2003) Enjoy fallâs beautiful colors at Kentucky State Parks this month.
Photography weekends will recreate those vivid colors and make them last into the gray winter.
Civil War reenactments and pioneer demonstrations retell some of the great stories of our state.
Pick up some autumn crafts at one of the many fairs and shows taking place this month.
Kentucky State Parks wants to show our appreciation to our campers by offering a special two for one rate at certain parks.
October
3-5 Greenbo Craft Show, Greenbo Lake State Resort, Greenup.
The tri-state area's finest artists display their crafts.
Browse through rows of basket weaving; candle making, woodworking, and much, much more.
$10 exhibitor fee.
Registration and set-up for vendors is Friday, Oct. 3 from 2 p.m. to 7 p.m. Show hours are Saturday, Oct. 4 10 a.m. to 8 p.m. 
3-5 Horse Campers Fall Round-Up, Dale Hollow Lake State Resort, Burkesville.
Horses camp free during this event featuring guided trail rides, entertainment, and a cookout.
Camp two nights for the price of one.
4,18 2^nd Annual Play It Again Music in the Park, Butler-Turpin State Historic House-General Butler State Resort, Carrollton.
Enjoy a rich variety of Americana music including Blues, Bluegrass, Jazz, and Celtic on the lawn of the historic site at the park.
The evening includes tours of the historic house and more.
4,11 Elk Sighting Tours, Jenny Wiley State Resort, Prestonsburg.
The tours will include
18,25 information on the reintroduction of this magnificent creature to Kentucky, as well as tours to view elk in the wild of the eastern Kentucky landscape.
These dates are the best time to hear the bull âelkâ bugling.
Tour fee.
4 Fabulous Fall 5K Run 
Enjoy the beautiful scenery of Lake Barkley as you run/walk this challenging course.
$16 pre-registration fee or $20 day of race.
Fee includes a T-shirt and buffet brunch.
Trophies awarded to the top finishers in several categories.
4-5 Big Rivers Arts 
Plan to attend this 31^st annual arts and crafts festival featuring over 300 exhibitors and their handcrafts.
Parking is $3.
Show hours are Saturday, Oct. 4 from 10 a.m. to dusk and Sunday, Oct. 5, noon to 5 p.m.
For more information, please call (270) 926-4433.
4-5 Battle of Perryville, Perryville Battlefield State Historic Site, Perryville.
This Civil War reenactment features a battle reenacted on the actual battlefield on both days.
Authentic weaponry, clothing, campsites; demonstrations of infantry, artillery and cavalry; sutlers, living history tours, Civil War music, food and more take you back to the days of Abraham Lincoln and the great defense of freedom.
4-7 Big Bone Lick Discovery Days-Lewis 
Crafts, pioneer demonstrations, and music take you back to frontier life.
This yearâs festival will also include the Lewis 
10-11 Crafts in the Village, Kentucky Dam Village State Resort, Gilbertsville.
Visit the park and browse among the unique Kentucky handcrafts set upon the backdrop of fall.
10-12 Camparama Weekend, Lake Cumberland State Resort, Jamestown.
Enjoy the pleasant temperatures of early October with golf tournaments, archery, campfire programs, live entertainment, hikes and more.
Camp two nights for the price of one!
10-12 Fall Celebration, Kenlake State Resort, Hardin.
Buy one night of camping; get the next night free! The weekend is filled with exciting recreational activities that celebrate fall and its beauty.
10-12 Civil War Days, Columbus-Belmont State Park, Columbus.
Authentic Civil War reenactments with encampments, demonstrations, sutlers, music, food, walking tours, style show, an authentic funeral, battle skirmishes and a Civil War Ball.
Do not miss the night firing of the cannons or the Sunday church services.
10-12 Fall Photography Weekend, Pennyrile Forest State Resort, Dawson Springs.
Photo contest; slide critique and evening programs for novice and professional photographers.
Awards offered in a variety of categories.
$27 pre-registration fee due by October 3, $30 registration after that.
10% discount on lodging for participants.
11 Arts, Crafts 
Show hours are 9 a.m. to 4 p.m. Saturday, Oct. 11.
Exhibitor fee is $35 per 12 x 12 space.
Deadline for exhibitor registration is September 26^th.
17-18 41^st Annual Photoscenic Weekend, Greenbo Lake State Resort, Greenup.
This long-standing event, co-sponsored by the Louisville Courier Journal, goes to Greenbo Lake this year.
Seminar includes nature hikes, photography techniques, and a slide contest.
For more information, please call Larry Spitzer at (502) 451-3191.
18 Butler History Day, Butler-Turpin State Historic House-General Butler State, Carrollton.
All that is Butler will be celebrated; featuring the military history of the Butler family, their Irish heritage, the building of the park by the CCC, the Veterans memorial, historic house, cemetery tours, and much more.
Event fee.
18-19 The âLastâ Mountain Bike Race-Off Road, General Butler State Resort, Carrollton.
Gear up for the last mountain bike ride of the year.
Sponsored by the Kentucky Recreation 
Registration fee.
25 Greenbo 5K Challenge, Greenbo Lake State Resort, Greenup.
Challenge yourself with a 5K run on the asphalt roads of the park and the hilly incline of champions.
Race begins at 10 a.m. $12 pre-registration fee before October 18 or $15 thereafter and until day of the race.
Entry includes a T-shirt, refreshments, and awards.
10% discount on lodging for participants.
25 Moonbow Trail Trek, Cumberland Falls State Resort, Corbin.
Choose a 10.8 or 4.5 mile hiking trek.
Registration includes a T-shirt, refreshments, 
Registration is $10.
Deadline for registration is October 22.
top of page top of page
Copyright © 2003 Kentucky.gov Kentucky.gov Home | Online Services | Privacy Statement | Link Disclaimer | Security Policy | Accessibility Policy | About Kentucky.gov | Individuals with Disabilities | Feedback |
Last updated: Wednesday, September 24, 2003
