[bbheading1.jpg] [bbheading2.jpg]
Collared peccaries are in the even-toed, hoofed mammal order of Artiodactyla.
Javelinas are often called pigs but they really are not.
They are in different family than pigs.
There are several differences between the two animals, which are detailed below.
click here to Listen to some Javelina!
Javelina Pigs three toes on the hind foot four toes on the hind foot bones are fused in the foot bones in the foot are not fused ulna and radius " lower arm bones" are fused ulna and radius are not fused 38 teeth 34 or 44 teeth canine teeth are straight canine teeth are curved have scent glands lack scent glands have complex stomach have a simple stomach lack a gall bladder gall bladder is present have a short tail
have a long tail lack sweat glands have sweat glands
Javelinas thrive in a variety of habitats and are able to adapt easily to different areas in their territory.
The javelina is a herbivore (plant eater) and frugivore (fruit eater).
They eat wide variety of fruits, tubers, rhizomes, bulbs, acorns, grass, green shoots of annuals, stems of prickly pears, lupines, mesquite beans, and lechuguilla.
They are also opportunistic and take animal matter as food when it is easily available or accidentally ingest it while foraging for other things.
Succulent prickly pear pads make it possible for the javelina to survive until rainfall brings many new annual food plants and water sources.
A continuous diet of cacti causes diarrhea and possible oxalic acid poisoning that could lead to kidney failure.
Javelina will drink when water is available, but it is not essential if succulents are available.
family group of javelina The collared peccary can breed any month of the year, but most births occur in May, June, or July, after a five-month gestation period.
This may be to correspond with the summer rainy season.
They first breed at about one year of age and only death or disease ends the ability to breed and bear young.
Collared peccaries live in groups, but do not form long-term pair bonds.
The female gives birth standing up and nurses the young for two months.
The average litter size is two, but occasionally is as high as five.
By six weeks of age the young are eating solid food like their mother.
By forty weeks the young are full-grown.
There is typically a 50% or higher mortality rate for the young.
Javelinas can get lice, ticks, fleas, tapeworms, nematodes, and assorted blood parasites.
They rarely get rabies.
Coyotes, bobcats, black bears, and mountain lions prey upon javelinas.
On average they live 7.5 years in the wild.
Herd size ranges from five to twenty seven animals, with an average of fourteen per herd in Big Bend National Park.
A typical day for a javelina in Big Bend begins at daylight when the herd gets up from the bedding site and feeds until mid-morning.
Food will include lechuguilla, roots, prickly pear, seeds of woody plants, fruits, and forbs when available.
The herd feeds by spreading out in a loosely knit group.
As they day heats up the javelina seek shelter in cooler canyons, caves, and areas of dense shrub.
They will feed again in late afternoon until dark.
Feeding time increases in cooler months and resting time increases in the summer.
Javelina may even feed at night during the hottest months.
After feeding, the herd will bed down under rocky overhangs, in caves, and in shallow depressions with heavy brush cover.
They will huddle together in a group for warmth and protection when bedding down.
Defecation stations are common near the bedding grounds.
When the collared peccary feeds it will often dig with its nasal disk to uproot plants and tubers.
They often use their feet to hold the pads of a prickly pear and then peel back the skin and spines to eat the juicy insides.
They prefer the younger pads which have the fewest spines and lowest level of fiber.
Squabbles can arise among the herd when feeding on the same plant.
Javelinas also enjoy wallowing in the mud or dust.
They prefer to "bathe" in mud rather than water.
The javelina does some mutual rubbing, nose touching, and nuzzling as greetings, but spend little time grooming each other.
Javelinas often rub their scent glands against rocks, trees, etc as a way of marking their territory.
Scent is also important in social behavior for recognizing group members and their hierarchical rank within the group.
javelina are not pigs Javelinas have many different vocal sounds.
They issue a bark as a togetherness call to find other herd members.
A woof is sounded for an alarm usually as the javelina runs away.
Grunts are also used to communicate with the young.
Tooth clicking and a low grumble are produced in times of aggression and fighting.
Javelinas have a good sense of hearing that allows them to hear herd communications from far away.
Javelinas are not visually oriented; they cannot easily detect and distinguish objects by sight alone except at the closest range.
If you are downwind of a javelina it is possible to get within ten feet before being detected.
Javelinas also have a well-developed sense of smell.
It is by far their best sense.
Scent alone can cause alarm, fright, and scent marking.
A javelina will often raise the hairs on its back when alarmed in an effort to look larger and more threatening.
Javelina hides were shipped east and to Europe for gloves and hairbrushes in the late 1800's and early 1900's.
The hides were used as barter in many trading posts along the U.S.-Mexico border.
Since the 1940's the javelina has been considered a sporting game animal in Texas.
It provides a source of income for landowners and the State of Texas for the hunter's fee.
The meat is typically baked or barbecued.
In Big Bend National Park the javelina is protected.
It is often seen in the campgrounds feeding and has been known to raid coolers and picnic tables when they are left unattended.
The javelina is common in Big Bend and a welcome site to many visitors.
