[clearpixel.gif] [clearpixel.gif]
Not long after their inception, they captured the 2001 Regional Harmony Sweepstakes title in Seattle, WA and again in 2002 in Denver, Co.
This led to their being featured among the best at the National Harmony Sweepstakes in San Francisco, CA. Eclipse was invited by Director Kenny Ortega to be featured in the Opening Ceremonies of the recent Winter Olympics which led to a feature spot in the Closing Ceremonies and at the Medals Plaza as the opening act for Brooks 
Eclipse was also featured in the Stadium of Fire 4^th of July Celebration with Toby Keith and Larry King.
Their repertoire spans an extremely wide range of styles from vocal jazz, to pop and R
With their explosive sound, driving rhythms, and lush harmonies, Eclipse brings a fresh new musical experience to any concert.
Outreach Options: Workshops and mini-interactive concerts adaptable to most ages focusing on such topics as vocal percussion, arranging, and basic ensemble techniques.
Tech Requirements: Full-range Concert-Style Sound System with coverage adequate for venue.
Emphasis on bass frequencies (ie: high-powered subwoofers).
Appropriate Stage lighting.
Minimum stage size of 24'x12' Eclipse will bring: Wireless microphones, wireless in-ear monitor system (no stage monitors are required), their own sound engineer to mix the performance.
Enoch Train
Enoch Train Contact Information: Christian Mealey 4910 W Amelia Earhart Dr Salt Lake City, UT 84116 801.355.1771 fax 801.355.1779 cmealey@xelent.com www.enochtrain.com
Cost: Presenter $ 1750 UAC $ 1750
Availability: Enoch Train is available to play all days except Sundays.
July1, 2003June 30, 2004
Enoch Train is an "instrumental-contemporary-acoustic-Americana-folk ensemble" dedicated to recording and performing traditional and original melodies from around the world in a fresh and innovative manner.
When immigrants came to America long ago, they carried the music of their homelands in their hearts.
Later, in public gatherings or at church worship services, they sang this music and shared it within their "melting pot" communities.
This music helped to establish a new musical tradition in a budding nation.
Enoch Train celebrates the diversity of the people of America by exploring these melodies.
Led by producer/musician Clive Romney, and comprised of some of the best studio musicians in the state of Utah, Enoch Train brings fresh expression to the songs and tunes that have become so well known in American culture, and introduces us to other sounds from around the world.
Guitar, woodwinds, bass, mandolin, fiddle, accordion, harmonica, and drums of all shapes and sizesto name just a fewpaint a musical picture that leaves the listener with renewed excitement for the music of America.
The Enoch Train was an actual sailing ship that brought immigrants from Europe and North America in the late nineteenth century.
Upon the occasion of its launch in 1852, the Boston Daily Atlas call the Enoch Train the largest clipper ship in the world, and praised it by writing, "Never was there a ship to which the term beautiful was more appropriately applied."
Enoch Train, the band, took the name in honor of those who sailed in search of a new and better life, bringing with them the traditions of their homelands and creating new traditions in a new land.
Enoch Train band consists of:
Clive Romney:Mandolin, Guitar, Banjo, Percussion Janice Walter:Fiddle, Guitar, Mandolin, Accordian Rich Dixon:Guitars, Dobro, Mandolin Rob Honey:Bass, Guitar Daron Bradford:Flute, Clarinet, Oboe, English Horn, Pennywhistle, Saxes, Recorder, Quena, Sampona, Shakuhachi, etc.
Dave Compton:Keyboards, Accordion, Harmonica and Guitar Jay Lawrence:Drums and Percussion Tom Hewittson:Mandolin, Guitar
Outreach Options: Enoch Train consists of some of the finest talent in the western United States.
Each artist is available to teach master classes in their respective areas of expertise.
Their expansive repertoire includes: Studio Recording 
Technical Requirements:
Tech rider available upon request.
CSP Homepage Music A-B Music C-D Music E-L Music M-Z Dance Theater
[clearpixel.gif]
Fry Street String Quartet
Fry Street String Quartet Contact Information: DeeAnne Hunsteing Hunstein Artist Services 65 West 90^th Street, 13F New York, NY 10024 212.724.2693 fax: 212.724.9393 deeanne@hunsteinartists.com www.frystreetquartet.com
Cost: Presenter $ 1500 UAC $ 1500
Availability: July 1, 2003 June 30, 2004
Formed in Chicago in 1997, The Fry Street Quartet (FSQ) brims with exuberance and energy.
The quartet's 2001 debut at Weill recital Hall in New York "spoke of precision, preparation, excitement, profound heritage, and ultimate satisfaction" (New York Concert Review).
Their performance earlier that season at the 92^nd Street Y in New York was hailed by the New York Times as "a triumph of ensemble playing."
Winners of the 2000 Millennium Grand Prize at the Fischoff National Chamber Music Competition and the first prize at the 2000 Yellow Springs Competition, the FSQ performs nationally and internationally, with concerts this year in Chicago, Los Angeles, New York, and others, and a concert tour of the Balkans sponsored by Carnegie Hall and the U. S. State Department.
Committed to education, in 1999 the Fry Street Quartet applied and was chosen to participate in Chamber Music America's three-year "Rural Residencies" program (funded by the National Endowment for the Arts).
The quartet spent three years working with the community of Hickory, North Carolina in outreach, education, chamber music activities, and serving as principal players in North Carolina's Western Piedmont Symphony.
The quartet was recently named Faculty Quartet in Residence at Utah State University, where it continues to influence and encourage future generations of musicians.
The Fry Street Quartet will present during the next two seasons "From Prodigy to Master" a series of six concerts exploring the first and last works by the grand old master-composers of the string quartet genre.
In one evening, hear the Mozart's precocious Opus 13, written by the composer at 16 years old, and then his Opus 590, written in the year of the composer's untimely death.
Such juxtapositions shed a new light on classical music's masterpieces and unearth some fascinating seldom-heard early works.
In Haydn's Quartet, Op.1, we see "the father of the string quartet" first exploring the new genre that would become his trademark, with the excitement and naivete of a young man.
In Haydn's Opus 77, No. 2, we hear "Papa Haydn," now an old man composing with wisdom and ease on a lifetime of experience, and also being inflruenced by the younger composers: Mozart, the prodigy who admired Haydn greatly, and Beethoven, Haydn's own irreverent and rebellious student.
The series showcases the early genius of a teen-aged Mozart and Mendelssohn, and displays incredible artistic development and innovation through the brilliant lives of Beethoven, Haydn, Dvorak, and Schubert.
Outreach Options: 1) A two-hour interactive master class/string chamber music workshop for string students which culminates in a student concert and a short performance by the Fry Street Quartet.
2) A young people's "informance" blending performance with lively activities and discussion previewing the upcoming concert.
3) An outreach concert for a non-traditional audience (hospital, prison, retirement home, etc.)
Technical Requirements: 4 armless chairs.
sufficient lighting for performers to see their music well and a quiet defined space for listening only.
Noisy air-conditiooning , or heating systems should be avoided.
Also, the space should not be open for any purpose other than listening to the concert or presentation..
Gift Horse
Gift Horse Contact Information: Russ Evans 9114 N 6800 W American Fork, UT 84003 801.768.1619 435.445.3491 fax birchcrrkbluegrass@hotm ail.com
Cost: Presenter $ 800 UAC $ 800
Availability: July 1, 2003 June 30, 2004
GIFT HORSE is a hard driving, high energy Bluegrass band.
They are committed to playing music that excites and involves their audience.
They perform original material that reflects traditional bluegrass nuances and stories of rural Utah lifestyles, including love, tragedy and real life in all of its forms.
The music is upbeat and includes intricate involvement among the five instruments, Banjo, Fiddle, Mandolin, Guitar and Bass.
Bluegrass music is an original American art form created in the 1920's and 30's.
Gift Horse tells modern-day stories of Heartbreak, Love and Life while staying true to original performance techniques of the early masters.
BLAINE NELSON is one of the finest 5 string Banjo players in the state of Utah.
His 20+ years of playing the long neck have made him one of the most sought-after players in the business.
Blaine's hard driving three-finger-roll style moves the music and defines the roots of bluegrass throughout the band's performance.
He has written many original tunes, and Blaine has opened shows as a solo act for such groups as the Grammy award winning Kathy Kallick Band, The Nashville Mandolin Ensemble, and The Grasshoppers, to name a few.
He is one of the founders of the Norbest Birch Creek Bluegrass Festival (Utah's largest multi-day Bluegrass Festival) and attracts a following of seasoned musicians for his amazing skills on the banjo.
He and his wife Sue have two children, Sklyer and Hanna.
SHARRON EVANS throws the big Bass Fiddle like no one else.
While moving notes and runs up and down the bass she puts out incredible lyrics and vocals to many of the band's tunes.
Her style reflects the many hours she has played with Mike Bub (Dell McCoury Band) and Mark Schatz, two of the finest bass players in the world.
Over the years Sharron has developed an amazing vocal range with a style that is unique and original to Bluegrass music.
Sharron is a gifted singer/songwriter and writes many of the tunes the band performs.
She is a nationally recognized artist and provided the cover art for the band's first CD,"Sanpitch Serenade".
She paints music in all its colors both instrumentally and vocally.
She is married to Russ and they have three girls, Aimee, Alissa and Lorraine.
BILL SPRUNGER has been playing Bluegrass for about 15 years.
He is a master on many instruments but is featured on guitar in Gift Horse.
He flat picks his Martin Guitar with clean lightning quickness while finding time between notes to bend the strings into blues and patterns that leave his listeners breathless.
He creates powerful rhythm patterns as well while throwing in bass runs and chops demonstrating remarkable skills on the old 'round hole'.
Bill is a great tenor singer adding lead and harmony vocals to the mix.
He has great song writing skills as well which will be demonstrated on the band's next CD release.
He is also the 2001 Utah State Champion on Fiddle and Mandolin.
Bill is single and available....
RUSS EVANS creates forward movement with his driving mando in the Band.
His passion for Bluegrass is reflected in his strong chops and percussion style of playing.
Living in the rural farm country of Utah, Russ has written many of the band's tunes that reflect all aspects of that life style from "witching" wells to Native American influences as well as Gospel.
He is one of the founders and the promoter of the Birch Creek Bluegrass Festival in Central Utah, which is held on his 200 acre farm as well as promoting a concert series in rural Utah.
Russ is married to the bass player in Gift Horse and is purported to be the Father of their three children.
DREW WILLIAMS has that great ear for the high and lonesome sound and creates powerful leads and fillers throughout the music.
Drew has played the fiddle for over 19 years and demonstrates his love for traditional as well as contemporary styles of bluegrass music.
He also shows off his skills in the band on the mandolin.
His rapid fire, clean and accurate technique on both instruments keeps the band in high gear.
He is finishing his degree this year in tech/ed and we hope he continues to keep all his didgets.
GIFT HORSE has played many venues over the last few years including: The 2002 Utah Olympic Winter Games at Soilder Hollow, the 2002 Salt Lake City Washington Square Olympic Celebration, The Utah Arts Festival 2001 and 2002, the Smithsonian's national touring "Barn Again" exhibition, The Salt Lake City Bluegrass and Folk Festival, The Ogden City Music Festival, The Birch Creek Bluegrass Festival and The Mesquite Nevada Bluegrass Festival to name a few.
They were recently selected for the Utah Performing Arts Tour 2003.
They have just released their first CD, "Sanpitch Serenade" featuring music and stories of Utah with a CD release concert sponsored by The Intermountain Acoustic Music Association and KRCL radio of Salt Lake City.
They are professional and committed to their art form and performances.
They are dependable, energetic and crowd pleasers.
They love their music and their performance reflects it.
They are Utah's "real deal, no nonsense, stand up get out of the way, hard driving, leaving em wanting more" Gift Horse Bluegrass Band.
Outreach Options: Gift Horse is capable of reaching anducating many different kinds of audiences.
They have performed for elementary and secondary schools, universities and many public and private gatherings.
Each performer speaks to the nature and value of their instrument as it works within the band, giving examples of rhythm, texture, timing and percussion.
These points are broken down individually in a song while adding additional instruments until the fullness of the band sound is created.
The audience is invited to ask questions and also participate with vocals during the performance.
The band has organized and presented half-day workshops for beginning musician, up to 200 people all bringing their instruments.
A better understanding of acoustic music is realized as well as a better understanding of the history of an original form of American folk music, Bluegrass.
Technical Requirements: Single round mic.
[clearpixel.gif]
Brenn Hill
Brenn Hill Contact Information: Savannah Music Inc.
Brian Ferriman 205 Powell Place, Suite 214 Brentwood, TN 37027 615.369.0810 savannahmusic@att.net www.brennhill.com
Cost: Presenter $ 1250 UAC $ 1250
Availability: July 1, 2003 to June 30, 2004
These days, the Chisholm Trail may be lined with Dennys and Starbucks; the Old West may be one giant Wal-Mart; but there are still wild places, rugged [places, in the mountains and plains, where the glory of America's fabled past thrives.
There you'll find singer-songwriter Brenn Hill drawing inspiration for his music.
No cowboy-come-lately, this Utah native is the real deal, a passionate poet, outdoorsman, and veritable yhoung lion in the field of Western music.
Still in his mid-20s, Brenn is one of the bright hopes of this most American music.
Brenn performs as a soloist, as a duo or trio, or as a larger band.
A Brenn Hill concert celebrates the land, the stillness, and the hard-bitten beauty of cowboy life in the modern mountain West.
His four albums reveal Brenn to be "a bridge between western music's best traditions and the future of the genre as cowboys and cowboy singers evaolve with the changing times" (Billboard).
Hill's songs speak for those who live a lifestyle they would never trade for money.
The Academy of Western Artists named Brenn's third recording, Trail Through Yesterday, its 2001 "Album of the Year."
The Western Music Association honored Brenn with its 2001 Crescendo Award as the industry's Rising Star.
Brenn's 2002 Western Music Assoication nominations include Male Performer of the Year and Traditional Western Album of the Year for his latest release on the Real West label, Call You Cowboy.
"The best new artist I've heard is Brenn Hill."
(Chris LeDoux)
Outreach Options: 1) Children's workshops; 2) Instrumental workshops on songwriting and guitar; or 3) Acoustic (non-amplified) performances at rest homes and care facilities.
Technical Requirements: Professional sound system.
Mixing board with at least 8 low impedance mic inputs and at least 2 monitor sends.
4 two-way wedge monitor cabinets.
6 professional quality vocal mics on tripod boom stands.
8 mic cables.
One active DI for guitar pickup.
[clearpixel.gif]
Kristie Arnold Jazz Ensemble Contact: Kristie Arnold 648 Wymount Terrace Provo, UT 84604 Tel: 801.362.7372 Fax: 801.489.7023 Cost: Presenter $ 750 UAC $ 750 Availability: July 1, 2003 to June 30, 2004
Kristie is a vibrant and accomplished jazz singer who toured England as the featured vocalist with Synthesis, the world renowned big-band from BYU.
She also toured Italy with Swing Set, the faculty jazz ensemble from BYU-Idaho.
Locally she has appeared with jazz greats Alivino Rey, Robert Bailey, Jan Hyde, Lars Yorgasen, Craig Larsen, Steve Keen, Keven Johansen, Shannon Roberts, Jerry Floor, and Kelly Eisenhour.
She performed in and is currently the director of Syncopation, the vocal jazz choir at BYU.
Her ensemble includes the Steve Keen Trio.
Robert Bailey performs regularly with the Great Basin Street Dixieland Band.
He brings over sixty years of experience from the west coast where he performed with just about every big name under the sun including Dean Martin, Nat Cole, and even James Stewart.
He performed in the Umbria Jazz Festival and also directed the BYU Vocal Jazz Choir for three years.
Outreach Options: Clinic with school age children and invited public.
Discuss main aspects of jazz performance including improvisation, style choices, communication between members of combo, listening techniques, practice techniques.
Depending on need of presenter, choir and combo rehearsal.
Technical Requirements: Stage area no smaller than 12' x 12' indoor or outdoor depending on weather, 1 tuned piano upright or grand, access to at least four electrical outlets, standard voltage.
Los Hermanos de los Andes
Los Hermanos de los Andes
Contact: Edgar Zurita 1756 South Main, Orem, UT 84085 Tel: day 801.427.5745 Night 801.764-9611 Email: edgarz@soundconcepts.com Website: www.andesproductions.com Cost: Presenter $ 850 UAC $ 800 Availability: July 1, 2003 to June 30, 2004
Close your eyes and let your imagination transport you to the highlands of the Andes mountains.
Imagine the sound of haunting winds and the chill that pierces your very soul.
These sensations were captured by the ancient Incans in their music.
Today you can experience these enchanting traditional melodies performed by Los Hermanos de los Andes.
Using the modern guitar and native instruments including the charango (10-string instrument made from an armadillo back), quena (notched bamboo flute), wank'ara (goat skin bass drum), and many others, Los Hermanos de los Andes entice listeners to soar with the condor to the highest summits of the Andes.
Along with their many performances throughout the Western U.S. and Hawaii, members of Los Hermanos de los Andes have performed throughout Canada, Mexico, Central America, Europe and Asia.
Wherever Los Hermanos de los Andes perform, the spirit of their music mesmerizes and the exuberance of the group provokes audience participation from people of all walks of life.
Los Hermanos de los Andes invite you to sit back and let their haunting music take you on a journey to the mystic Andes.
Using instruments that date back to the Incan civilization, including the charango (10-string instrument made from an armadillo back), quena (notched bamboo flute), zampoña (bamboo pan flute), and wank'ara(goat skin bass drum), Los Hermanos de los Andes, magnificently blend melodies and entice listeners to soar with the condor to the highest summits of the Andes.
Wherever Los Hermanos de los Andes perform, the spirit of their music mesmerizes and the exuberance of the group provokes audience participation from people of all walks of life.Since 1989, members of Los Hermanos de los Andes have traveled throughout the U.S., Canada, Mexico, Central America, Europe and Asia, electrifying crowds with their music.
Los Hermanos de los Andes has had many guest appearances throughout the western United States and Hawaii, as well as consulting and recording for Macmillan/McGraw-Hill's school division, Brigham Young University, TBS and Embryo Records.
Los Hermanos de los Andes have also recorded and produced their own full-length album-- Mi Desventura.
Outreach Options: The outreach activity includes traditional folkloric from Cuba and puerto Rico as well as popular music.
The objective is to expose the audience to music that is heavily influenced by africian music.
Los Hermanos de los Andes will work with students in an outreach activity with emphasis on the history of the music and the instruments and musical structures of latin music.
Technical Requirements: 20´ x 20´ minimum stage space, 2 electrical outlets.
Will will provide own sound system use available lighting.
Dr. Ning Lu Ning Lu
Contact: Dr. Ning Lu 204 David P Gardner Hall 1375 Presidents Circle Salt Lake City, UT 84112-0030 Tel: day 801.587.9376 night 801.488.0068 Fax 801.581.5683 Email: ning.lu@music.utah.edu
Cost: Presenter $ 1000 UAC $ 1000
Availability July 1, 2003 June 30, 2004
Dr. Ning Lu was born in China and made his professional debut and first recording at the age of nine.
As the recipient of the Frank and Gina Day Performance Scholarship and the Norma Ekstrand Performance Scholarship, Lu completed his doctoral study in three years at the University of Colorado at Boulder, where he was the student of Angela Cheng, Larry Graham and Robert Spillman.
Since his debut with orchestra at age of twelve with the Central Conservatory of Music Philharmonic, Dr. Lu has performed with the Youth Symphony of China, University of Utah Philharmonic and Midland-Odessa Symphony Orchestra.
Other noted accomplishments include 1990 Grand Prizewinner of summer Arts Piano Competition, First Prize of the National Piano Competition in China, both the 1^st Annual Piano Competition and Piano Etude Competition of the Central Conservatory of Music, the Audition of Gina Bachauer International Piano Competition in China, and numerous other awards.
Dr. Lu has served as the adjudicator of preliminary round in the 2002 Gina Bachauer International Artist Piano Competition.
He will also present master class and solo recital as well as serve as jury member for the 2003 competition.
Dr. Lu is the assistant professor of music at the University of Utah and the visiting Professor of the Conservatory of Music, Nanjing Normal University in China, where he presents recitals and master classes regularly.
His repertoire consists of Chopin Sonata No. 2 in B-flat Minor, Op.35, Beethoven Sonata No.32 in C minor Op.111, and Schubert Sonata in B-flat major, D960.
Outreach Optiions: Master Classes, lectures, demonstrations for all ages.
Technical Requirement: One tuned grand piano (Steinway preferred), one piano bench
[clearpixel.gif] [CSP Homepage]
[clearpixel.gif]
[clearpixel.gif]
folk_bottmbar
