[smbannertop.gif] [smNYSpictures.jpg]
Estimating the winnings.
(a) In estimating the value of a race to the winner, there shall be deducted only the amount of money payable to the owners of the other horses and to other persons out of the stakes and out of the added money.
(b) In estimating foreign winnings, the current rate of exchange at the time of such winnings shall be adopted.
(c) The value of prizes not in money will not be estimated in value of the race to the winner.
(d) In estimating the value of a series of races in which an extra sum of money or prize is won by winning two or more races, the extra sum or prize shall be estimated in the last race by which it was finally won.
4030.2.
Surplus to winner.
In all races, should there be any surplus from entries or subscriptions over the advertised value, it shall be paid the winner, unless stated by the conditions to go to other horses in the race.
Back to Top
4030.3.
Winnings defined.
(a) Winnings during the year shall include all prizes from the first of January preceding to the time appointed for the start and shall apply to all races in any country; and winning shall include dividing or walking over.
(b) Winning of a fixed sum is understood to be winning it in one race, unless specified to the contrary.
Back to Top
4030.4.
In a walkover.
(a) In case of a walkover, one half of the money offered to the winner is given.
(b) When a walkover is the result of arrangement by owners of horses engaged, no portion of the added money nor any other prize need be given.
Back to Top
4030.5.
Disposition of money or prize.
Any money or prize which, by the conditions of the race is to go to the horse placed second or in any lower place in the race, shall, if the winner has walked over or no horse has been so placed, be dealt with as follows:
(a) If part of the stake, it shall go to the winner.
(b) If a separate donation from the association or any other source, it shall not be given at all.
(c) If entrance money for the race, it shall go to the association.
Back to Top
4030.6.
Race not run or void.
If a race never be run or be void, all moneys paid by an owner in respect to that race shall be returned.
Back to Top
4030.7.
When race declared void.
A race may be declared void if no qualified horse cover the course according to rule.
Back to Top
4031.1.
Extra weight; running second.
No horse shall carry extra weight nor be barred from any race for having run second or in any lower place in a race.
Back to Top
4031.2.
Exemption from penalties.
When winners of claiming races are exempted from penalties, the exemption does not apply to races in which any of the horses running are not to be claimed.
Back to Top
4031.3.
Penalties, allowances--not cumulative.
Penalties and allowances are not cumulative unless so declared by the conditions of the race.
Back to Top
4031.4.
No allowance for beaten horse.
No horse shall receive allowance of weight or be relieved from extra weight for having been beaten in one or more races; provided that this section shall not prohibit maiden allowance or allowances to horses that have not won within a specified time or that have not won races of a specified value.
Back to Top
4032.1.
Apprentice jockeys; allowances.
Any person licensed as an apprentice jockey in accordance with section 4002.26 of this Subtitle may claim in all overnight races, except handicaps, the following allowances:
(a)
Back to Top 4033.5.
Time for declaration of overweight.
If such apprentice is under an apprentice contract of not less than three years nor more than five years with his original owner or trainer, he may, for one year after the completion of the conditions in subdivision (a) of this section, claim three pounds when riding horses owned or trained by such original owner or trainer.
If an apprentice has not ridden 40 winners within three years of being licensed as an apprentice, his rights to any weight allowance shall expire.
(d) After riding 40 winners within such three-year period, such apprentice will be eligible for a jockey's license pursuant to section 4002.27 of this Title.
A person not riding 35 winners within such three-year period shall also be eligible for a jockey's license if he shall have ridden in at least 10 races within the last six months of such period.
Back to Top
4032.2.
Apprentice jockeys; certificates; agreements.
Upon being licensed, any person who has never previously been licensed as a jockey in any country, may:
(a) either be issued a certificate which may be in effect no longer than five years; or
(b) of his own free will, and if under the age of 18 years, with the written consent of his parents or guardian, bind himself to an owner or trainer for a term of not less than three nor more than five years (subject to written extension if made for less than five years) by written contract approved by the board and filed with the board and The Jockey Club.
Back to Top
4032.3.
Apprentice contracts.
(a) All holders of apprentice contracts shall be subject to investigation as to character, ability, facilities and financial responsibility and shall, at the time of making the contract, own in good faith a minimum of three horses in training, or, if a trainer, shall operate in good faith a stable of at least three horses.
(b) Contracts for apprentice jockeys shall provide for fair remuneration, adequate medical attention and suitable board and lodging for the apprentice; and approved provision shall be made for savings out of his earnings.
(c) No apprentice shall be permitted to acquire his own contract.
(d) All apprentice contracts described in this Part shall be filed with The Jockey Club within 30 days after execution thereof or upon filing application for license with the board.
(e) The failure of an owner or trainer to file any such contract or to obtain the approval of the board thereto may subject such owner or trainer to the revocation or suspension of his license or to such other disciplinary action by the board as in its judgment may seem proper.
(f) Apprentice contracts may contain an option, equally available to both employer and apprentice, to cancel the same after two years from their date on such terms as may be prescribed therein; and notice of such cancellation signed by the party or parties so cancelling any such agreement shall be filed promptly with the board and The Jockey Club.
Back to Top
4032.4.
Extension of an apprenticeship.
(a) Under intervening exceptional circumstances which would prevent an apprentice jockey from riding during the full period specified in this Part, such as:
(1) service in the Armed Forces of the United States;
(2) personal injuries suffered in the course of his occupation;
(3) a disabling illness;
(4) restrictions on racing; or
(5) other reasonable circumstances; the board may extend said period and the term of his contract or certificate to compensate therefor; provided, however, that an apprenticeship shall not exceed 36 working months.
(b) The board shall take jurisdiction on applications for extensions where the injuries specified and restrictions on racing occurred at tracks licensed or franchised by the board.
(c) The board shall take jurisdiction on applications for extension of contracts because of service in the Armed Forces only where such contracts were executed and filed in the State of New York.
Back to Top
4032.5--4032.9.
[Repealed]
4033.1.
Time for weighing out.
Every jockey must be weighed for a specified horse not less than 30 minutes before the time fixed for the race, and the number of the horse shall be exhibited officially as soon as possible.
Back to Top 4033.2.
Equipment weighed with jockey.
If a horse run in muzzle, martingale, breastplate or clothing, it must be put on the scale and included in the jockey's weight.
Back to Top 4033.3.
Equipment not weighed.
No whip or substitute for a whip, blinkers or number cloth shall be allowed on the scales nor shall any bridle, safety vest or safety helmet approved by the stewards be weighed.
A safety vest shall weigh no more than two pounds and shall be designed to provide shock-absorbing protection to the upper body, as evidenced by a label with at least a rating of five, by the British Equestrian Trade Association (BETA).
Back to Top
4033.4.
Declaration of overweight.
If a jockey intends to carry overweight, he must declare the amount thereof at the time of weighing out, or if in doubt as to his proper weight, he may declare the weight he intends to carry.
Back to Top 4033.5.
Time for declaration of overweight.
If a jockey intends to carry overweight exceeding by more than two pounds the weight which his horse is to carry, the owner or trainer consenting, he must declare the amount of overweight to the clerk of the scales at least 45 minutes before the time appointed for the race, and the clerk shall cause the overweight to be stated on the notice board immediately.
For failure on the part of a jockey to comply with this section, he may be punished as provided by sections 4022.12 through 4022.15 of this Subtitle.
Back to Top 4033.6.
Five pounds overweight limit.
No horse shall carry more than five pounds overweight except in races confined exclusively to amateurs or to riders who are officers of the United States Army or Navy or of the National Guard.
Back to Top
4033.7.
Owner responsible for weight.
The owner is responsible for the weight carried by his horse.
Back to Top
4033.8.
Equipment regulated.
Only equipment specifically approved by the stewards shall be worn or carried by a jockey or a horse in a race.
Back to Top
4034.1.
[Duties of starter.]
(a) The starter shall give all orders necessary for securing a fair start.
(b) He shall report to the stewards by whom and by what cause any delay was occasioned and any cases of misconduct by assistant starters or by jockeys when under his orders.
Back to Top
4034.2.
[Failure of horse to start.]
If a horse whose number has been exhibited or whose starting is obligatory does not start and run in the race, the stewards may suspend any person or persons responsible therefor.
Back to Top
4034.3.
[Persons excluded from course.]
After the horses are ordered to the starting post and until the stewards direct the gates to be reopened, all persons except the racing officials shall be excluded from the course to be run over.
Back to Top
4034.4.
[Time signals.]
A bell shall be rung to indicate the time to saddle and a bugle sounded to indicate the time to go to the post.
Back to Top
4034.5.
[Parade to the post.]
All horses shall parade and, under penalty of disqualification, shall carry their weight from the paddock to the starting post, such parade to pass the finish line.
Back to Top
4034.6.
[Horses led to the post.]
When, by permission of the paddock judge and upon payment to the association of $ 10, a horse is led to the post, he is excused from parading with the other horses, but nevertheless he must, on his way to the post, pass the stewards' stand.
Back to Top
4034.7.
[Determination of starting position.]
The position of horses when starting shall be determined by lot, i.e., a numbered ball shall be drawn from a bottle by the clerk of the scales.
Back to Top
4034.8.
[Starting vicious horse.]
The starter may place vicious and unruly horses on the outside and behind the line.
Back to Top
4034.9.
[Accident at the post.]
A horse in the hands of the starter shall receive no further care from anyone at the starting post except the assistant starters, provided that if any accident happen to a jockey, his horse or his equipment, the starter may permit any jockey or jockeys to dismount and the horses to be cared for during the delay; otherwise no jockey shall dismount.
Back to Top
4034.10.
[Starting gate.]
(a) Except in cases provided for in subdivision (b) of this section, all races shall be started in a starting gate selected by the association conducting the meeting if approved by the commission.
(b) By permission of the stewards a race may be started without a gate.
Back to Top
4034.11.
[Starting in front of the post.]
A start in front of the post is void, and the horses must be started again.
Back to Top
4034.12.
[Horses to be schooled before starting.]
All horses shall be schooled properly before starting and, upon the report of the starter, the stewards may suspend any trainer who, after being notified, shall start an unruly horse.
Back to Top
4034.13.
[Position at starting post.]
The horses shall be started as far as possible in a line, but may be started at such reasonable distance behind the starting post as the starter thinks necessary.
Back to Top
4034.14.
[Matters to be referred to stewards.]
For disobedience of his orders at the starting post or for attempting any unfair advantage, the starter may refer the matter to the stewards for action; but any penalty shall not take effect until after the last race of the day.
Back to Top
4034.15.
Statements by starter conclusive.
The concurrent statements of the starter and his assistant as to incidents of the start are conclusive.
Back to Top
New York State Racing and Wagering Board 1 Watervliet Avenue Extension, Suite 2 Albany, NY 12206 Phone: (518) 453-8460 Last Updated: Tuesday, April 01, 2003 11:16 AM Send Questions or Comments to: mailto:info@racing.state.ny.us Please note: All emails are scanned for viruses.
Those found to be infected will be deleted without being viewed.
Disclaimer Statement
[ecommercelogo.gif]
