[blank.gif] Living History at Arbor Lodge State Historical Park The Battle of Chalk Bluff Facts about Arbor Lodge Living History Events The Original 1st Nebraska Volunteers [Chalktop.JPG]
A reenactment by accurately costumed and outfitted Civil War enthusiasts is a highlight of living history events at Arbor Lodge State Historical Park in Nebraska City.
It begins as an insignificant squabble a handful of 1st Nebraska Infantry Volunteers guarding a broken-down Union supply wagon, and a few lean and hungry Confederates trying to take it away.
Soon, with both sides reinforced, the little skirmish matures into a full-fledged battle, as volleys of musketry and barrages of cannon fire fill the air with powder smoke and thunder.
The Battle of Chalk Bluff begins.
[civil1.JPG] At least thats how it began last fall at Arbor Lodge State Historical Park in Nebraska City, where nearly 300 Civil War buffs, decked out with Yank and Reb uniforms and equipment, reenacted the affair for an estimated 20,000 park visitors.
That is how it might begin again this year, when the annual event is repeated October 4 and 5.
The real Battle of Chalk Bluff took place in southeastern Missouri in May 1863.
The 1st Nebraska Volunteers fought in the engagement, and the reenactment is a highlight of Arbor Lodges living history attractions.
It is staged in the fall to coincide with the apple harvest that attracts visitors to Nebraska City.
Living history events include free tram rides, old-fashioned cider pressing, spinning, weaving and demonstrations of other occupations and crafts of the 19th and early 20th centuries.
The battle reenactment, a spectacle of action, noise, smoke and pageantry to be presented this year by a cast of 350 in blue and gray or butternut uniforms, is the main event of the weekend.
The Union and Confederate units both employ tactics and formations used in the Civil War.
They deploy skirmishers, advance shoulder-to-shoulder in a compact line-of-battle and deliver massed volleys of musketry or fire-by-file.
Artillery pieces belch flame and white smoke from the perimeter of the battlefield.
Prisoners are taken.
Officers shout and are obeyed or ignored.
Casualties fall, and the wounded are carried to a field hospital for care by surgeons and nurses.
[civil3.JPG] The 60-minute reenactment is staged on Saturday and Sunday.
Although it is an orchestrated presentation, it is nevertheless inherently chaotic as all battlefields, even reenacted battlefields, must be.
Spectators come away infused with the heady, distinctive bouquet of black powder smoke, but more significantly, with a greater understanding of what Civil War soldiers might have experienced in combat, minus the real suffering, grief and fear.
Spectators who invest a few minutes before and after the battle also can learn something of army life off the battlefield during the Civil War period.
Before and after each days battle, reenactors demonstrate period military skills and equipment in their camps and on the battlefield.
An infantry unit might demonstrate marching, drill and the manual of arms and explain how those skills are used in the battle.
They might identify bugle calls and their meaning.
Also likely are demonstrations of the care and feeding of the infantry musket, the firing of volleys and Gatling gun demonstrations.
Cannoneers demonstrate the steps in loading and firing the big muzzle- loading field pieces, showing examples of shot, shell and canister, the principal types of artillery ammunition used during the Civil War, and the rammer-staffs, pricks and other accessories used to load and fire them.
Artillerymen will explain a deadly peculiarity of front-loading artillery: how a cannon loaded once can fire twice, and how the second blast can injure or kill the gun crew serving the front of the weapon.
A stroll among the A-frame and two-man tents and other 1860s-vintage shelters in the reenactors encampments is as enlightening as the formal demonstrations and reenacted battle.
The shelters, tents, clothing, cooking utensils and other paraphernalia are accurate reproductions of 1860s equipment.
So are the camp inhabitants, right down to their spectacles and jewelry.
[civil4.JPG] They remain in uniform and in character, performing camp chores and military duties, talking about tactics and equipment and trading camp gossip.
Soldiers fall into line, some eagerly for pay call, others reluctantly for punishment as drunkards or thieves.
At any time, the reenactors will pause to answer visitors questions.
The mood of the camp grows more lively on Saturday evening in anticipation of a full-fledged ball later that night featuring music and dances of the Civil War period.
Although period costumes are optional, many of the women turn out in 1860s finery, the soldiers in dress uniforms.
The public is welcome.
Reenactors devote countless hours to re-creating Civil War battles.
Last years event at Arbor Lodge, for example, included reenactors from Minnesota, North Dakota, South Dakota, Iowa, Missouri, Illinois, Colorado and Nebraska.
Some invested two days travel each way to participate in the two-day event.
Their cash outlay for equipment, alone, is considerable.
A typical infantryman, a mere private in the ranks, will invest $400 in his musket, $300 in a uniform and $100 in footgear.
Belts, cartridge box, canteen and other accessories to the uniform can raise the cost as high as $1,800 not including tent and camp equipment.
Some reenactors buy dress uniforms as well as field garb, and many have both Yankee and Rebel outfits, changing when one side or the other is short of manpower at an event.
Reenactors typically belong to organizations that are reincarnations of Civil War military units.
Their uniforms and equipment are reproductions of those used by the original units, and they carry the units colors.
The Battle of Chalk Bluff reenactment at Arbor Lodge is the handiwork of the one such unit, the modern 1st Nebraska Infantry Volunteers.
Like the original 1st Nebraska, the group draws most of its members from the Omaha and Nebraska City areas.
Most reenactors do it out of love for history.
Many had ancestors on one or both sides of the Civil War, said Steve Jipp of Omaha.
Jipp and his neighbor Bob Bebout, both members of the modern 1st Nebraska Infantry Volunteers, organize the Battle of Chalk Bluff reenactments at Arbor Lodge, which began in 1994.
Members of the 1st Nebraska also have appeared as extras in several major movies, including Dances with Wolves, Glory and Gettysburg.
[civil6.JPG] Jipp, Bebout and 1st Nebraska committees began working on the 1997 Chalk Bluff reenactment before the smoke cleared from the 1996 event.
The Battle of Chalk Bluff is growing in popularity among Civil War buffs, said Jipp and Bebout, and the 1997 event will be limited to 350 participants.
Spectators often remark at the number of women and children involved in Civil War reenactments, an activity often perceived as largely a mans domain.
Weve made it a family affair, involving our wives and kids in camp settings, said Cliff Stevens of Lincoln, who has participated in several Chalk Bluff reenactments.
Boys eight to 10 years old were drummers and runners in the infantry during the Civil War, and in the artillery, were the `powder monkeys who brought gunpowder, shot and shell from the caissons forward to the guns, Stevens said.
In those days, 10-year-old boys would run away from home to go to war.
Women in Civil War reenactments portray nurses, officers wives or other non-combatants of the Civil War including the displaced persons who followed armies for supplies or security when the war threw civil institutions into chaos.
Reenactors who, like Stevens, do not belong to a Civil War reenactors organization, often petition a unit to join its ranks for an event.
After passing inspection and a safety test, they fall in with the unit.
Although Stevens has a Confederate uniform, he prefers to play the role of a displaced civilian, portraying a town or county lawman in the battle reenactment.
A Civil War history buff, Stevens said, Reenacting is a way to get people to look at their history, to see their past.
I think we need to understand the attitudes, superstitions and religious views of the people of that era, and reenactment can help us do that.
__________________________________________________________________
