[smbannertop.gif] [smNYSpictures.jpg]
Interpretation.
This Article is to be interpreted and enforced in a manner consistent with the laws of the State of New York in effect from time to time.
4020.2.
Recognized meetings.
A recognized meeting in the State of New York is a meeting held with the sanction of the commission upon a race course in the State of New York operated by a duly licensed association, for the time and at the place where such meeting is licensed to be held.
Back to Top
4020.3.
Definitions.
(a) A horse includes mare, gelding, colt and filly.
(b) A horse is bred at the place of his birth.
(c) The age of a horse is reckoned as beginning on the first of January in the year in which he is foaled.
(d) A maiden is a horse which, at time of starting, has never won a race on the flat in any country.
(e) A race includes a stake, a purse, a sweepstakes, a private sweepstakes, a match or an overnight event, but does not include a steeplechase or hurdle race.
(f) A purse is a race for money or other prize to which the owners of the horses engaged do not contribute.
(g) A sweepstakes is a race in which the entrance fee, subscription and other contribution of three or more owners is distributed according to the conditions of the race; and any such race is still a sweepstakes when money or other prize is added; but no overnight race, whatever its conditions, shall be considered to be a sweepstakes.
(h) A private sweepstakes is one to which no money or other prize is added and which, previous to closing, has not been advertised, either by publication or by circular or entry blank, or in any other way.
(i) A match is a race between two horses, the property of two different owners, on terms agreed upon by them and to which no money or other prize is added; it is void if either owner dies.
(j) An overnight race is one for which the entries close 72 hours (exclusive of Sundays) or less before the time set for the first race of the day on which such race is to be run.
(k) A handicap is a race in which the weights to be carried by the horses are adjusted by the handicapper for the purpose of equalizing their chances of winning.
(l) A free handicap is one in which no liability is incurred for entrance money, stake or forfeit until acceptance of the weight, either directly or through omission to declare out.
(m) A highweight handicap is one in which the top weight shall not be less than 140 pounds.
(n) A post race is one in which the subscribers declare, at the usual time before a race for declaring to start, the horse or horses they are to run, without limitations of choice other than that prescribed by this Subchapter or the conditions of the race.
(o) A produce race is one to be run for by the produce of horses named or described at the time of entry.
(p) An untried horse is one whose produce are maidens.
(q) (1) A claiming race is one in which every horse running therein may be claimed in conformity to this Subchapter.
(2) An optional claiming race is a race restricted to horses entered to be claimed for a stated claiming price and to those which have started previously for that claiming price or less.
In the case of horses entered to be claimed in such a race, the race will be considered, for the purposes of this Subchapter, a claiming race.
(r) The nominator is the person in whose name a horse is entered for a race.
(s) The breeder of a horse is the owner of his dam at the time of foaling.
(t) (1) An authorized agent is a person appointed by a document signed by the owner and lodged annually at the office of The Jockey Club, or if for a single meeting only, with the clerk of the course for transmission to The Jockey Club.
(2) An authorized agent may appoint a subagent only when authorized so to do by the document lodged as above.
(u) Weight for age means standard weight according to this Article.
A weight for age race is one in which all horses carry weight according to the scale without penalties or allowances.
(v) A walkover is when two horses in entirely different interests do not run for a race.
(w) Association veterinarian is a veterinarian licensed by the board and employed by a racing association or corporation.
(x) Attending veterinarian is a veterinarian licensed by the board and hired by the owner or trainer.
Back to Top
4020.4.
Calculation of time.
(a) When the last day for doing anything under this Article falls on a Sunday, it may be done on the following Monday, unless a race to which such act relates is appointed for that day, in which case it must be done on the previous Saturday.
(b) A month means a calendar month; a day means 24 hours.
Back to Top
4021.1.
Scope.
Subchapter A of this Subtitle, including this Article, supersedes the conditions of a race or the regulations of a meeting or of an association when they conflict.
Back to Top
4021.2.
Overnight events limited.
After May 31st in each year, only four overnight events for a distance less than a mile for horses three years old and upwards shall be given on any race day, except upon approval by the stewards.
Back to Top
4021.3.
Distance limited
After June 30th in each year, there shall be no race less than five furlongs.
Back to Top
4021.4.
Number of starters.
The number of starters in overnight races shall be limited by the width of the track at the starting post, the maximum number to be determined by the stewards.
The number of starters in such overnight races, except handicaps, shall be reduced to the proper number by lot or, by division also by lot, of the race, at the option of the association.
The division of overnight handicaps shall be made by the racing secretary in his entire discretion.
Back to Top
4021.5.
Change of course.
By permission of the commission, races may be over a race course her than the one over which they have been announced to be run.
Back to Top
4021.6.
Unrecognized meeting.
(a) If a horse runs at any unrecognized meeting, he is disqualified for all races to which this Article applies.
(b) Any person owning, training or riding horses which run at any unrecognized meeting is disqualified, as are also all horses owned by or in charge of any such person.
(c) Any person acting in any official capacity at any unrecognized meeting may be disqualified.
Back to Top
4022.1.
Stewards of The Jockey Club.
The stewards of The Jockey Club have charge of the registry office and the registration or custody, as the case may be, of stable names, colors, designations of authorized agents and subagents, partnerships, leases, contingencies, jockey contracts and apprentice agreements.
Back to Top
4022.2.
Definition.
Whenever the word steward or stewards is used, it means steward or stewards of the meeting, or their duly appointed deputy or deputies.
Back to Top
4022.3.
Stewards at race meeting.
There shall be three stewards to supervise each race meeting.
One or such stewards shall be the official steward of the commission, one shall be appointed by The Jockey Club or by the National Steeplechase and Hunt Association, as may be appropriate, and one shall be appointed by the corporation or association conducting such race meeting.
Such stewards shall exercise such powers and perform such duties at each race meeting as may be prescribed by this Article.
Back to Top
4022.4.
Representative of The Jockey Club.
The Jockey Club may designate one of its members to visit each race meeting in an honorary capacity in association with the stewards.
Back to Top
4022.5.
Commissioner to act as steward.
During the absence or inability to act of an official steward of the commission or in the event of the failure or inability to appoint either of the other two stewards, the powers and duties of such steward shall be exercised and performed without compensation by a member of the commission designated by the commission for that purpose.
Back to Top
4022.6.
Emergency substitute.
In case of emergency, the stewards may, during a meeting, appoint a substitute to fill any of the offices during that meeting only.
Back to Top
4022.7.
Complaints against officials.
Every complaint against an official shall be made to the stewards in writing signed by the complainant.
Back to Top
4022.8.
Powers at meeting.
The stewards have power, as they think proper, to make and, if necessary, to vary all arrangements for the conduct of the meeting, as well as power to put off any race from day to day until a Sunday intervenes.
Back to Top
4022.9.
Access to all facilities.
The stewards have control over, and they and the stewards of The Jockey Club and members of the commission and their duly appointed representatives have access to all stands, weighing rooms, enclosures and all other places within the grounds of the association.
Back to Top
4022.10.
Supervision of entries, declarations.
The stewards have supervision over all entries and declarations.
Back to Top
4022.11.
Control of officials, others.
The stewards have power to regulate and control the conduct of all officials and of all owners, trainers, jockeys, grooms and other persons attendant on horses.
Back to Top
4022.12.
Power to exclude, suspend.
If the steward of the board shall find that any person has violated any of the sections of this Subchapter or has been involved in any action detrimental to the best interests of racing generally, he may exclude such person from the grounds, or any portion of such grounds, of the association conducting the meeting for a period not exceeding 60 days, or he may suspend the license of such person from participating in racing in this State, for a period not exceeding 60 days, or both such exclusion and suspension; and if he considers necessary any further action, he shall promptly refer the matter to the board.
The steward, in the exercise of his power under this section, shall consult with the steward of the racing association and the steward of The Jockey Club, affording them a reasonable opportunity to make recommendations relative to the action determined by the board's steward.
Nothing in this section shall be construed to limit any racing association or track licensee's power to exclude or deny any individual from its grounds or privileges thereon.
Back to Top
4022.13.
Imposition of civil penalty.
In place of or in addition to the actions recited in section 4022.12 of this Part, the steward of the board is hereby authorized to impose a civil penalty in an amount not to exceed $ 5,000 for each violation of any of the sections of this Subchapter or for any action detrimental to the best interests of racing generally; and each day upon which such violation continues may be considered by the steward as a separate violation in assessing the amount of such civil penalty.
Before imposing such civil penalty, the steward of the board shall give the other two stewards of the meeting a reasonable opportunity to submit recommendations relative to such penalty.
Back to Top
4022.14.
Appeal from penalty.
Any person so penalized shall have the right to appeal to the commission by filing with the commission within 30 days after the imposition of such civil penalty, a written notice of such appeal; and the commission in determining the appeal may increase or decrease the amount of such civil penalty, or it may suspend or revoke or otherwise act with respect to the license or the licensing of the appellant; and the determination of the commission on such appeal shall be final.
Back to Top
4022.15.
Action by the commission.
Whenever under this Subchapter a matter has been referred to the commission, it shall take such action as it shall deem proper and appropriate under the law.
Back to Top
4022.16.
Determination of all questions.
The stewards have power to determine all questions arising in reference to racing at the meeting, subject to appeal to the commission.
Should no decision have been arrived at by the stewards within seven days of an objection being lodged, the clerk of the course shall then report the case to the commission, which may, at its discretion, decide the matter, and which, if it considers there has been negligence, may order any additional expense arising therefrom to be defrayed out of the funds of the meeting at which the case occurred.
Back to Top
4022.17.
Disqualification of horses.
No horse which is disqualified or ineligible, as provided in this Subchapter, or nominated by, or the property, wholly or in part, of a person who is unlicensed, disqualified or ineligible, as provided in this Subchapter, may be entered or started in a race.
Back to Top
4022.18.
Examination of horses.
The stewards have power at any time to order an examination, by such person or persons as they think fit, of any horse entered for a race or which has run in a race.
Back to Top
4022.19. Use of motion pictures.
Motion pictures shall be taken of every race from start to finish, and may be used to aid the stewards in determining any question within their jurisdiction.
Back to Top
4022.20.
Disputes relating to bets.
The stewards shall not entertain any disputes relating to bets.
Back to Top
4022.21.
Discretionary powers.
If any case occurs which is not or which is alleged not to be provided for by this Article, it shall be determined by the stewards in such manner as they think just and conformable to the usages of the turf; and the stewards may impose such punishment and take such other action in the matter as they may deem to be within the intent of this Article, including reference to the commission.
Back to Top
4022.22.
Limitation on punitive powers
The punitive powers of the stewards provided for in any section of this Article are limited to the powers provided for in sections 4022.12 through 4022.15 of this Part.
Back to Top
4022.23.
When hearing held.
Whenever a matter has been referred to the board by the stewards which involves an alleged violation by any person of any law or of any section of this Subchapter, or whenever the board, on its own initiative, shall determine to take cognizance of any such alleged violation or any other matter within its jurisdiction.
Back to Top
4023.1.
Approval by commission.
All officials connected with the actual conduct of racing shall be approved by the commission.
Back to Top
4023.2.
Duties of clerk of the course.
(a) The secretary of the association or his deputy shall be clerk of the course.
He shall discharge all duties, expressed or implied, required by this Article, and he shall report to the stewards all violations of this Article or of the regulations of the meeting.
(b) He shall keep complete records of all races.
(c) He shall receive all stakes, entrance moneys and fees, including jockeys' fees.
(d) Within 14 days, exclusive of Sundays, from the close of the meeting, he shall pay, to the persons entitled to it, all the money collected by him; and at the expiration of the same period, he shall notify the association of all arrears then remaining unpaid, and all arrears shall be regarded as having been assumed by the association.
(e) Before acceptance, he shall submit to the association, all entries and transfers of engagements for all races except those opened and decided during the meeting.
Back to Top
4023.3.
Duties of handicapper.
The handicapper shall append to the weights for every handicap the day and hour from which winners will be liable to a penalty, and no alteration shall be made after publication except in case of omission, through error, of the name or weight of a horse duly entered, in which cases by permission of the stewards the omission may be rectified by the handicapper.
Back to Top
4023.4.
Duties of clerk of the scales.
(a)
The clerk of the scales shall exhibit the number (as allotted on the official card) of each horse for which a jockey has been weighed out, and shall forthwith furnish the starter with a list of such numbers.
(b) Any extra or special weight declared for any horse, or any declaration to win or any alteration of colors, shall be exhibited by the clerk of the scales upon the notice board.
(c) He shall in all cases weigh in the riders of the horses, and report to the stewards any jockey not presenting himself to be weighed in.
Back to Top
4023.5.
Photographs of the finish./P
A camera selected by the association conducting the meeting, if approved by the commission, shall be used to make a photograph or photographs of the horses at the finish to assist the placing judges in determining their positions as exclusively indicated by their noses.
Back to Top
4023.6.
Official time.
The official time of each race shall be determined by the official timer.
The time recorded when the first horse crosses the finish line shall be the official time of the race.
Back to Top
4023.7.
Result of each race to be reported.
The placing judge or judges shall, at the close of each day's racing, sign and send a report of the result of each race to the stewards and the board.
Back to Top
4023.8.
Determination of order of finish.
The placing judge or judges shall determine the order of finishing of as many horses a they may think proper.
Back to Top
4023.9.
Duties of placing judges.
The placing judge or judges must occupy the judge's box at the time the horses pass the winning post, and their sole duty shall be to place the horses.
They must announce their decisions promptly, and such decisions shall be final, unless objection to the winner or any placed horse is made and sustained.
Provided, that this section shall not prevent the placing judges from correcting any mistake, such correction being subject to confirmation by the stewards.
Back to Top
4024.1.
Registration required to enter or start.
(a) No horse may start in any race unless duly registered and named in the registry office of The Jockey Club, which is established for the identification of all horses whether foaled in the United States or in other countries and for the certification of their pedigrees; nor shall the entry of any such horse be accepted unless its certificate of foal registration, certificate of foreign registration, or racing permit, whichever has been granted by The Jockey Club, is on file with the identification department of The Jockey Club.
(b) (1) Tattoo requirement.
No horse shall be allowed to enter or start in any race unless it has been lip-tattooed in a manner satisfactory to the board; except that the stewards may, in their discretion, allow a horse registered with the registry of a foreign country to start in a stake or invitational race upon such terms as they deem appropriate.
(2) No horse shall be allowed to enter or start unless a Jockey Club certificate of foal registration, certificate of foreign registration, or racing permit is on file in the office of the racing secretary or other designated office of the track; except that the stewards may, in their discretion, for good cause, waive this requirement if the horse if otherwise properly identified.
(c) In addition, no horse shall be allowed to start unless its ownership has been duly registered in the Owners Registry of The Jockey Club established for recording the true ownership, including the proper names of all persons holding a proprietary interest, of all thoroughbred horses that race.
The use of such data in the National Association of State Racing Information Service (NASRIS), operated by the National Association of State Racing Commissioners, is hereby authorized.
(d) No horse shall be allowed to enter or start unless the certificate of foal registration, certificate of foreign registration, or racing permit, on file in the office of the racing secretary or other designated office of the track, has been endorsed by a State racing commission or board, or a designated track official, or a Jockey Club certificate of ownership has been attached thereto, certifying to the registration of the horse in the Owners Registry of The Jockey Club.
(e) The stewards may, in their discretion, for good cause and for not over one race at a time, waive the requirements of subdivisions (c) and (d) of this section if the ownership is otherwise properly disclosed to their satisfaction.
(f) Upon transfer of any interest in a horse by sale, lease, claim or otherwise, it shall be the responsibility of the transferee managing owner to register such change in the Owners Registry with The Jockey Club and to cause the stewards at each track to be informed before that horse starts at such track.
(g) The board, by order, may phase over a period of years, the requirement of registration in the Owners Registry, as set forth in subdivisions (c) and (d) of this section, by nature of transaction and age of horse.
Back to Top
4024.2.
Disqualification of certain horses.
(a) No horse shall be allowed to enter or start if the horse was knowingly entered under a name other than its own by a person having lawful custody or control of the animal at the time it was so entered.
(b) No horse shall be allowed to enter or start if a person having lawful custody or control of the animal knowingly participated in or assisted in the entry of racing of some other horse under its name.
(c) For the purposes of subdivisions (a) and (b) of this section, the name of a horse means the name reflected in the registration certificate or racing permit issued with respect to the horse by The Jockey Club.
Back to Top
New York State Racing and Wagering Board 1 Watervliet Avenue Extension, Suite 2 Albany, NY 12206 Phone: (518) 453-8460 Last Updated: Tuesday, April 01, 2003 11:16 AM Send Questions or Comments to: mailto:info@racing.state.ny.us Please note: All emails are scanned for viruses.
Those found to be infected will be deleted without being viewed.
Disclaimer Statement
[ecommercelogo.gif]
