U P DA TE BOST ONS CITYWIDE TRANSPOR T A TION PLAN S Access Bostons Re por ts Now Available on Web cityofboston.gov/ accessboston Boston Transpor tation Fact Book and Neighborhood Profiles Citywide and neighborhood demographic, economic and transportation facts and trends.
Parking in Boston Guidelines to manage off- and onstreet parking.
Pedestrian Safety Guidelines for Residential Streets Guidelines to implement operational and design strategies in residential neighborhoods that enhance pedestrian safety, calm traffic and improve quality of life.
Boston Bicycle Plan Policies, education programs and facility improvements to create a better environment for bicycling in Boston.
U M M E R 2 0 0 2 Public Outreach Involving people in the development of Access Boston from the beginning helped ensure that Access Boston stayed grounded in the reality of how people live in Boston.
Citizen comments obtained from Public Outreach components helped to formulate recommendations to improve the qualities of peoples lives and make transportation safe and accessible.
Pubic Outreach Components: Ten Public Workshops held at Boston Public Librar y and aired on television 14 Discussion Groups held at Boston City Hall Access Boston website, email address and hotline number access BOSTON 2000-2010 Mayor Releases Transpor tation Fact Book and Neighborhood Profiles Mayor Thomas M. Menino released the Boston Transportation Fact Book and Neighborhood Profiles report this June.
The Fact Book, the 5th report released by the Boston Transportation Department as part of Access Boston, provides information on how Bostons transportation system is used to connect its people, jobs and neighborhoods.
The report provides a detailed overview of the extensive inter-modal transportation network in the Boston area, and contains relevant maps and statistics describing its scale and use from regional, citywide and neighborhood perspectives.
The report is divided into two sections, Citywide Facts, and Neighborhood Profiles.
Section one, Citywide Facts, displays transportation information consolidated for Boston as a whole.
Pages are grouped in pairs illustrating complementary information about a particular transportation topic, such as roadway use, parking and public transportation.
The second section of the Fact Book features Neighborhood Profiles for each of Bostons neighborhoods.
The two pages devoted to every neighborhood have maps and text that describe the transportation mode choices available to residents and visitors in each distinct part of the city.
Did you know? Since 1990, Boston's population has grown about 3%.
Auto registrations grew 36% over that same period.
Each day, 927,000 people travel into Boston from the rest of the region.
Of these, 70% have destinations outside the downtown neighborhoods.
57% of Boston's population, and 79% of its jobs lie within an approximately 10 minute walk of a rapid transit or commuter rail station.
Three out of every ten trips in Boston are pedestrian trips.
47% of the 283,000 trips destined for the downtown neighborhoods, and beginning outside Boston are by public transportation.
The Transportation Fact Book has been developed primarily through the Boston Transportation Departments collaboration with the Central Transportation Planning Staff (CTPS).
CTPS participation was funded by the Massachusetts Highway Department and Bostons Public completed in partnership with the Boston Transpor tation Metropolitan Planning Organization, Boston and Regional Redevelopment Authority, MBTA and the Connections Initiatives to improve Artery Business Committee.
existing public transportation service and create priority list of future capital investment.
(coming soon) Transpor tation Involvement Programs for: 65,380 Resident parking permits were issued by Teens, Elder Bostonians and BTD in the year 2000, a 47% increase from New Bostonians 1990.
For a copy of the Fact Book, please email accessboston@cityofboston.gov or call us at 617-635-3082.
In a recent national survey, parking costs in Boston, at up to $28/day, were second only to New York City.
BOSTON TRANSPORTATION DEPARTMENT Page 2 ACCESS BOSTON S U M M E R 2 0 0 2 Corridor Improvement Program Implemented A key recommendation of the Parking in Boston report released in 2001 was to undertake a Corridor Improvement Program to eliminate double parking and reduce congestion for streets with extensive loading activity.
As a follow-up, BTD has implemented curbside regulation changes on Boylston, Newbury, Tremont (South End) and High Streets.
On Boylston Street to encourage loading activity in the morning before customers need curbside parking, specific changes included: Access to curbside loading zones on Boylston Street greatly improved after the Increased curbside loading threefold from 8 implementation of new regulations to 11 a.m.
Reduced loading space by almost 25% after The High Street Corridor Improvement Program addressed its specific characteristics and 11 a.m. and added metered parking issues.
Changes included: Extended meter hours from 6 to 8 p.m. Removed the prohibition on peak hour parking except between Pearl and Congress The changes were made through a public proStreet cess that involved residents, merchants and institutional groups in the Back Bay, as well as Added priority loading (7 to 11 a.m.) to one side of the street commercial carriers such as UPS, FedEx and Pepsi-Cola.
BTD color-codes the tops of its parking meters to identify curbs that have multi-purpose use and regulations.
The specific regulations are posted on signs on the meters and nearby poles.
Red Cap meters are used to identify locations with peak hour No Stopping regulations.
The parking lanes at these curbs are used as travel lanes during peak commuting hours.
Yellow Cap meters were recently installed to identify meters that are also used as loading New Development Review Guidelines Presented at Joint BSCE and MAITE Meeting BTD planners discussed the new development review guidelines outlined in the Parking In Boston report with the Boston Society of Civil Engineers and the Massachusetts Institute of Transportation Engineers in March of this year.
Highlights of the meeting included: New Parking Ratios are Integrated into Development Projects New development projects under review or approved in Boston are using the new district-based parking ratios established in the Access Boston Parking in Boston report.
parking spaces in a nearby garage.
One Court Street is a proposed 127 room hotel that plans to use 30 spaces to be designated in a nearby garage.
Updated development review analysis procedures, including new mode shares and trip distribution numbers for each neighborhood to be used to determine a projects transportation impact analysis BTDs new District Based Parking Goals, used to help determine acceptable parking ratios Preferred methodology for traffic modeling Thoughts on mitigation and incorporation in Transportation Access Plan Agreements The parking ratios are helping developers The parking ratio guidelines in the report build projects with the appropriate number provide a broad policy framework that: of parking spaces based on the unique characteristics of the projects neighborhood.
Serves as a guide for the community in planning for their neighborhood The approved Fenway Mixed Use Project is a 580 unit 651,000 s.f. mixed-use residential Provides developers with broad standards to adhere to when designing project located in the West Fenway their projects neighborhood.
The project will provide 498 parking spaces and is consistent with the recommended parking ratios of 0.75 spaces/ Is a starting point for district studies and rezoning efforts 1,000 gross square feet and 0.75 spaces/ unit.
The Fenway Mixed Use Project went through significant community review and is As evident from these and other projects, expected to be a catalyst to the redevelopment the parking guidelines are being utilized and integrated into new development of the Boylston Street corridor.
projects.
The result is model projects for Two examples of hotel projects that meet the community and developers alike.
BTDs proposed parking ratios of 0.4/unit in the downtown are 154 Berkeley Street and One Court Street.
154 Berkeley Street is a proposed 220 room hotel that will use 35 BOSTON TRANSPORTATION DEPARTMENT Page 3 Transpor tation Safety Initiatives Ongoing The Boston Transportation Department completed the final design for a transportation safety program for the Hyde Square area in Jamaica Plain.
Phased construction is slated to begin later this fiscal year.
The project was a recommended pilot in the Pedestrian Safety Guidelines for Residential Streets report released in August last year as part of the Access Boston process.
The Hyde Square program implements a combination of regulatory signage, raised crosswalks, speed humps, and roadway geometry changes including neckdowns spread over a multi-street area.
Initiated by the community the design was developed through numerous public and inter-agency sessions.
The community was required to submit a petition to the City proving that all the residents living on the effected streets were in support of the changes.
The Access Boston report outlines ways to improve pedestrian safety on residential streets by implementing measures that slow vehicles and limit cut-through traffic.
Following a needs-assessment exercise, a two-stage process is recommended.
First, enforcement and regulatory measures are instituted.
If they do not provide the required results geometric solutions which require construction may be warranted.
Outreach and education programs promoting transportation safety are a complement to any regulatory and physical changes.
Finally, transportation safety projects near schools, parks and community centers, senior citizen facilities, hospitals and MBTA stations are prioritized.
Residential street in Hyde Park selected for improvements The Walk This Way campaign is aimed at raising the awareness of pedestrians about the dangers of crossing streets.
The Police Departments Operation Crosswalk addresses the problem of drivers who fail to yield to pedestrians in crosswalks.
Lets Get Moving, a Police Department and BTD initiative is designed to target traffic and pedestrian safety hazards at key intersections throughout Boston.
Bostons Bicycle Program Manager Re por ts Following the Educate Young Bicyclists recommendation of the Boston Bicycle Plan, we added a bicycle component to the Sports Center at Franklin Park.
About 60 young people participated in one of the six fourday sessions offered in July and August.
The instructors were Nate Curtis and Ben Jacobs.
The program included a limited traffic skills section.
In addition, Dont Be a Road Hog brochures were placed near the parking ticket payment area in City Hall.
The crosswalks at Cedar Street and Heath Street along the Southwest Corridor Park were moved back as had been called for in the original plans.
This permits cyclists to regularly cross these streets without being blocked by stopped traffic for the first time in 15 years.
New bicycle parking guidelines were included in the updated Transportation Access Plan guidelines.
For more information email accessboston@cityofboston.gov or call the Boston Bicycle Program Manager at 617-635-4606.
Boston Tour Bus Parking Map Released The Boston Transportation Department has released a Tour Bus Parking map that is currently being distributed to tour bus companies, in time for the fall peak tourist season.
The Tour Bus Parking Guidelines map is designed to help tour bus operators travel between destinations quickly and efficiently.
Locations around Boston are identified on the map for tour bus drop-off/pick-up and for long-term (layover) bus parking.
The map contains detailed information regarding tour bus regulations and contact information for tour bus operators.
Tourist attractions and hotels are also indicated on this map.
As a result of this public information, visitors and residents alike will be better directed throughout the streets of Boston as well as informed of the citys antiidling enforcement activities.
The Tour Bus Parking Guidelines map, prepared by BTD with input from the Tourism Transportation Task Force, is a product of its efforts.
The Task Force, co- chaired by BTD and Move Massachusetts, consists of many members from both the tourism industry and from Bostons neighborhoods.
Map Extract.
For full map call the BTD at 617-635-3076 Page 4 ACCESS BOSTON S U M M E R 2 0 0 2 Beyond the Big Dig......
The City of Boston, as part of its ongoing Public Transportation and Regional Connections report, is proposing a next generation of transit investments.
The goal is to identify a list of new projects to be built after the Central Artery project is complete.
The report also recommends specific actions to improve the delivery of existing services in tandem with long-term strategies.
Targeted enhancements to the transit system today, can allow the MBTA to increase capacity and improve service with minimal capital improvements.
Boston is recommending a framework of projects centered around three systems outlined below.
This framework is presented as a menu of options, for decision-makers and the community at large to consider while debating the future of transit in the Boston area.
Urban Ring: A proposed circumferential transit service connecting Boston to surrounding communities, it will link the Longwood Medical Area to Crosstown and Dudley Square and further east to the JFK Station area in Dorchester, the South Boston Waterfront and Logan Airport.
An environmental impact study for a busway based Phase II is currently underway for this system.
A tunnel based Phase III is also envisioned.
Expanded Silver Line: Using the currently proposed Silver Line alignment as a backbone, Boston proposes expansions to Mattapan Square along Warren Street and Blue Hill Avenue, to Allston Brighton and the Fenway using the Turnpike and to residential South Boston.
Future light-rail tunnel connections are key to the proposal.
Fast Track Rapid Rail: This concept combines currently proposed projects that utilize commuter rail right-of-ways like the Indigo Line through Dorchester, the Yawkey South Station shuttle (East West connector) and the Allston Landing inter-modal center into a proposed rapid rail system with two overlapping lines.
To participate in this ongoing discussion please email accessboston@cityofboston.gov or call BTD at 617-635-2756.
System wide improvements of existing service and new stations to the Fairmount line are the City of Bostons top transit priorities Boston Transportation Department Room 721, City Hall Boston, MA 02201 How to contact us Your ideas and questions are welcome, additional information may be requested, and comments may be addressed to: Website E-mail www.cityofboston.gov/accessboston accessboston@cityofboston.gov City of Boston Mayor Thomas M. Menino Boston Transportation Department Commissioner Andrea dAmato Chief of Envir onmental Ser vices Mayors Advisor y Committee on Transportation Thanks to members of the Mayors Advisory Committee on Transportation for their dedicated leadership and creativity in supporting ACCESS BOSTON.
Curtis Davis, Diane Moes, Co-Chairs
