[smbannertop.gif] [smNYSpictures.jpg]
Stewards' ruling accepted.
Every person subscribing to a sweepstake or entering a horse in a race to be run under this Article accepts the decision of the stewards or the decision of the commission, as the case may be, on any question relating to a race or to racing.
Back to Top
4025.2.
Entries may be cancelled, revoked.
The nominations or entries of any person, or the transfer of any nomination or entry, may be cancelled or revoked without notice by the racing association or in the discretion of the commission or of the stewards.
Back to Top
4025.3.
Horse must be entered.
A horse is not qualified to run in any race unless he is duly entered for that race.
Back to Top
4025.4.
Disqualification--ownership.
No horse is qualified to be entered or run which is wholly or partly the property of or leased to or from, or in any way under the care of superintendence of, a person who is required to be licensed but is unlicensed, disqualified or ineligible, as provided in this Subchapter.
Back to Top
4025.5.
Disqualification--improper practice.
Any horse which has been the subject of improper practice may be disqualified for such time and for such races as the stewards shall determine.
Back to Top
4025.6.
Procedure for making entries.
Entries and declarations shall be made in writing signed by the owner of the horse or of the engagement or by his authorized agent or some person deputed by him; and in order to secure privacy, all entries to overnight races must be made at a specially designated booth.
Back to Top
4025.7.
Entries made by telegraph.
Entries and declarations by telegraph are binding if promptly confirmed in writing.
Back to Top
4025.8.
Entrance money not returned.
Entrance money is not returned on the death of a horse nor on his failure to start, whatever be the cause of the failure.
Back to Top
4025.9.
Entries to be posted.
Entries to all races, excepting those which are opened and decided during the meeting, shall be posted on the bulletin boards at the track where meeting is being held.
Back to Top
4025.10.
Limitations on entries.
(a) A horse whose managing owner is a partnership cannot be entered or run in the name, whether real or stable, of an individual partner unless that individual's interest or property in the racing qualities of that horse is equal to at least 25 percent.
(b) All horses in common ownership as defined in section 4026.2(e) of this Title (i.e., having any common managing owner) or section 4026.3(c) (i.e., in which there is a 25 percent commonality among nonmanaging owners) must be coupled and run as an entry.
(c) Not more than two horses trained by the same person shall be drawn into any overnight race, or on the also-eligible list, to the exclusion of another horse.
(d) All horses trained by the same trainer must be coupled and run as an entry.
(e) The board steward may require any horses entered in a race to be coupled for betting purposes prior to the commencement of wagering on-track and off-track, if he finds it necessary in the public interest.
(f) All horses trained or ridden by a spouse, parent, issue or member of a jockey's household shall be coupled in the betting with any horse ridden by such jockey.
(g) Notwithstanding the provisions of subdivisions (b) and (d) of this rule, no entry shall be couples by reason of common ownership or training in any race in which the gross purse is one million dollars or more, provided however that the provisions of subdivision (e) of this rule shall continue to be applicable in any such races.
In any race subject to the provisions of this subdivision, the racing secretary shall have the authority to establish a mutuel field and coupled entries in any race with more than fourteen starters.
Back to Top
4025.11.
Restrictions on ownership by trainer.
No licensed trainer shall have any interest, either by ownership of the horse or by lease of its racing qualities, in a horse of which he is not the trainer and which may be racing at the same race track where the trainer is licensed and currently racing.
Back to Top
4025.12.
Name in which horse is run.
The name in which any horse is run must be the real or the stable name of the individual owner or the name of the partnership owner (being its stable name or the name of the individual in whose name the horse is run) of the entire interest in the horse.
Back to Top
4025.13.
Closing time--overnight races.
The list of entries for overnight races shall be closed at the advertised time and no entry shall be admitted after that time, except that, in case of an emergency, the racing secretary may, with the consent of a steward, grant an extension of time.
Back to Top
4025.14.
Delayed entries.
The list of entries for all other races shall be closed at the advertised time and no entry shall be admitted after that time unless the nominator can prove to the stewards that the entry was mailed before the advertised time of closing; and starters must be named through the entry box by the usual time of closing on the day preceding the race unless otherwise designated by the stewards.
Back to Top
4025.15.
Information required for entry.
(a) Except as provided in section 4025.16 of this Part, entries shall be in the name of one person, or a stable name, and shall state the name, or the stable name, of the managing owner (or when a partnership is the managing owner, of the managing partner), the name or description of the horse, if unnamed, and, if the race be for horses of different ages, the age of the horse entered.
(b) All entries and declarations of horses eligible for administration of furosemide pursuant to section 4043.2(b) of this Title are required to denote the use of furosemide on the entry form.
Back to Top
4025.16.
Name of entry.
Entries may be made in the name of a corporation or a partnership, but no horse may race in such a name and in order to remain eligible, such entries must be transferred to an individual or a stable name on or before January 1st of the horse's two-year-old year.
Back to Top
4025.17.
Information for initial entry.
(a) In entering a horse for the first time, it shall be identified by stating its name (if it has any), its color and sex and the name or description of its sire and dam as recorded in the stud book.
If the dam was covered by more than one stallion, the names or description of all must be stated.
(b) Except as provided in subdivision (d) of this section, this description must be repeated in every entry until a description of the horse with his name has been published in the racing calendar or in the program or the list of entries of an association, or in such other publication as the commission may designate.
(c) In every entry after such publication, his name and age will be sufficient.
(d) If a horse be entered with a name for the first time, in several races for the same meeting, closing at the same place on the same day, the description need not be added in more than one of the entries.
Back to Top
4025.18.
Change of name.
Upon any change of name of a horse which has run in any country, his old name as well as his new name must be given in every entry until he has run three times under his new name over the course of an association.
Back to Top
4025.19.
Closing time--entries, declarations.
Except in overnight races, if the hour for closing of entries or for declarations be not stated, it is understood to be midnight of the day specified.
Back to Top
4025.20.
Where entries made.
In the absence of notice to the contrary, entries due on the eve of and during a meeting, are due at the office of the clerk of the course where the race is to be run.
Back to Top
4025.21.
Transfer of subscription.
A person who subscribes to a sweepstakes may, before the time fixed for naming, transfer his subscription.
Back to Top
4025.22.
Subscription defined
An entry of a horse in a sweepstakes is a subscription to the sweepstakes.
An entry or subscription may, before the time of closing, be altered or withdrawn.
Back to Top
4025.23.
Death of owner of subscription.
Subscriptions and all entries or rights of entry under them shall not become void on the death of the person in whose name they were made or taken.
All rights, privileges and obligations shall attach to the continuing owners including the legal representatives of the decedent.
4025.24.
Striking out of engagement.
No horse shall be considered as struck out of any of his engagements until the owner or his authorized agent shall have given notice, in writing or by telegram, promptly confirmed in writing, to the clerk of the course where the horse is engaged.
Back to Top
4025.25.
Striking out is irrevocable.
The striking of a horse out of an engagement is irrevocable.
Back to Top
4025.26.
Omission by vendor to strike out.
Omission by the vendor to strike a horse out of an engagement, not sold or transferred with him, does not entitle his owner to start him or to the stakes if he wins.
Back to Top
4025.28.
Proof of transfer with engagements.
Whenever the ownership of a horse is transferred in any manner, all racing engagements of the said horse shall automatically accompany the transfer.
Back to Top
4025.29.
Sale to unqualified person.
A sale to a person ruled off or to an unqualified or disqualified person will not entitle such person to be recognized as an owner.
Back to Top
4025.30.
Restrictions on acceptance of nominations.
No nominations shall be accepted for a sweepstakes or other race from any person whose license has been revoked and who has not been subsequently licensed by the commission; nor during the period of suspension from any person whose license has been suspended; nor from any person who is otherwise disqualified.
Back to Top
4025.31.
Nerved horses--restrictions.
(a) Any horse that has been nerved (neurectomy, cryosurgery, stunning) at or above the fetlock (i.e., Median nerve, Ulnar nerve, Volar nerve or the Plantar nerve) shall not be permitted to race at tracks under the jurisdiction of the board.
(b) Any horse that has been nerved below the fetlock (Volar [posterior] digital nerve only) may be permitted to start, provided that such nerving has been reported to the track veterinarian who shall cause such fact to be entered on the foal certificate and prominently displayed in the entry room prior to any subsequent start.
Back to Top
4025.33.
Programming of jockeys.
(a) At nonprofit racing associations:
(1) (i) Each horse to be drawn into the main body of a race or as an also eligible shall have its jockey named by the time established by the racing secretary for drawing of post positions and prior to the publication of the overnights.
No jockey may be named to ride more than one horse in a race except that a jockey may be named to ride a horse drawn into the main body of a race and a horse drawn as an also eligible in such race if a backup-rider is indicated for the horse with second call, or a jockey may be named to two or more parts of a coupled entry where only one starter from such entry will start.
(ii) An apprentice allowance may only be claimed before entries have closed and only if the apprentice has been engaged.
(2) It shall be the responsibility of the trainer to insure compliance with this rule.
In this regard, upon request, the racing secretary's office when taking entries shall notify the trainer of the availability of specific jockeys.
Should a jockey remain unnamed at the time prescribed herein such naming shall be made by the stewards or their designee.
No jockey, once named, shall be changed except for good cause by the stewards.
(b) At other racing associations, all jockeys shall be named by scratch time and no jockey shall be named or changed thereafter except by the stewards for good cause.
(c) It shall be the responsibility of both jockey and trainer to fulfill their engagements.
Back to Top
4025.40.
Entry for produce race.
In making an entry for a produce race, the produce is entered by specifying the dam and the sire or sires.
Back to Top
4025.41.
When entry is void.
If the produce of a mare is dropped before the first of January, or if there is no produce, or if the produce is dead when dropped, of if twins are dropped, the entry of such mare is void.
Back to Top
4025.42.
Allowance.
In produce races, allowances for the produce of untried horses must be claimed before the time of closing, and are not lost by subsequent winnings.
Back to Top
4026.1.
Definitions.
(a) Managing owner.
A person who, through ownership, lease or designation, manages all racing activities for a race horse and is personally responsible for all liabilities arising therefrom.
(b) Nonmanaging owner.
A person holding any property interest in a race horse, who is not a managing owner.
(c) Property interest.
Any direct or indirect legal or beneficial interest in the racing, breeding or other qualities of a race horse (including a right to share in its earnings or fees) whether present or future, established by deed, lease, sale with contingencies, contract of sale, syndication agreement, right of possession, or otherwise.
Both lessors and lessees hold a property interest in a horse.
Included in such term shall be any interest, direct or indirect, in stock, shares, parts or otherwise of any legal entity holding a property interest in a race horse (including administering or holding office in such entity).
Back to Top
4026.2.
Managing ownership.
(a) Managing owner.
No horse may race unless the entire management and control of its racing activities, and financial responsibility therefor, are held by a registered managing owner registered with The Jockey Club.
A managing owner may be either an individual or a racing partnership, registered for such purpose with The Jockey Club.
A racing partnership may consist of only general partners, not to exceed four, each of whom shall own not less than a 25-percent partnership interest, and one of whom shall be designated as the managing partner under whose name or stable name the partnership's horses race, who is entitled to be credited with winnings on behalf of the partnership and who is responsible for complying with the filing, registration and licensing requirements of these rules.
The managing owner of a horse shall be established either by registered ownership, registered written lease (or written notice thereof), or registered written designation as such, by the owner.
The managing owner shall be responsible for all racing affairs of the horse, including the proper registration of the horse and its ownership, and all changes thereto.
(b) Name of managing owner.
The name of the programmed owner of a horse in a race shall be either the name of the managing owner, if an individual, or, if a racing partnership, the name of the managing partner followed by the words as lessee or by designation, if either term applies.
Should an individual register a stable name, his real name may not be listed as managing owner.
Nothing in these rules shall relieve any person of any statutory obligations related to business filings and recordings with public officials, or rights or limitations incident thereto.
(c) Managing owner by lease or designation.
A managing owner established by ownership shall register such ownership with The Jockey Club.
A managing owner established by lease or designation shall register such lease or designation, executed by both the lessor or designating owner and the managing owner, with The Jockey Club.
The notice of lease or designation shall set forth the name of the horse, the name of the lessor or designating owner, the name of the managing owner (who is responsible for complying with the licensing, registration and filing requirements of these rules), the term of the lease or designation, and a statement that the managing owner has full power of management and control of the racing activities of the horse, including the right to subject such horse to claim in claiming races, and assumes all liabilities incident thereto.
If the managing owner is a partnership, the notice of lease or designation shall set forth the name of the managing partner.
All registrations shall include the social security number of each individual registered.
(d) Licensing of managing owners.
All individuals in the managing ownership of a horse must be licensed before such horse is entered or starts, unless for good cause the board or State steward waives such requirement for a race.
In no event, however, may a horse start if the license of any individual in its present or former managing ownership has been denied, suspended or revoked until such time as the board is satisfied that any withdrawal of such individual or transfer of his entire interest is in good faith.
(e) Coupled entries.
Should the same individual be present in the managing ownership of two or more horses in a race, all such horses shall be coupled as an entry.
(f) Credentials.
Only managing owners of horses to race at the meeting shall be entitled to track credentials as owners, including paddock and backstretch privileges.
Back to Top
4026.3.
Nonmanaging ownership.
(a) Owners-registration and disclosure.
(1) The managing owner of a horse shall not enter or start such horse, nor shall such horse race, unless each individual holding any property interest in such horse at such time has been disclosed to The Jockey Club and registered therewith by the managing owner.
(2) In addition, should any property interest in a horse be held by a general or limited partnership, syndicate, association, corporation, trust, estate, or other form of representative or joint ownership or legal entity, such entity shall be registered with The Jockey Club; and there shall also be disclosed the identity of all officers, directors, managing agents, representatives, trustees or other individuals holding the power to manage such entities, in addition to all individuals holding any legal or beneficial interest in such entity.
Any changes in such information shall be clearly indicated and submitted to The Jockey Club within 10 days after the end of each calendar quarter after registration or, if no changes have occurred, a statement to that effect shall instead be filed.
(3) For good cause shown, the board may waive for a particular case, or for a category of cases, the obligation to file the identity of numerous insignificant interest and allow such interest to be filed as an identified class.
At any time, however, upon demand of the board, individual identity shall be disclosed.
(b) Nonmanaging owners--licensing.
No horse shall be entered or started by its managing owner, that is owned by 35 or less owners, unless all of the owners are licensed, or, if owned by more than 35 owners, unless each individual having a three-percent or greater property interest is licensed as an owner by the board.
In addition, each such owner which is not an individual must be registered and licensed with the board, and all its officers, directors, trustees or other managing individuals must be licensed by the board unless otherwise directed by the board.
The board may also require any other individual involved in ownership to be licensed at any time it may deem desirable.
The board or the State steward, for good cause, may waive any of such requirements for a race.
In no event, however, may a horse start, if the license of any such individual has been denied, suspended or revoked, until the board is satisfied that any withdrawal of such individual or transfer of his interest is in good faith.
(c) Coupled entries.
Should the same individual or legal entity required to be disclosed and registered as a nonmanaging owner for a horse be present in the ownership (including the managing ownership) of another horse or horses in a race, to the extent that there is a 25 percent commonality in ownership between any two of such horses, all such horses shall be coupled as an entry.
In addition, the stewards may require the coupling of horses having a lesser degree of common ownership where they deem it desirable in the public interest.
Back to Top
4026.4.
Data to be declared.
All statements of partnerships, of sales with contingencies, of leases of designation of managing owner, or of arrangements, shall declare the name of the managing owner; or when a partnership is the managing owner, the name of the managing partner who shall be the only person to whom winnings are payable (which must be the name of the nominator), in whose name the horse will run and with whom rests the power of entry.
Back to Top
4026.5.
Filing procedures.
If any agreement of partnership, sale with contingencies, lease, designation of managing owner or other arrangement required to be filed with The Jockey Club would have the effect of deceiving or improperly misleading the public as to the identity of the persons holding an interest in a horse, or would otherwise be contrary to the best interest of racing, The Jockey Club shall notify the board, which shall consider the matter and take such action with respect thereto as it deems appropriate.
Back to Top
.
In cases of emergency, authority to sign declarations of partnerships may be given to The Jockey Club by a telegram, as long as such notice is given before the race for which applicable.
Such notice shall be promptly confirmed in writing within 48 hours.
Back to Top
4026.7.
Assignments restricted.
After a horse is drawn into a race, there shall be no transfer nor assignment of any ownership interest in such horse until after such race or until such horse is scratched from such race, if sooner.
No member of a partnership which owns a horse, leases the racing qualities of a horse, or is designated a managing owner for a horse shall assign his share or any part of or interest in it without the written consent of the other partners being filed with The Jockey Club.
No assignment of an interest in a partnership which, by ownership or lease, controls the racing qualities of a horse, shall be accepted if the effect of the assignment would be to create a partnership which would not qualify for filing under the terms of section 4026.2 of this Part.
Back to Top
4026.8.
[Renumbered]
4026.9.
[Renumbered]
4026.15. Use of stable name.
No individual shall race a horse under a stable name unless such stable name is currently registered by such individual with The Jockey Club.
When, in the opinion of The Jockey Club, the use of a name required to be registered with it would deceive or improperly mislead the public, or would otherwise be contrary to the best interests of racing, it shall so notify the board, which shall consider the matter and take such action with respect thereto as it deems appropriate.
Back to Top
4026.16.
Stable name--restriction on individual.
An individual cannot have registered more than one stable name at the same time and, so long as such individual has a stable name registered, he shall not use or permit the use of his real name to identify his ownership interest in the racing qualities of any horse.
Back to Top
4026.17.
Stable name--restriction on partnership
A partnership which, by ownership, designation or lease, controls the racing qualities of a horse shall race such horse under the name, real or stable, of a member of the partnership whose proportionate interest in the horse meets the requirements of section 4025.10(a) of this Title, and who has been designated as the managing partner.
All horses, the racing qualities of which are controlled by a given partnership, shall be raced under the same name.
Back to Top
4026.18.
Changing stable name.
A stable name may be changed at any time by registering a new stable name.
Back to Top
4026.19.
Limitations on use of stable names.
An individual cannot register as a stable name one which has been already registered or one which is the name of a race horse or one which is the real name of an owner of race horses, other than such individual him/herself.
Back to Top
4026.20.
Abandoning stable name.
Any individual who has registered a stable name may at any time abandon it by giving written notice at the office of The Jockey Club and also to the racing secretary's office; and notice of such abandonment shall be published in the racing calendar, after which all entries which have been made in such stable name shall be altered as may be appropriate.
Back to Top
4026.21.
Trainer not eligible for stable name.
No licensed trainer of race horses shall register a stable name; but a partnership of which such a trainer is a member may use the stable name of another member, provided that the use of such other member's stable name is authorized by this Article.
Back to Top
4026.22.
Incorrect descriptions in entry.
Provided the identity of the horse is satisfactorily established, incorrect or imperfect description in the entry of a horse or failure to register a partnership may be corrected at any time before the horse is announced as a starter and his number exhibited for the race concerned, or in a handicap before the weights are announced; but this section shall not be construed so as to allow any horse to start in any race for which he is not otherwise completely qualified under this Article.
Back to Top
4027.1.
Time for overnight entries.
In the absence of conditions or notice to the contrary, entries for overnight races are to be made at the office of the clerk of the course by 2 p.m. on the day before the race.
Back to Top
4027.2.
Start--when considered.
Every horse shall be considered as having started and be liable for whatever is due for so doing, when its jockey has been weighed and its number displayed, unless the stewards shall otherwise determine.
Back to Top
4027.4.
Start subject to payment of certain fees.
No horse shall be allowed to start for any race and no jockey shall be weighed out for any horse until there have been paid or guaranteed to the clerk of the course:
(a) any stake or entrance money due by the owner in respect to that race; and
(b) the jockey's fees.
Back to Top
4028.1.
Qualifications to start.
A horse shall not be qualified to start in any race unless, not less than 30 minutes before the time set for the race his presence on the grounds of the association be reported to the paddock judge, he be announced to the clerk of the scales as a starter, and the name of his jockey given to the latter official.
Back to Top
4028.2.
Change of jockey.
Any change of jockey must be sanctioned by the stewards and if no satisfactory reason is given for the change the board steward may suspend or fine any person found culpable in the matter.
Back to Top
4028.3.
Horses to be saddled in paddock.
All horses must be saddled in the paddock.
Back to Top
4028.4.
Duties of paddock judge.
The paddock judge shall be in charge of the paddock and inspect all race horses and their equipment prior to each race and shall report forthwith to a steward any violation observed by him.
Back to Top
4028.5.
Horse in paddock not to be touched.
No one not actually connected with its stable shall touch a horse while in the paddock preparatory to starting in a race except for authorized inspection as in this Part provided.
Back to Top
4028.6.
Inspection of plating, bandaging.
A representative of the association conducting a meeting shall inspect the plating and bandaging of each horse as it enters the paddock before the race and record the plating on a board provided for the purpose in the paddock.
Back to Top
4028.7.
Withdrawal of horse
The stewards may permit or direct the withdrawing of a horse after weighing out.
Back to Top
4028.8.
Time of race to be printed.
The time fixed for the first race shall be printed on the program.
Back to Top
4028.9.
Post time.
Post time is the time designated by the stewards at which horses are to arrive at the post for each race; and such time shall be shown on the dial provided for that purpose.
Back to Top
4029.1.
Scale of weights.
The following weights are carried when they are not stated in the conditions of the race: [See illustration(s) in the printed copy.]
Back to Top
4029.2.
Races of intermediate distance.
In races of intermediate distances the weights for the shorter distance are carried.
Back to Top
4029.3.
Races for two-, three- and four-year-olds.
In races exclusively for three-year-olds or four-year-olds the weight is 126 pounds, and in races exclusively for two-year-olds, it is 122 pounds.
Back to Top
4029.4.
Weights for fillies, mares.
In all races except handicaps and races where the conditions expressly state to the contrary, the scale of weights is less by the following: for fillies two years old, three pounds; for mares three years old and upwards, five pounds before September 1st and three pounds thereafter.
Back to Top
4029.5.
Welter weights.
Welter weights are 28 pounds added to the weight for age.
Back to Top
4029.6.
Overnight races except handicaps.
In all overnight races except handicaps not more than eight pounds may be deducted from the scale of weights for age, except for allowances.
Back to Top
4029.7.
[Repealed]
4029.8.
Top weight for overnight, claiming handicaps.
In all overnight handicaps and in all claiming handicaps, the top weight shall not be less than 122 pounds.
Back to Top
4029.9.
Minimum weight for overnight races; exceptions
In all overnight races for two-year-olds, for three-year-olds, or for four-year-olds and upward the minimum weight shall be 112 pounds, subject to sex and apprentice allowances.
This rule shall not apply to handicaps, nor to races for three-year-olds and upward.
Back to Top
New York State Racing and Wagering Board 1 Watervliet Avenue Extension, Suite 2 Albany, NY 12206 Phone: (518) 453-8460 Last Updated: Tuesday, April 01, 2003 11:16 AM Send Questions or Comments to: mailto:info@racing.state.ny.us Please note: All emails are scanned for viruses.
Those found to be infected will be deleted without being viewed.
Disclaimer Statement
[ecommercelogo.gif]
