S P R I N G 1 9 9 7 diabetes N E W S L E T T E R University of Medicine and Dentistr y of New Jersey s Published by UMDNJ-Center for Continuing Education NEW JE R S EY he 1946 convention of the American Diabetes Association was planned as a festive affair.
It was the 25th anniversary of the discovery of insulin.
Many physicians, having witnessed insulin's extra- t for measuring the levels of blood sugar at home.
By the early 1980s, glycosylated hemoglobins were found to reflect the average level of glucose in the blood over the prior three months.
About the same developing guidelines in diabetes care ordinary effects in preventing death associated with diabetic ketoacidosis, believed that the problems of diabetes mellitus were overcome.
Not all physicians agreed.
Dr. Henry Dolger, Chief of Diabetes Clinic at Mount Sinai Hospital, New York stunned the audience when he reported that insulin therapy, adequate enough to prevent diabetic ketoacidosis coma did not prevent diabetic retinopathy and blindness.
Subsequently, numerous studies suggested that improvements in diabetic control might limit the progression of diabetic complications, but definitive evidence for tight control was lacking.
Clinical studies were not feasible until the development of inexpensive methods time, finger tip glucose determination methods were introduced to patients.
Finally the tools were available for clinical investigators to perform a definitive study relating long term diabetic control to the development of diabetic complications.
The Diabetes Control and Complication Trial (DCCT), a multicenter study organized by the National Institute of Health, began recruiting in 1983.
Seventy years after the clinical introduction of insulin, the DCCT results were presented to the 1993 convention of the American Diabetes Association.
The data were nearly as dramatic as insulin's effect on reversing ketoacidosis.
The DCCT investigators found that insulin management of an intensely treated cohort of patients reduced hemoglobin A1C, the best characterized glycosylated hemoglobin, to a mean of approximately 7.2% compared to a mean of 9.3% in a group of patients undergoing conventional insulin treatment.
Although normal A1C is less than 6%, the decrease in A1C to 7.2% was associated with reduction in evidence of diabetic neuropathy, retinopathy, and nephropathy of 50 to 60%.
Since complications of diabetes mellitus have been related to hyperglycemia, the readily measurable marker of the diabetic state, a consensus of diabetologists believe that the conclusion of the DCCT must guide and direct the control of all patients with diabetes mellitus.
Thus the goal of universal normalization of glucose control has become a priority in diabetic treatment reminiscent of the experience 25 years earlier when normalization of blood pressure was shown to prevent stroke and cerebral hemorrhage.
The precise criteria for optimalization Table 1a ADUL T NON-PREGNANT DIABE TES PERFORMANCE MEASURES 
if meeting goals: ever y three to six months if not meeting goals: ever y three months or as indicated ever y visit BP ever y visit; EKG in adults, baseline and prn check ever y routine visit (two to four times/year) to include vascular and neuro check dilated eye exam yearly with initial diagnosis; then yearly if abnormal, ever y 5 years if normal if meeting goals: yearly or as indicated if not meeting goals: ever y three months ever y visit yearly yearly yearly offered ever y 5 years WEIGHT ..........
CARDIOVASCULAR ASSESSMENT ..........
FEET EXAMINATION ..........
EYE EXAMINATION ..........
LIPID PROFILE ..........
HEMOGLOBIN A 1C ..........
FASTING OR RANDOM BLOOD GLUCOSE ..........
CREATININE ..........
U/A FOR MICROALBUMIN ..........
FLU VACCINE ..........
PNEUMOVAX .......... of diabetic control have become a focus of much discussion and debate since the DCCT demonstrated that intensive insulin regimens place patients with Type I diabetes at significant risk of hypoglycemia.
Meanwhile the inadequacy of methods for treating obesity confounds the efficacy of drugs in the treatment of Type II diabetes mellitus.
Thus, the American Diabetes Association and the American Association of Clinical Endocrinologists developed consensus guidelines based on the results of the DCCT which are considered safe and reasonable in the context of currently available therapeutic modalities.
Patients able to achieve such goals are expected to enjoy some freedom from diabetic complications and their care would ultimately be less costly.
Consequently, guidelines or performance measures have attracted significant government and managed care interest.
Published guidelines are extensive and advocate the evaluation and management of all other risk factors for accelerated atherosclerosis and insidious nephropathy.
The New Jersey Diabetes Council, a diverse group of clinicians, subspecialists, diabetes educators, nurses, public health officials and clinical perfor2 mance analysts, organized by the New Jersey Department of Health and Senior Services, with support from the Center for Disease Control and Prevention, reviewed many of the published standards to extract essential criteria useful for primary care providers who treat the majority of diabetic patients.
Tables 1a + b list these essential performance measures.
Successful implementation of these guidelines will depend in part on the practitioner's compelling interest in educating and motivating their patients with diabetes.
Realistically, efforts may need to be limited in a particular patient as economic factors and personality traits may impair a patient's willingness to achieve goals.
In such cases, some attainable and reasonable objectives should be negotiated between the patients, their family and the physician.
be monitored every 6 months in stable patients who achieve their goal.
Values of 8% or more require follow-up every 3 months with emphasis on education and/or adjustment in therapy as further discussed in the following article by Dr. Krosnick and educators Carson and Johnson.
Patient self-monitoring glucose records need to be reviewed.
Frequency of glucose monitoring depends on the type of diabetes, pharmacotherapy, and the patient's stability or risk of hypoglycemia.
For example, a patient with Type II diabetes maintaining an A1C of less that 7% every six months on monotherapy with an oral agent who is not experiencing hypoglycemia need not monitor glucose four times a day.
Nevertheless, a log should be maintained documenting glucose surveillance at a reasonable frequency to detect a change in control.
More monitoring is advised during life style alterations such as illness or travel.
Adjustments in the diabetes treatment regimen are based on the A1C and the pattern and frequency of hyperglycemia.
Failure to attain glycemic goals or a discrepancy between the patient's glucose log book and the A1C may require consultation with a diabetic specialist.
An increasing number of insulin formulations, delivery systems, and treatment schedules can be discussed by the Diabetologist for treating Type I patients.
Similarly, various forms of newer oral agents used in combination with insulin, can be applied to intensify the treatment of Type II diabetes.
v CLINICAL EXAMINATION thresholds for intervention v GL YCEMIC GOALS Table 2 lists the current American Diabetes Association's recommendations for diabetes control based on critical analysis of the DCCT.
Hemoglobin A1C can Essential elements in the longitudinal evaluation of diabetic patients are the measurement of weight and blood pressure together with clinical assessment of the cardiovascular system, eyes, feet and nervous system.
Changes in weight are indicative of the stability of diabetic control and the motivational forces at play in the patient with Type II.
The threshold for blood pressure intervention in diabetes are values greater than 135/85mm Hg. Early treatment is intended to offset the impact of this significant risk factor on Table 1b the vascular system.
The cardiovascular system is the most frequent site of diabetic complications.
Inquiry and the search for new signs of cardiac and vascular disease should be done at a frequency appropriate to the risk factors conferred by age, type and duration of diabetes, as well as the presence of other predisposing factors.
Since photocoagulation can preserve vision in diabetes mellitus, an annual dilated examination by a specialist is recommended.
Peripheral neuropathy can lead to catastrophic foot complications.
Both nerves and feet should be routinely checked and the patient advised on foot care and risk factors for ulceration. v LABORATOR Y EXAMINATION teronism common in elderly diabetic patients.
Lipid studies should be obtained annually if abnormal, because hypercholesterolemia and low HDL accentuate the risks of hyperglycemia on large blood vessels.
The recommended LDL cholesterol level in diabetes mellitus is less than 130 mg/dl.
APPROPRIATE REFERRALS TO SPECIALISTS NUTRITIONAL COUNSELING ..........
SELF-MANAGEMENT EDUCATION ..........
FAILURE TO OBTAIN GL YCEMIC CONTROL ..........
RETINOPATHY ..........
Registered Dietitian RN, CDE (see Table 2) Diabetologist Ophthalmologist/ Retinal Specialist Podiatrist, Or thopedic or Vascular Surgeon Renal Specialist Mater nal Fetal Specialist FOOT DEFORMITIES, NEUROTROPIC ULCERS ..........
NEPHROPATHY ..........
PREGNANCY ..........
Treatment of proteinuria with converting enzyme inhibitors and tight glycemic control have been shown to slow progression of renal impairment.
Thus, urine is checked for protein routinely.
Microalbuminuria, an early sign that the kidney is at risk of progressing to proteinuria, should be checked annually.
A value greater than 20ug/min (30 mg/24h) indicates greater emphasis on blood pressure control and diabetes management.
Measurement of the creatinine and electrolytes annually permits assessment of kidney function which also may be affected by non-proteinuric disorders caused by medications, chronic pyelonephritis, papillary necrosis or functional obstruction associated with neurogenic bladder.
Elevated serum potassium may indicate hyporeninemic hypoaldos- health maintenance Diabetic patients require expert medical advice.
Smoking cessation efforts are crucial.
Vaccinations should be current as there is an increased risk from infections.
In the reproductive age woman, prepregnancy counseling is essential to preclude unplanned pregnancies which put the embryo and fetus at developmental risk while exacerbating diabetic retinopathy and nephropathy in the mother.
v NUTRITIONAL COUNSELING AND TRAINING IN SELF-MANAGEMENT ed patients with Type II diabetes mellitus can often achieve excellent control or even normalization with life style modification.
Certified Diabetes Educators (CDE) provide the information either individually or in group education programs.
At the time of diagnosis, patients also need to learn self-management methods, (including the use of glucose meters and insulin injection techniques) general information on pharmacotherapy, and methods for dealing with daily problems such as acute illness and foot care.
conclusion references 1.
Diabetes Control and Complications Trial Record Group: The effects of intensive treatment of diabetes on the development and progression of long-term complications of insulin dependent diabetes mellitus, N. Engl J. Med (1993) 329: 977 2.
Laslo, R.D.: The DCCT: Implications for policy and practice (editorial) N. Engl J. Med (1993) 329: 1035 3.
Lewis, E.J. Hunsechio, L.G. Brain, R. P. et al: Effects of angiotension converting-enzyme inhibition on diabetic nephropathy, N. Engl J. Med (1993) 329-1456.
There are over 8 million known persons with diabetes in the United States.
A similar number remain unaware of their asymptomatic diabetes mellitus, an insidious risk factor for multiple complications.
The great burden of caring for these patients will fall on increasing numbers of primary care Table 2 providers.
These patients represent an enormous risk to themselves RECOMMENDATIONS FOR GL YCEMIC CONTROL and the health care system.
The implementation of DCCT guidelines for treating diabetes should BIOCHEMICAL INDEX ..............
NORMAL GOAL ACTION SUGGESTED limit the risk and the cost as improved methods for maintain
<
<
(Louis Amorosa, MD, Professor of Clinical HbA1C (4-6%) ..............
<
Highly motivat- 3 he Diabetes Control and Complications Trial (DCCT) strongly suggests that intensive diabetes control is important in persons with Type II Diabetes (NIDDM).
Complications of t pathophysiology of NIDDM and its complications, and our current armamentarium of new pharmacologic agents into clinical practice makes near-normal glycemia attainable in most patients.
If v CRITERIA FOR IMPAIRED GLUCOSE TOLERANCE (IGT) v the evaluation and treatment of hyperglycemia in type II diabetes: an algorithm NIDDM cost over $100 billion annually.
Prevention of complications is the raison d'etre for early diagnosis; and the prompt, intensive and ongoing treatment of the 16 million persons with diabetes in the United States.
New knowledge of Impaired Glucose Tolerance (IGT) and Gestational Diabetes (GDM), and their progression into overt Type II Diabetes and culmination into insulin-requiring Type II Diabetes, demands attention now.
Genetic and clinical problems associated with IGT include obesity, hypertension, dyslipidemia and a predisposition to macroangiopathic complications.
All of these respond to preventive intervention.
Translating our understanding of the Table 3 Fasting PG
1.
screening for diabetes (non-pregnant adults) v DIAGNOSTIC FINDINGS v Classic signs 
2.
3.
4. Use a systematic approach to screening for NIDDM, IGT and GDM, Establish a clinical and laborator y data base on each patient at the first office visit, Employ national standards for glycemic, lipid 
Physicians should have a high index of suspicion for disorders of carbohydrate tolerance.
About half the persons with NIDDM are undiagnosed, representing almost 8 million Americans.
It is estimated that NIDDM occurs in 6% of U.S. citizens; IGT is twice as common as NIDDM, i.e. almost 12%; GDM occurs in 2-5% of pregnancies.
The risks for NIDDM are demography, genetics, lifestyle, obesity, parity and intrauterine factors.
Epidemiological studies of race and ethnicity have shown the highest likelihood of NIDDM are among African Americans, Mexican Americans, Asian Americans and Native Americans.
Hispanic Americans have 2-3 times the risk of diabetes of Caucasian Americans.
AGE AND SEX are important risk factors.
The risk is low before age 30 and rapidly increases in the older decades.
The highest rates are among octogenarians.
NIDDM is 40% greater in U.S. women than in men.
GENETIC F ACTORS include racial enhancement of genes among homogeneous ethnic groups, gene-sharing among Native Americans with Hispanics or with Caucasian Americans or Hispanics with Caucasian Americans.
FAMIL Y HISTOR Y is a well established risk factor: DIAGNOSIS BEFORE AGE 50: 5.
6.
One Parent: NIDDM Risk = 14% Both Parents: NIDDM Risk = 25% Sibling: NIDDM Risk = 14% DIAGNOSIS OF NIDDM IN IDENTICAL TWIN: 7.
NIDDM Risk = 58-75% 4 combined with seem to be accepted risk factors for NIDDM, a heterogeneous disease.
OBESITY, especially total body adiposity (i.e. based on percentage of body fat, Body Mass Index) and central obesity (based on Waist/Hip Ratio), is an accepted NIDDM risk factor.
Central abdominal obesity alone appears to be an important NIDDM risk factor.
The latter is associated with lean extremities, a large percentage of intra-abdominal adiposity, and a genetic predisposition.
MUL TIPLE GENES, ENVIRONMENTAL FACTORS, PARITY AND INTRAUTERINE FAC- v Diabetes education, self-management training, family education; Glucose monitoring equipment, SMBG records; Consultants: podiatry, ophthalmology (annual dilated retinal exam), dental care; Past and associated medical, surgical and obstetrical history; Educational 
v 4.
utilization of certified diabetes educators Primary physicians rarely have certified diabetes educators (CDE's) in their offices.
However, CDE's are readily available in nearby diabetes education centers, endocrinology practices, hospital outpatient programs and in local health agencies.
New Jersey's Diabetes Law, enacted by the State Legislature and signed by the Governor in January 1996, mandates that managed care organizations provide reimbursement to patients with diabetes for disease related education.
Physicians should utilize these benefits for their diabetic patients.
This will ensure high quality self-management, patient and family member skills and will establish weight and nutritional goals for each patient.
v v v v v v v may be risk factors for NIDDM based on the higher rates of maternal diabetes as compared to paternal diabetes.
The increased number of completed pregnancies, associated with their diabetogenic intrauterine hormonal onslaught, are the probable risk factors for NIDDM.
A sedentary LIFESTYLE and inappropriate dietary habits, seem to be logical risk factors for NIDDM.
Epidemiological studies of nurses and male physicians who engaged in regular physical exercise showed a 20% and 30% respective reduction in NIDDM.
Other lifestyle factors are urbanization and "acculturation", i.e. assumption of a Western Lifestyle (especially a high fat diet and reduced physical activity).
In addition, SOCIOECONOMIC MARKERS such as lowest income and educational levels, are associated NIDDM risks.
TORS v COMPREHENSIVE PHYSICAL 
nutritional goals v v Provide meal-planning guidelines Balance food intake with pharmacotherapy 
v v v v 2.
the data base An effective individualized patient management plan is based on information about that patient.
This Data Base is gathered in the traditional manner: v COMPREHENSIVE DIABETES HISTOR Y v 3.
national standards for glycemic control The American Diabetes Association (ADA) has established standards for glycemic control and goals for lipid and blood pressure levels for non-pregnant adults.
While these are guidelines, it behooves primary physicians to utilize them.
Self-monitoring of blood glucose 2-4 times daily is essential to attain glycemic control.
The recommended performance measures for glycemic control have been noted above.
(See Table 1 and 2, above article) 6.
establish a safe and effective exercise program The physician who treats diabetes should recognize the potential benefits of exercise for all with Type II diabetes, regardless of the age or complications.
Careful evaluation for risk factors and risk/benefit ratios of individual exercises for each patient can be established with the advice of an exercise physiologist in the community.
These professionals are found in the cardiac rehabilitation programs in most hospitals.
5 Diagnosis, previous treatment, quality of glycemic control; Weight history, diet review; complications; Details of previous treatment: diet, exercise, oral hypoglycemic agents, insulin therapy; v v dosage of insulin, 10-15 units, is added to oral agents in the evenings or before dinner PHARMACOTHERAPY: GUIDELINES when fasting blood glucose or hemoglobin CHARACTERISTICS OF ORAL HYPOGL YCEMIC AGENTS: MONOTHERAPY A1C values exceed the guidelines considered reasonable for an individual patient.
Symptomatic severe hyperglycemia generic name ..........
BRAND NAME DAILY DOSAGE (MG) TIME ACTION (HOURS) requires intensive insulin therapy.
glipizide .......... glucotrol 2.5 - 40 12 - 24 Post-marketing studies and clinical glucotrol XL 5-60 24 practice have shown the merits of comglyburide .......... diabeta 1.25 - 20 16 - 24 bined therapy, but enthusiasm must be moderated by as yet unstudied pharmamicronase coeconomic considerations and the greater glynase prestab 0.75 - 12 12 - 24 potential for adverse events of combining glimepiride .......... amar yl 1- 8 24 different classes of oral agents and insulin.
metformin .......... glucophage 1,500 - 2,500 5.5 The rules should be: 1) be familiar with the acarbose .......... precose 25 - 150 2-4 agents, 2) select your patients cautiously for combined theraTable 5 py and 3) monitor them very carefully.
THE NEWER ORAL AGENTS, METFORMIN AND ACARBOSE, HAVE REVOLUTIONIZED MONOTHERAPY The playing field FOR NIDDM IN FAVOR OF 7.
continuing care has not been tested COMBINED THERAPY Assumption of the care of a person with completely; so NIDDM entails a major commitment by expect improved Sulfonylurea or glimiperide + metformin 
The frequency of viscontrol, but look out its and referrals to specialists depends on Sulfonylurea or glimiperide + insulin for the unexpected the patient's diabetes control, complicabounce.
(Arthur Sulfonylurea or glimiperide + metformin + insulin tions, etc.
It is recommended that the freKrosnick, MD, CDE, Sulfonylurea or glimiperide + acarbose + insulin quency of visits is contingent upon the staco-chair, Patricia Metformin + acarbose bility of diabetic control: stable patients Carson, RN, MA, meeting glycemic goals may be seen every CDE, CNS and Mary Metformin + insulin six months.
Patients not meeting goals, Johnson, RD, MS, Acarbose + insulin every three months.
Each visit requires an CDE members, NJ interval history (symptoms, hypo- and Diabetes Council) s to dosage alone and in combination with hyperglycemia, intercurrent illnesses, other agents, potential adverse events, drug medications, etc.), specific tests and examreferences interactions, etc.
If prescribed properly, the inations, a review of diet and medication 1.
Medical Management of oral hypoglycemic drugs alone or in comcompliance, and the selfmonitoring gluNon-Insulin-Dependent 6.
Linton AL. Peachey DK. (Type II) Diabetes, Third bination with insulin work well.
A working cose log or computer printout from a Guidelines for medical Edition, American Diabetes practice: the reasons why. relationship between the physician, nurse, memory glucose meter.
Association, Clinical EDITOR'S Canadian Medical Education Series pharmacist and patient is very helpful.
NOTE Association Journal.
2.
ADA Position Statement: 1990:143:485-490.
The first generation sulfonylureas The FDA has Standards of Medical Care recently 7.
Ginserg B. Masse R. (tolbutamide, chlorpropamide, tolazaof Patients with Diabetes pharmacotheraClinical consequences approved Mellitus, Diabetes Care mide) have largely been replaced by glipof the Diabetes Control troglitazone 17:617-623, June 1994 peutic algorithm and Complication Trial.
izide, glyburide, and recently, glimiperide.
(RezulinTM) as 3.
The Diabetes Control New Jersey Medicine.
the prototype of Most patients respond satisfactorily initialAlthough the foundation of treatment of and Complications Trial 1994:91(4):221-224.
a new class of Research Group: The effect ly, but secondary failure to respond occurs NIDDM is diet and exercise, the current 8.
Thomson R. Lavender M. oral agents of intensive treatment of Madhok R. How to ensure in 5-10% of patients per year after 5 to 15 array of pharmacotherapeutic agents is designed to diabetes on the developthat guidelines are effective.
sensitize ment and progression of years of treatment.
As many as 35% of awesome.
Primary physicians can now BMJ. 1995:331:237-242.
skeletal muscles long-term complications in patients with NIDDM become insulin users.
attain near-normal glycemia with the to the action of 9.
Vinicor F. Cohen C. Mazzuca insulin-dependent diabetes insulin.
mellitus, N Engl J Med S. Et al.
DIABEDS: A Studies have shown that those patients appropriate utilization of safe and effective 329:977-986, 1993 randomized trial of the This drug is with adequate insulinogenic capacity, as drugs as monotherapy or in combination.
effects of physician and/ approved for 4.
Diabetes 1996 or patient education on demonstrated by C-peptide levels, did well It is crucial that the physician who treats insulin-requiring Vital Statistics, ADA diabetes patient outcomes.
patients with with combined therapy, i.e. insulin with NIDDM be fully cognizant of the content of 5.
Clinical Practice Journal of Chronic Disease.
type II diabetes.
Recommendations, ADA 1987:40:345-356.
oral antidiabetic agent.
Usually, a low the package inserts, especially with regard 6 Table 4 Diabetes Newsletter CME Test Questions ORIGINAL RELEASE: EXPIRATION: April, 1997 April 30, 1998 For each question, circle the one best answer on the answer sheet (page 8). diabetes diabe N E W S L E T T E R University of Medicine and Dentistry of New Jersey s Published by UMDNJ-Center for Continuing Education cme test questionnaire 1.
The results of the DCCT demonstrate that intensive insulin management: 4.
Optimalization of diabetic control: Decreased diabetic retinopathy b. Reduced Hemoglobin A1C c. Reduced the evidence of complications of diabetes 50 to 60%.
d.
All of the above a.
Is only necessary for insulin dependent diabetes b.
Is evidenced by reduced Hb A1C as close to 6% as possible for the individual c. Enables patients to enjoy some freedom from diabetic complications d.
A and B e. B and C a. 8.
Which of the following statements is incorrect: 2.
Normal Hemoglobin A1C (which is the best indicator of glycosylated hemoglobin) is: a. b. c. d. 5.
Recommended LDL Cholesterol levels for diabetes mellitus is less than: a. b. c.
Most patients with NIDDM should be referred to a registered dietitian for nutritional counseling.
b. Hemoglobin A1C is only indicative of blood sugar levels for the past two weeks.
c. Referrals for patient selfmanagement diabetes education should be made to an RN, CDE. a. 
The recommended fasting/preprandial blood sugar parameters that necessitate action to improve glycemic control are: a. b. c. d. 3.
Which of the following statements is true: 6.
The following two new oral agents have revolutionized monotherapy for NIDDM: a. b. c. Patients with NIDDM need only see their physician every five years for a Hemoglobin A1C. b.
The DCCT results proved that tight control of diabetes reduced the complications of the disease.
c.
It is not a priority to examine a diabetic patient's feet on every visit.
d.
All patients with diabetes should be placed on a weight reduction diet plan.
a.
Glyburide and Metformin Metformin and Acarbose Acarbose and Glipizide 
The first generation sulfonylureas have largely been replaced by: Glipizide, glyburide and glimiperide b. Glucotrol, Diabeta and Precose c. Glucophage, Glucotrol and Diabenese a. 10.
Presently, the Center for Disease Control and Prevention is funding a state grant to implement minimal standards of care for all diabetic patients thereby incorporating the findings of the DCCT into practical use.
Key performance measures identified in these standards are: a. b. c.
For additional copies of newsletter, comments and inquiries, contact DOROTHY CAPUTO, MA, RNC, CNA, CDE, Editor and Project Coordinator at (908) 235-7430* or e-mail caputoda@umdnj.edu UMDNJ-CCE gratefully acknowledges an unrestricted educational grant from HOECHST MARION ROUSSEL PHARMACEUTICAL COMPANY for the publication of this newsletter.
*Note: Effective June 1, 1997, our phone number will be (732) 235-7430.
d. e. Weight Lipid Profile Hemoglobin A1C Appropriate referral for selfmanagement education to an RN, CDE All of the above 7 Diabetes Newsletter CME Answer Sheet ORIGINAL RELEASE: EXPIRATION: April, 1997 April 30, 1998 diabetes diabe N E W S L E T T E R University of Medicine and Dentistry of New Jersey s Published by UMDNJ-Center for Continuing Education PLEASE CIRCLE APPROPRIATE LETTER questionnaire answer sheet 1.
Read the newsletter carefully.
2.
The questions are designed to provide a useful link between each submission and your everyday practice.
Read each question, choose the correct answer, and record your answer on this form.
Retain a copy of your answers so that they can be compared with the correct answers that will be sent to you at a later date.
3.
Type your full name, address, and Social Security number in the space provided.
4. Use the enclosed postage-paid envelope to return your completed test or send the completed answer sheet to: UMDNJ-CENTER FOR CONTINUING EDUCATION 30 BERGEN STREET NEWARK, NJ 07107-9816 (201) 982-4267** OUTSIDE NEW JERSEY 1 (800) 227-4852 Specialty 1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
A A A A A B B B B B C C C C C D D D D E 6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
A A A A A B B B B B C C C C C D D E Name Degree Managed Care Organization Affiliation Date Social Security # Please tear along dotted line 5.
Your answers will be graded, and you will be advised that you have passed (or failed).
An answer sheet containing all correct answers will be mailed to you.
Review the parts of the newsletter addressing any questions you have missed and read the materials suggested in the listed references.
6.
A minimum score of 70% correct must be obtained in order for credit (AMA/PRA category 1, 1.0 credit hours) to be awarded.
Address City, State Postal Code Daytime Phone Fax Signature *Please complete questions on back panel.
**Note: Effective June 1, 1997, our phone number will be (973) 972-4267 8 diabetes N E W S L E T T E R University of Medicine and Dentistry of New Jersey s Published by UMDNJ-Center for Continuing Education Was this publication balanced, free of commercial bias? u Yes u No Did this CME activity meet the stated objectives? u Yes u No What topics would you like addressed in future publications? UPCOMING EVENT: On October 30, 1997, the Diabetes Control Program, New Jersey Department of Health and Senior Ser vices, will host a site for the National Diabetes Satellite Town Hall Meeting.
The intended audience for the conference will consist of persons and organizations with a specific interest in reducing the burden of diabetes.
Specifics of the event will be provided 9 in the next newsletter.
objectives Upon completion of this CME activity, the participant should be able to: 1.
Discuss the impact of the DCCT on the management of diabetes 2.
Recognize the role of hemoglobin A1C in the treatment of diabetes 3.
List essential elements in an individualized patient management plan 4.
Discuss the role of diabetes patient self-management education in the treatment of diabetes 5.
State three pharmacotherapeutic options available in the treatment of diabetes 6.
Define the minimum standards of care for those with diabetes diabetes NEWSLETTER UMDNJ-Center for Continuing Education 30 Bergen Street Newark, New Jersey 07107-9816 Non-Profit Org.
US Postage paid UMDNJ participating organizations part ip or ni First Option, University Health Plan, CAMcare, Eric B. Chandler Health Center, Jersey City Family Health Center, Newark Community Health Center, North Hudson Community Action Health Center, Plainfield Neighborhood Health Center and VNA of Central Jersey Community Health Center.
published by ishe This Newsletter is a CME activity published by the University of Medicine and Dentistry of New Jersey (UMDNJ)Center for Continuing Education and distributed to a select number of primary care providers in private HMO's and federally funded qualified health centers.
The newsletter will be published semi-annually as part of the educational component of an outcome research project advocating principles of diabetic management.
credits This newsletter was reviewed for relevance, accuracy of content and time required for participation by Sandra Moss, MD, John Orzano, MD, Steven H. Schneider, MD, Ronnie Davidson, Ed.D., Elizabeth B. Congdon RN, MA, Betsy Solan RN, MPH and Dorothy Caputo, MA, RNC, CNA, CDE. Mary O'ConnorRoot RN, BSN provided editorial assistance.
This newsletter was designed by Dana Nolletti, UMDNJ-RWJMS Media Resources.
accreditation UMDNJ-Center for Continuing Education is accredited by the Accreditation Council for Continuing Medical Education to sponsor continuing medical education for physicians.
category credits The University of Medicine and Dentistry of New Jersey - Center for Continuing Education designates this educational activity for a maximum of 1.0 credit hour in category 1 towards the American Medical Association/ Physician's Recognition Award, provided the post-activity test is completed with a minimum passing score of 70%.
This CME activity was prepared in accordance with ACCME Essentials.
Credit for this CME Test is available until March 1998.
After this date, physicians may self-designate category 2 for this activity.
Correct answers will be returned with your scored test and the CME credit letter within 30 days of receipt of your answer sheet.
