LHLS 
Baton Rouge, LA 70806 [PhoneIiCONclrbkgrd.gif]
Phone 225-925-7500 FAX 225-925-7501
Pet 
American Humane Association Animals, as well as people, are often victims of volcanic eruptions, floods, tornadoes, hurricanes and other national disasters.
Through an agreement with the American National Red Cross, AHA provides on-site rescue and relief for animal victims of disaster.
AHA maintains an Emergency Animal Relief Fund to provide desperately needed funds to local animal welfare agencies attempting to meet animals' needs when disaster strikes.
American Pet Association The APA is an independent, national humane organization dedicated to promoting responsible pet ownership through action, education and services.
American Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals Poison prevention, pet care, education, issues, volunteer opportunities
Animal Care and Control We, as people, have a responsibility to animals.
Animal care and control laws were first enacted in the mid-1800's to ensure that animals were treated humanely.
As life became more complicated in the twentieth century, new laws were needed to enable animals and humans to continue to live compatibly.
Many of these ordinances, such as the lead and anti-litter laws, protect not only the animals, but humans and their property as well.
Animal Defense League The League provides programs and services which strengthen the bond between animals and people.
Service include: ambulance service to pick up injured strays; conduction of humane education programs in schools and the community; shelter for abused and unwanted pets and strays
Animal Hospital A list of animal hospitals, veterinary services, 
Animal Rescue Foundation To rescue homeless, lost or abandoned dogs in order to prevent and alleviate animal suffering and reduce pet overpopulation.
To provide dogs with food, shelter, care and medical attention on a temporary basis.
ARF is currently developing an education and awareness program for the Indian Reserves, teaching responsible and proper care for dogs and cats.
ASPCA/National Animal Poison Control Center This 24-hour emergency service is the first and only national animal-oriented poison information center in the United States
Boarding Kennel - Pet Hotels A list of cat 
Community Animal Rescue Effort, Evanston, Illinois C.A.R.E. is an all volunteer organization that works in conjunction with Evanston's municipal Animal Shelter to find homes for the abused and abandoned animals that are brought to the shelter
Florida Animal Disaster Plan The establishment of an animal disaster relief plan will serve as a blueprint which can be used and modified in the event of a hurricane.
This would allow the relief effort to proceed smoothly so that the greatest part of volunteers' energy could be used constructively to provide emergency and supportive care to animal victims of a hurricane.
Humane Society of the United States The Humane Society of the United States is the nation's largest animal-protection organization, with more than 3.5 million constituents.
The HSUS was founded in 1954 to promote the humane treatment of animals and to foster respect, understanding, and compassion for all creatures.
Louisiana Veterinary Medical Association Advancing the science and art of veterinary medicine and its relationship to the public's health and biological sciences and agriculture in the state of Louisiana and promoting the health of all species and to extend to the agricultural community and the community-at-large the benefits of sound and progressive leadership in the diagnosis and treatment of animals
Louisiana Department of Agriculture 
Louisiana State University Agricultural Center (LSU Vet School)
Sacramento SPCA The Sacramento SPCA works to prevent the needless suffering of animals.
We promote the humane care and treatment of animals by providing shelter for homeless, lost or abused pets, offering low-cost spay and neuter services, humane investigations, and public education and outreach programs.
United States Department of Agriculture-Animal 
Related Information Animal Index Emergency Partners Link Index Animal Disaster Plan Worksheet - Information Sheet Disaster Planning Tips for Pets, Livestock 
[uparrow.gif] Top
Home | News | Site Contents | Contact Directory | Search
Terms | Privacy | E-mail Webmaster
