New York State: the e-mpire state New York State Common Web Banner Info for Consumers __________________________________________________________________ Return to Other Cancers __________________________________________________________________ Home Page Commissioner's Page Directory Services Vital Records Information Information for Consumers Information for Providers Information for Researchers Information for the Public Employment Events Search the DOH web site Help What's New Ovarian Cancer - Diagnosis and Treatment Image of Cancer Survivor's Quilt The Ovarian Cancer Survivor's Quilt, completed in January 1997 Our deepest thanks to the women who have inspired and created the Ovarian Cancer Survivor's Quilt: Shirlee Mohiuddin, Nancy LeGendre, Judith R. Adams, Joanne Arsenault, Judy Barwood, Rosemary Berger, Andree Bergeron, Susan Lowell Butler, Joan Cannizzaro, Diana Dalgins, Judith DeSiro, Paula Gerlack, Mercedes Georges, Carol Gilbert, Gail Hayward, Andrea Heinrich, Mary Hoppes, Emily Ann Lawrimore, Alice Petteruti LeGrende, Cathy Lefchuk, Cindy Melancon, Julia Anne Richardson, Martha N. Solanche, Suzanne Thompson, Judy Tolces, Sheila Walkerden, and Catherine Lynn Yost.
The stories behind the quilt squares can be viewed on the National Ovarian Cancer Coalition website at http://www.ovarian.org/quilt.shtml __________________________________________________________________
Quilt pattern image
Ovarian Cancer
On average, 1,700 women in New York State are diagnosed with ovarian cancer each year.
If you are one of them, or if your doctor suspects you may have ovarian cancer, you probably have many questions about how your cancer will be treated and what you can expect.
This booklet is intended to offer you help and guidance as you learn more about ovarian cancer.
However, it is not meant to be a complete information resource or a substitute for your doctors advice.
You must agree to any treatment before it can be carried out.
You have the right to take part in decisions relating to your care.
Dont be afraid to ask questions.
Make sure you understand what your doctor is saying.
It may help to write down your questions ahead of time, and to have a family member or friend with you when you talk to your doctor.
Every case is unique, and no two people will respond to treatment in exactly the same way.
Use the information in this booklet to talk to your doctor and explore the options available to you.
With the additional information your doctor gives you, you can make an informed choice of the best treatment for you.
Structure of the Ovary and Types of Ovarian Cancer Picture of Ovaries
The ovaries are about the size and shape of an almond, and are located at the end of the fallopian tubes, on either side of a womans uterus.
Ovarian cancer occurs with equal frequency in each of the two ovaries.
Like all body organs, the ovaries are made up of different types of cells.
The outer surface and inner lining of the ovary are covered with cube-shaped cells called the germinal epithelium (JERM-ih-nal ep-ih-THEE-leeum).
85 to 90% of ovarian cancers are found in this cell layer and are called epithelial carcinomas (ep-ih-THEE-lee-al kar-sih-NO-mahs).
One form of epithelial cancer is less likely to spread to surrounding tissues; this type is referred to as a tumor of low malignant potential, or LMP tumor.
Quilt pattern image
Under the epithelial layer is the tunica albuginea (TUNE-ick-ah al-boo-JIN-ee-ah), a protective capsule of connective tissue.
If this capsule has been ruptured by an ovarian tumor, the cancer is considered more advanced than if the capsule is intact.
Another layer of connective tissue, the stroma (STROH-ma) lies underneath the tunica albuginea.
Stromal tumors (also called sex cord tumors), or cancer of cells in the stroma, can occur, but they are far more rare than epithelial malignancies.
Germ cell tumors, another type of ovarian cancer, are also very rare.
This type of cancer affects the special cells that give rise to the ovaries during fetal development.
Germ cell tumors are most commonly seen in children and young girls.
Stromal tumors and germ cell tumors together make up about 10% of all ovarian cancers.
Diagnosis
As you are probably already aware, diagnosis of ovarian cancer is often very difficult.
Such early symptoms as bloating or vague pelvic pain can be hard to tell from more common abdominal complaints.
75% of women with ovarian cancer are not diagnosed until the disease has spread into the abdomen.
Because the ovaries are deep within the body, and because symptoms can vary so much, a biopsy (BYE-op-see) (the surgical removal of a small sample of tissue for examination under a microscope) is the only way to tell for certain whether cancer is present.
This type of surgery is called an exploratory laparotomy (lap-ah-ROT-ahmee).
Another type of exploratory procedure often used is called a laparoscopy (lap-ah-ROSS-koh-pee).
With a laparoscopy, a small incision is made in the abdomen and a thin, hollow tube is inserted.
The tube has a tiny lighted microscope on the end so the surgeon can visually examine the inside of the abdomen.
The tube is removed and the incision closed with a few stitches when the procedure is over.
Before the laparotomy or laparoscopy, your doctor will schedule you for some or all of the following tests.
This will give him or her a better idea of where to examine for cancer during the surgery.
Quilt pattern image * Physical examination, including a rectovaginal pelvic exam: To check for masses or growths in the pelvic area.
In a rectovaginal pelvic exam, the doctor inserts one finger into your vagina and one finger into your rectum and presses down on your abdomen with the other hand.
This allows the doctor to palpate (feel) your abdominal organs as thoroughly as possible.
* Pap smear: To check the lower uterus (cervix) for any cancerous cells.
However, while a Pap test is useful in checking for cervical or vaginal cancer, it has little or no value in finding whether ovarian cancer is present.
* Ultrasound: This test uses highfrequency sound waves, which humans cannot hear or feel, to create an image called a sonogram.
A sonogram can show whether an abnormal growth is a cyst (a sac filled with fluid, usually not cancerous) or a solid tumor (may be either cancerous or benign {not cancer}).
* Color Doppler imaging: This is another form of ultrasound that is used to look at blood flow to the ovaries.
Since new blood vessels often form around tumors, an increase in blood flow can be an indicator of tumor growth.
Quilt pattern image * CT (also called CAT) scan: A computerized X-ray of cross-sections of the body.
* CA-125 or CA-125 II assay (ASS-ay): An assay simply means a test to measure the amount of a particular substance in a mixture.
CA-125 is a tumor marker for ovarian cancer.
Tumor markers are substances that can be detected in higher-than-normal amounts in the blood, urine, or body tissues of some patients with certain types of cancer.
A tumor marker may be produced by the cancer itself or by the body in response to the presence of cancer.
A CA-125 assay by itself is not always a reliable test for the presence of cancer, since other, non-cancerous conditions (such as uterine fibroids or endometriosis) can cause the levels of CA-125 to rise.
For this reason, a CA-125 assay is not considered precise enough to be a screening test (a test used to find cancer in the general population, such as the Pap test for cervical cancer).
However, your doctor will probably want to check your CA-125 levels if there is a suspicion of ovarian cancer.
Continual monitoring of CA-125 levels can also be a useful way to check for the presence (or recurrence) of cancer after treatment.
Quilt pattern image
A newer, somewhat more sensitive test to measure CA-125 levels, called the CA-125 II assay, is also being used by many medical centers.
The numbers for the CA-125 II assay may be somewhat higher than the same level measured by the older CA-125 assay, so it is important to know which test was used when comparing test results.
Other assays are coming into use which may use still different numbers, so always ask your doctor what test was used when comparing results.
During a laparotomy, the surgeon makes an incision (surgical cut) to open up the lower abdomen (between the navel and the pubic area).
The affected ovary is biopsied (removed for examination under a microscope).
The surgeon must remove the entire ovary because if cancer is present, cutting through the ovary can spread cancer cells.
The surgeon will also examine the entire abdominal area, paying particular attention to any areas that may have looked unusual on the tests described above.
Any unusual-looking tissues or fluid will be also be biopsied.
The patients abdomen and pelvis will be washed with a sterile saline solution (a mixture of salt and purified water).
This solution is then removed and examined for cancer cells.
In addition, several samples of normal-looking tissue are removed or biopsied.
What the doctor sees during the laparotomy, together with the results of the biopsies, is used to determine whether cancer is present and, if so, how far it has spread.
This is called staging.
Accurate staging is important because treatment is based on what stage the cancer is in.
Stages of Ovarian Cancer Stage I:
Cancer is found within one or both ovaries.
It has not spread beyond the ovaries.
Stage II:
Cancer is found in one or both ovaries and has spread to the uterus and/or the fallopian tubes and/or other body parts within the pelvis (the area between the hip bones).
Quilt pattern image Stage III:
Cancer is found in one or both ovaries and has spread to lymph nodes (small bean-shaped structures found throughout the body that produce and store infection-fighting cells) or to other body parts inside the abdomen, such as the surface of the liver or intestine.
Stage IV:
Cancer is found in one or both ovaries and has spread outside the abdomen or has spread to the inside of the liver.
Recurrent or refractory:
Recurrent means that the cancer has come back (recurred) after it has been treated.
Refractory means that the cancer did not respond to treatment.
Tumor Grade
Another determination made at diagnosis is tumor grade.
Grade is a term used to describe how closely a tumor resembles normal tissue of its same type when the tissue is examined under a microscope.
Normal cells have distinct borders and an orderly pattern.
One of the characteristics of cancer cells is that they become less distinct (also called less differentiated) and the cell pattern becomes poorly organized.
Cancer cells that look more like normal tissue are called well differentiated; cells that are poorly defined and disorganized are called poorly differentiated.
As a general rule, the grade of a tumor corresponds to its rate of growth or aggressiveness; high-grade, or poorly differentiated, tumors usually grow more quickly than low-grade, or well-differentiated, ones.
Information about tumor grade therefore helps doctors decide what treatment is most likely to be effective.
Tumors are usually graded from 1 to 3, with 1 being the lowest grade and 3 being the highest.
Treatment
Treatment for ovarian cancer almost always involves one or more of the following: * surgery: an operation to take out as much cancerous tissue as possible * chemotherapy: using drugs to kill the cancer cells * radiation therapy: using high-energy X-rays to kill the cancer cells.
Quilt pattern image
The first treatment method used to treat the cancer is called the primary treatment; in ovarian cancer this is almost always surgery.
Treatment methods used after the primary method are called adjuvant (AD-joo-vent) therapy; chemotherapy is a common adjuvant to surgery.
The goal of the primary treatment is to remove as much of the cancer as possible; adjuvant treatment is to prevent its recurrence.
Which treatments are used depends on the stage of the cancer, the type of cancer cells that are present, your age, and your general health.
The following discussions are general guidelines to standard treatment for the different stages of cancer.
Bear in mind, however, that treatment for ovarian cancer is undergoing constant research and testing.
New treatments, especially new uses of drugs, are tested through what are called clinical trials.
This means that one group of patients receives the new treatment and another group (called the control group) receives what is considered standard treatment.
Neither the patients nor the researchers know who is in which group.
At the end of a certain period of time, the patients progress is evaluated to see how well the new treatment has worked.
If you want to be included in a clinical trial, talk with your doctor.
He or she is usually your best guide to current treatment options for your particular situation.
If your doctor is not familiar with the clinical trials currently available, call the National Cancer Institute at 1-800-4-CANCER and ask for their listing of clinical trials.
(See the Resources section on this page.)
Surgery
If the biopsy shows cancer cells are present, surgery will be performed (usually at the same time) to remove the cancerous tissue and any nearby tissue to which the cancer may have spread.
If the cancer is confined to the ovary, this may be the only treatment needed.
Usually both ovaries, the fallopian tubes, uterus, surrounding lymph nodes, and part of the tissue that stretches from the stomach to nearby organs in the abdomen (called the omentum {oh-MENtum}) are removed.
Quilt pattern image
If the cancer is confined to one ovary, and the patient wishes to have children, it is sometimes possible to remove only the affected ovary and fallopian tube on the same side.
This leaves one ovary, fallopian tube and the uterus for childbearing.
If the cancer has spread beyond the ovaries, the surgeon will remove as much of the cancerous tissue as possible.
This is called tumor debulking.
Because of the importance of accurate staging, it is recommended that, whenever possible, surgery be performed by a gynecologic oncologist a doctor who specializes in gynecological cancers.
If the ovarian capsule has ruptured, if the cancer has spread beyond the ovary, or if any tumorous tissue could not be removed with surgery, treatment will usually include chemotherapy after surgery.
In some cases radiation therapy may be used.
Chemotherapy
Chemotherapy uses drugs to kill any cancer cells left after surgery.
The chemotherapy drugs most commonly used in treating ovarian cancer are the platinum compounds cisplatin and carboplatin.
Often they are given in combination with other chemotherapy drugs, such as paclitaxel (Taxol), cyclophosphamide (Cytoxan), and/or doxorubicin.
Topotecan (top-poe-TEE-kan) is a new drug that is currently being used to treat recurrence of ovarian cancer.
Chemotherapy is usually given intravenously (in-trahVEE-nus-lee) (through a vein); however, it is sometimes given intraperitoneally (in-trah-pearah-toe-NEE-ah-lee) (placing the drugs directly in the abdominal or pelvic cavity).
The choice of drugs, how they are given and how often they are given depend on the individual case.
Radiation Therapy
Cancer cells are sensitive to the high energy from radioactive material, so radiation therapy is sometimes used to kill cancer cells that may remain after surgery.
Radiation therapy is not often used to treat ovarian cancer.
However, it is sometimes given if the womans abdominal area has many small cancer sites that cannot be surgically removed.
Radiation therapy can be given in one of two ways.
External beam radiation therapy uses an X-ray machine to beam high-energy X-rays into the abdominal area.
With intraperitoneal (in-trah-pear-ahtoe-NEEL) radiation therapy, a liquid containing radioactive phosphorus (P32) is placed directly into the pelvic and abdominal cavities through a thin tube.
The radioactive liquid coats these areas, killing any remaining cancer cells.
Side Effects
While chemotherapy and radiation therapy kill cancer cells, they can also harm healthy cells.
This can lead to such side effects as nausea, diarrhea, and hair loss.
Cisplatin can cause nerve damage, leading to numbness, tingling, or pain in the fingers and toes (neuropathy) (new-ROP-ah-thee), difficulty in hearing, or ringing in the ears.
Quilt pattern image
Both carboplatin and paclitaxel can damage bone marrow, which in turn reduces the bodys ability to fight infection.
Patients who are receiving high doses of chemotherapy may be treated with stimulating factor, a group of substances that encourage bone marrow cells to develop and divide into red blood cells, white blood cells, and platelets.
This helps protect the immune system while the patient is undergoing chemotherapy.
Abdominal radiation can cause digestive problems, such as nausea, diarrhea, or stomach cramps.
Like the side effects of chemotherapy, these usually ease after treatment is completed.
In a small percentage (around 5%) of patients, radiation leads to scarring that can cause a partial or complete obstruction (blockage) of the intestine.
The patients discomfort may be relieved by using a suction tube to remove the backed-up fluid and ease the pressure.
Sometimes surgery is necessary to remove the obstruction.
(It should be noted that sometimes the cancer itself blocks the intestine, in which case surgery is performed to remove the tumor.)
Quilt pattern image
An experimental treatment that is used in some cases of highdose chemotherapy is to remove some cells from the patients bone marrow or blood before the chemotherapy begins.
The cells are stored and transplanted back into her body once the chemotherapy is over.
This gives the patients immune system a base of healthy cells with which to rebuild her resistance to disease.
When this procedure is done with bone marrow, it is called a bone marrow transplant; when cells are harvested from the bloodstream, it is called a peripheral stem cell transplant, or PSCT.
If you experience severe vomiting or diarrhea during treatment, let your doctor know.
There are medications which can be prescribed to help ease these side effects.
Some patients report that drinking large quantities of water before and/or after chemotherapy helps prevent nausea.
Since healthy cells can repair themselves, most side effects eventually go away after the course of chemotherapy or radiation treatment is over.
Neuropathy may continue after treatment but usually gets better with time.
There are medications and vitamin supplements that can help ease the effects of neuropathy; your doctor can tell you what would be most helpful to you.
Health Insurance Issues
Most health insurers cover the cost of standard care for treatment of ovarian cancer, including diagnostic tests, surgery, chemotherapy with FDA-approved drugs, radiation therapy, and follow-up care.
Quilt pattern image
Health insurance questions are more likely to come up when treatment involves such non-standard procedures as clinical trials.
If you are in a health maintenance organization (a prepaid health plan, or HMO), the law in New York State entitles you to file an appeal outside your plan if you are denied coverage.
If you have questions about this law or other insurance legislation, contact the New York State Department of Insurance at 1-800-342-3736.
Coverage of non-standard procedures may vary from one plan to another.
You have the right to request a written copy of the clinical criteria your plan uses to determine what treatments it will cover.
Call the plans member services office to find out how to request this information.
Your plan must also tell you how to file an appeal if you are denied coverage for a treatment procedure.
If you are not in an HMO, check with your health insurer about what procedures are covered.
If your doctor has recommended treatment that your insurer has denied as not medically necessary, ask that your doctor write a letter explaining why he/she is recommending this treatment.
Send it to your insurance company (and keep a copy for yourself).
Follow up with phone calls (there is usually a toll-free number on your ID card for customer service).
Some insurers will reconsider covering a procedure if a physician can convince them that it is potentially lifesaving.
Follow-Up Care Quilt pattern image
Once your treatment is completed, you will need regular follow-up care.
Your doctor will use some of the same tests that were used to make your diagnosis: a physical exam and rectovaginal pelvic exam.
You may also have a CT scan, chest X-rays, and lab tests, including tests to monitor your CA-125 levels.
In some cases, a doctor performs what is called a second-look laparotomy or laparoscopy a second surgery to examine the abdominal cavity for signs of cancer once chemotherapy is over.
This is usually done several months or more after the chemotherapy.
If any cancer is found, another course of chemotherapy or radiation therapy is usually advised.
Prognosis
The overall survival rate for ovarian cancer is lower than that of other gynecological cancers.
This is not because of any unique characteristics of ovarian cancer, but because it is not usually diagnosed until it is in later stages that may respond less sucessfully to treatment.
Prognosis also depends on such factors as the patients age, general state of health at the time of diagnosis, the type of cancer cell found, how large the tumor is, and the tumor grade.
Many promising new chemotherapy drugs are now in clinical trials and are already beginning to improve survival statistics.
In the meantime, it is important to remember that the outcome of treatment is impossible to predict for any individual.
There have been long-term survivors at every stage of diagnosis.
Genetic Concerns
If you have a family history of ovarian, breast, or colon cancer, or other genetic concerns related to ovarian cancer, you can call the Gilda Radner Familial Ovarian Cancer Registry.
Registry support staff offer advice and help for women who may be at risk for the disease.
The number is 1-800-OVARIAN (682-7426).
For referral to a genetic counselor with expertise in cancer risk assessment and counseling, call the New York State Department of Health, Bureau of Chronic Disease Services at (518) 474-1222.
Support Groups
Dealing with cancer taxes both your body and your spirit.
While good medical care is vital, dealing with the emotional issues cancer raises is just as important to your well-being.
Your family and loved ones also may need help in dealing with both the practical and the emotional concerns of this disease.
There are many different organizations that have programs for patients and their families.
Your medical team may be able to refer you to programs in your area.
You can also check the Resources section on this page.
The National Cancer Institute sponsors Cancer Information Service offices which provide referral information.
The office nearest you may be reached by calling 1-800-4-CANCER.
Or contact your local office of the American Cancer Society at 1-800-ACS-2345.
See also the listings in the Resources section on this page.
The Future Quilt pattern image
Its important to seek regular follow-up care from a doctor experienced in treating ovarian cancer.
You should be comfortable with your doctor and able to have your questions answered in a way you can understand.
The problem with monitoring ovarian cancer is the same problem as diagnosing it symptoms of recurrence are often vague and difficult to detect.
For this reason, its important to keep to your suggested schedule of follow-up tests.
And if you should experience any pelvic pain, shortness of breath, or something that doesnt seem right to you, let your doctor know right away.
This is a time when many advances are taking place in the treatment of ovarian cancer.
Through research, clinical trials, and efforts to increase awareness of ovarian cancer, progress is being made every day in the fight against this disease.
RESOURCES FOR INFORMATION AND/OR SUPPORT
Medical Organizations
These organizations can provide referrals to physicians who specialize in the treatment of ovarian cancer: Society of Gynecologic Oncologists/Gynecologic Cancer Foundation
401 North Michigan Avenue Chicago, IL 60611 (312) 644-6610 Web site: http://www.sgo.org Toll-free number for referral to gynecologic oncologists by geographic area: 1-800-444-4441 Quilt pattern image American Society of Clinical Oncology, Inc.
225 Reinekers Lane, Suite 650 Alexandria, VA 22314 (703) 299-0150 Web site: http://www.asco.org American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists (ACOG) Resource Center
409 12th Street SW Washington, DC 20024-2188 (202) 863-2518 or Web site: http://www.acog.org New York District Office: 152 Washington Avenue Albany, NY 12210 (518) 436-3461 A professional organization of physicians who specialize in womens health care.
They publish a variety of patient education materials dealing with gynecological health, including a pamphlet on Cancer of the Ovary.
American College of Surgeons
633 North Saint Clair Street Chicago, IL 60611-3211 (312) 202-5000 Web site: http://www.facs.org American College of Radiology
1891 Preston White Drive Reston, VA 20191 1-800-ACR-LINE (1-800-227-5463) Web site: http://www.acr.org Medical Society of the State of New York
420 Lakeville Road Lake Success, NY 11042 (516) 488- 6100 x344 Web site: http://www.mssny.org Quilt pattern image
Cancer Information/Advocacy Organizations National Cancer Institute
The National Cancer Institute publishes several excellent brochures about cancer and cancer treatment.
They also have an on-line database of information, called PDQ, about all kinds of cancer, including ovarian cancer.
PDQ includes information on clinical trials and doctors participating in them.
There is a PDQ for patients and another, written in more technical language, for physicians.
PDQ information is updated monthly.
NCI publications: * What You Need to Know about Ovarian Cancer * Radiation Therapy and You: A Guide to Self-Help During Treatment * Chemotherapy and You: A Guide to Self-Help During Treatment * Eating Hints: Recipes and Tips for Better Nutrition During Cancer Treatment * Taking Time: Support for People with Cancer and the People Who Care About Them * Questions and Answers about Metastatic Cancer * Questions and Answers about Pain Control
To order any of these publications, or to find out how to access the PDQ database, call 1-800-4-CANCER (1-800-422-6237).
Web site: http://cancernet.nci.nih.gov American Cancer Society
Eastern Division: 6725 Lyons Street East Syracuse, NY 13057 (315) 437-7025 or 1-800-ACS-2345 (24-hour Cancer Information Hotline) NYC Metro Office: (212) 586-8700 Plus 22 other regional offices in New York State; check your phone book or call 1-800-ACS-2345 for the office nearest you.
Quilt pattern image
Sponsors the Cansurmount program, which matches current cancer patients with patients who are medically and emotionally stabilized for one-on-one visits and support.
The ACS attempts to pair individuals by type and site of cancer, sex, age, and other factors to ease communication as much as possible.
Also provides patient transportation, support groups, and the Look Good...
Feel Better program to help women cope with the physical side effects of cancer treatment.
The ACS also publishes a free, helpful booklet called Sexuality and Cancer: For the Woman Who has Cancer and Her Partner.
To order, call your local ACS office and ask for booklet #4657.
The Gilda Radner Familial Ovarian Cancer Registry
Roswell Park Cancer Institute Elm and Carlton Streets Buffalo, NY 14263 1-800-OVARIAN (1-800-682-7426) Provides an ovarian cancer hotline and a registry for women with a family history of ovarian cancer.
Quilt pattern image SHARE
Self-Help for Women with Breast or Ovarian Cancer 1501 Broadway, Suite 1720 New York, NY 10036 (212) 719-0364 Hotlines: * Ovarian: (212) 719-1204 * Breast: (212) 382-2111 * Spanish: (212) 719-4454
Web site listing SHAREs calendar and newsletter: http://www.sharecancersupport.org A self-help organization that offers support groups, educational programs, hotlines, wellness programs, and advocacy for women with breast or ovarian cancer.
All programs for patients and their families/caregivers are free of charge.
Gildas Club (National/NYC)
195 West Houston St. New York, NY 10014 (212) 647-9700 and Gildas Club (Westchester)
Box 92 Purchase, NY 10577 (914) 997- 5315 Web site: http://www.gildasclub.org A free emotional and social support community for people with cancer and their families and friends.
Sponsors workshops, lectures, groups, and social events.
Quilt pattern image Cancer Care, Inc.
275 7th Avenue New York, NY 10001 (212) 221-3300 Web site: http://www.cancercareinc.org Offices also in: Nassau: (516) 364-8130 Suffolk: (516) 737-1836
An organization that provides a variety of counseling and emotional support services for cancer patients in person, over the phone, and via e-mail.
Also runs educational programs and provides financial assistance for patients in need.
Services are available in both English and Spanish.
All services are available free of charge.
Cancer Care also sponsors a free counseling hotline for cancer patients, their families and friends.
Staffed by oncology social workers, it operates Monday-Friday from 9 am to 5 pm.
The counseling hotline number is 1-800-813-HOPE (1-800-813-4673).
GYN Cancer Network
Cancer Action 255 Alexander Street Rochester, NY 14607 Pat Fitzpatrick, facilitator (716) 423-9700
An ongoing support group, held in 6-week sessions, for gynecological cancer patients.
The Cancer Action office also has a library of materials for women dealing with gynecological cancer and for their families.
Free of charge.
Quilt pattern image National Ovarian Cancer Coalition
Gail Hayward, Founder P. O. Box 4472 Boca Raton, FL 33429-4472 1-888-OVARIAN (682-7426) Web site: http://www.ovarian.org NYS Chapter: Marcia Van DeWark, PhD 20 Peters Circle West Seneca, NY 14224 (716) 675-8088
A grassroots organization of ovarian cancer survivors who are working for increased awareness of ovarian cancer among the general public, medical practitioners, and legislators.
Their web page offers information about NOCC action on issues related to ovarian cancer, links to medical information, a listing of gynecologic oncologists by state, and a very comprehensive listing of resources, including helpful phone numbers, books, tapes, and support groups.
On-line Resources Ovarian Problems Discussion List
An on-line discussion group for women with ovarian problems, specifically ovarian cancer or ovarian cysts.
To subscribe, send an e-mail message to: listserv@listserv.acor.org.
Leave the subject line blank and put the message SUBSCRIBE OVARIAN, followed by your first name and last name, in the body of your message.
Oncolink: The University of Pennsylvania Cancer Center Resource
Web site: http://www.oncolink.upenn.edu
A very comprehensive source of information about all kinds of cancers, including ovarian.
Includes links to on-line cancer discussion lists and to the NCIs PDQ.
See also the NOCC Web site at http://www.ovarian.org
Magazines/Newsletters Conversations!
The Newsletter for Women Who Are Fighting Ovarian Cancer Cindy Melancon, Publisher P. O. Box 7948 Amarillo, TX 79114-7948 (806) 355-2565 Web site: http://www.geocities.com/HotSprings/7938
A monthly newsletter containing personal experiences of women with ovarian cancer.
Subscribers can, if they wish, include their names in a monthly pen/phone pal list.
No charge for subscriptions, but donations are welcomed.
Ovarian Plus International
Gynecologic Cancer Prevention Quarterly P. O. Box 498 Paauilo, HI 96776-0498 Web site: http://www.monitor.net/ovarian $50/year
A quarterly newsletter for women at risk of developing ovarian cancer.
It includes articles on research developments, psychosocial issues, and cancerrelated politics.
Coping: Living with Cancer
P. O. Box 682268 Franklin, TN 37068-2268 (615) 791-3859
Published 6 times yearly; subscription price is $18/year.
A magazine for people living with cancer, whether their own or that of a friend or family member.
Telephone Cancer Care Couseling line
1 800-813-HOPE
A free counseling hotline for cancer patients, their family and friends.
Staffed by social workers; operates Monday through Friday (except holidays) 9am-4pm Eastern time.
See also the Ovarian Cancer hotline (1-800-OVARIAN) at the Gilda Radner Familial Ovarian Cancer Registry.
Video Living with Ovarian Cancer
Produced by the Ovarian Cancer Research Fund, Inc., New York, NY Cost: $15 Order by calling Transit Media at 1-800-43-5540.
The video may also be available through some local American Cancer Society offices.
Designed for women newly diagnosed with ovarian cancer, this video interviews five ovarian cancer patients, their families, friends, and medical providers.
The video discusses all aspects of living with ovarian cancer, including treatment, impact on the family, sexuality, and dealing with the emotional and practical issues a cancer diagnosis brings.
Books Quilt pattern image
Gildas Disease: Sharing Personal Experiences and a Medical Perspective on Ovarian Cancer M. Steven Piver, M. D., and Gene Wilder Prometheus Books, 1996
Everyones Guide to Cancer Therapy Malin Dollinger, M. D., Ernest Rosenbaum, M. D., and Greg Cable Andrews 
Fifty Essential Things to Do When the Doctor Says Its Cancer Greg Anderson Dutton, 1993
Diagnosis Cancer: Your Guide Through the First Few Months Wendy Schlessel Harpham, M. D. Norton, 1992
After Cancer: A Guide to Your New Life Wendy Schlessel Harpham, M. D. Harper Perennial, 1995
The Activist Cancer Patient: How to Take Charge of Your Treatment Beverly Zakarian Wiley, 1994
Dancing in Limbo: Making Sense of Life After Cancer Glenna Halvorson-Boyd and Lisa K. Hunter Jossey-Bass, 1995
Womens Cancers: How to Prevent Them, How to Treat Them, How to Beat Them Kerry A. McGinn, R. N., and Pamela J. Haylock, R. N. Hunter House, 1993
Choices in Healing: Integrating the Best of Conventional and Complementary Approaches to Cancer Michael Lerner MIT Press, 1994
The following books by Annette and Richard Bloch are available free of charge by calling the R. A. Bloch Cancer Foundation at (816) 932-8453.
Fighting Cancer: A step-by-step guide to helping yourself fight cancer
Cancer theres hope
Guide for Cancer Supporters __________________________________________________________________
State of New York George E. Pataki, Governor Image of New York State Shield Department of Health Antonia C. Novello, M.D., M.P.H., Dr.P.H., Commissioner 0436 R8/99
e-mail Send questions or comments to: canserv@health.state.ny.us Revised: February 2001
