U.S.Deoartment OfTransportation Federal High wa y Administration Office of Motor Carriers Washington, D.C. 20590
Pub. No.
FHWA-MC-88-041
July 1988
C on fe re nc e ON AND COMMERCIAL
DIABE T I
C DISORDERS DRIVERS
Fred Whitehouse, M.D., et.al. 9 .
Per form ing
The Washington Consulting Group, Inc. 1625 Eye Street, N.W., Suite 214 Washington, D.C. 20006 of Transportation Administration Carriers 20590 Associates,
Orga nization Nan.
an d A ress dd
2.
Sponsoring A cy N and Add ress gen ame
U.S. Department Federal Highway Office of Motor Washington, D.C. 3.
Supplementary No te s
Prepared in cooperation With Prospect 6.
Inc.
-..
Abstract _.
This document represents the outcome of a conference sp on sor ed by the office of Motor Carriers to review the current medical standard covering commercial drivers with diabetes mellitus.
The standard (49 C.F.R. section 391.41(b)(3)) permits qualification of individuals to drive a commercial motor vehicle if that person baa n o established medical history or clinical diagnosis of diabetes mellitus currently re qu iring in su lin fo r con t ro l .
Four task force papers which carefully review the administrative rule with reference to advances in the care of diabetes since 1970 are contained in this report.
The papers have been reviewed by the task forces and discussed at a plenary se ss io n .
Following further in-depth discussion by members of the Steering Committee, these recommendations are made: 1 Certified commercial driven who develop diabetes mellitus after driving for five (5) Years and who require insulin therapy may continue to be ce rt i fie d On an annual basis if they meet certain criteria.
2.
Persons with diabetes mellitus who use insulin and who have no demonstrated history of safety on the highway as commercial driven are not eligible for certification.
3.
All persona with diabetes mellitus who do not require insulin therapy are eligible for certification as commercial driven unless disqualified by an organ complication of diabetes as defined under current Federal standards.
17 .
Y . , Wo ds r
18 Di ribution St em . st at ent
19 .
Sec ur ity Cl a ssi f . (of th is
-Central Nervous -Epilepsy System Disease -Convulsion A nt i co n v ul s an t s -Motor vehicle -Neuromuscular Diseases -Traffic Acc id en t v -Seizure re po rt )
20 .
Se cu rit y Cl a ss if . (of
th is page)
21 .
N.. of Pa ge s
22 .
P ri ce
unclassified
unclassified
66
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Executive Summary Task F or ce
...........,.,.................1 3 9
I Report Diabetes Mellitus Without Insulin . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Task Force II Report Diabetes Mellitus With Insulin . . . . .
- .
- .
- . * .
- - .
- .
Task Force III Report Medical Certification System . . . . . . . . .
- - * - - .
- * .
21 Task Force IV Report Monitoring.
Compliance, end Recertification. . . . . * .
- - - . .
47 Appendix A: Conference Participants . . , . . . . . . . . . . . . .
- .
- .
- .
Appendix B: Other Participants
.
53
and Attendees . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
57 ..................... . . .
59
Appendix C: Conference Speakers .
Appendix D: Conference Agenda. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
61
... 11 1
LIST OF TABLES
TABLE I-l:
Biochemical Indices of Metabolic Control: Top Limits . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
.1 Projj ected Hypoglycemic Reactions and Subsequent Accident Rates . . . . . . .
1
TABLE II-1: Literature Review of Diabetic Drivers . . . . . . . . . , TABLE II-2
TABLE II-3 Projected Cumulative Accidents Per Year in Diabetic Drivers . . . . . . . . .
1 TABLE II-4: Projected Cumulative Accidents Per Year Due to Hypoglycemia , . . . .
TABLE II-5: Projected Outcome of Certification of Diabetic Commercial Driven TABLE III-1: Medical Evaluation System . . .
1.
. . . . . .
1:
. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
.23 TABLE III-2: Medical Evaluation Form. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27 TABLE m-3: Job Performance Characteristics Form. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
.41
iv
CONFERENCE A DIABETIC DISORDERS ND COMMERCIALDRIVERS
EXECIJTlVE SUMMARY
The O ic e Of Motor Carriers (OMC), Federal Highway Administration (FHWA)U.S. ff Department of Transportation (DOT), sponsored a conference on September 9 and 10, 1987 to review the current medical standards for truck driven with diabetes mellitus.
Conference participants numbered twenty-four and included physicians and scientists experienced in the care of people with diabetes, and representatives from the motor carrier industry.
The current standard (FHWA regulations, 49 C.F.R. section 391.41(b)(3), as published in the Federal Register on April 22, 1970) permits qualification of individuals to drive a commercial motor vehicle if that person has no established medical history or clinical diagnosis of diabetes mellitus currently requiring insulin for control.
There is no provision for a waiver of the minimum physical requirement with respect to the individual with insulin-taking diabetes in the Federal Motor Carrier Safety Regulations.
careful review by four task forces, discussion at a plenary session, and following further in-depth discussion by members of the Steering Committee, the following recommendations are made:
reviewed as are the many advances in the care of diabetes accrued since 1970.
After
The administrative rule applied to the commercial driver with diabetes mellitus was
'
0 Certified commercial drivers who develop diabetes mellitus after driving for five (5) years and who require insulin therapy may continue to be certified if they meet the particular criteria:
--Absence of recurrent hypoglycemia that results in I of consciousness or seizure; OU --Absence of seizure or coma without antecedent prodromal symptoms of hypoglycemia; --Absence of recurrent diabetic ketoacidosh or hyperosmolar non-ketotic coma; and --Documentation of regular medical followup.
0 Persons with diabetes mellitus who use insulin and who have no demonstrated history of safety on the highway as commercial drivers are not eligible for Certification.
0 All persons with diabetes mellitus who do not require insulin therapy are
eligible for certification as commercial drivers unless disqualified by an organ complication of diabetes as defined under current Federal standards.
o For those drivers who use insulin.
a careful history and physical examination will be recorded o n a standardized form by a physician with subsequent review and evaluation Of this status by a diabetes specialist.
Following this evaluation, the completed form is forwarded to a Medical Advisory Board (MAB) of the FHWA which mak es a recommendation to the Director within the Office of Motor Carriers with tegard to certification.
The MAB will include physicians experienced in the care of people with diabetes An appeal mechanism is suggested.
Following the initial certification, annual waiver renewal will be required.
Mechanisms for monitoring the compliance of the commercial driiver who uses insulin and subsequent recertification are recommended.
These means include review of violation and accident rates when possible glycemic logs and driving logs, and evidence of attendance at an acceptable formal diabetes education Program.
These data will be reviewed by an MAB annually at the time of waiver renewal.
The conference members are plea sed to mmend to the DOT that certified commercial drivers requiring insul in for diabetes management be considered eligible for continued ce rtification Wh ile emphasizing the initial eligibility for drivers who develop diabetes requiring inslulin therapy and who have proven safety skills as commer cial driven, the conferees encourage the DOT to accrue prospective data on the se drivers after certification These data will facilitate reevaluation of these recommendations after a suitable period of time to study the feasibility of including the person with insulin-taking diabetes who wishes to become a commercial driver.
ec o r
Additionally, it is recommended that
* All drivers with diabetes should have annual examinations for
visual impairment neurological function, and cardiovascular disease (including hypertension).
o If poor control of the diabetic state based on the suggested guidelines of the American Diabetes Association exists certification will b-e deferred until control is improved:
o Drivers taking oral agents should be informed about possible interactions of these drugs with other medications they may be taking and about possible hypoglycemic risk associated with missed meal s
2
TASK FORCE I REPORT: DIABETES MELLITUS WITHOUT INSULIN Dr. Ronald Arky (Chairman)* Dr. Paul Beisswenger Dr. Harold Rifkin *Replaced by Dr. Fred Whitehouse at the September 9-10 meeting
DIABETES MELLITUS WITHOUT INSULIN
In the United States, most of the individuals with diabetes mellitus who do not take insulin fal l into the category of Type II or noninsulin-dependent diabetes mellitus (NIDDM) as defined by the National Diabetes Data Group.
The majority of these individuals are obese, have a family history of diabetes, and frequently are asymptomatic.
Many remain as mptomatic for years and the disease process progresses to a more severe form slowly.
if at all individuals with NIDDM are usually over forty years of age, although a form of this disorder may appear in adolescents or young adults (maturity-onset diabetes of youth or MODY) Individuals with diabetes mellitus who do not require insulin are not prone to ketosis and are unlikely to develop ketoacidosis.
Circulating insulin levels in this group of patienb may be normal, relatively or absolutely low.
or even high when compared to the corresponding blood glucose.
When patients with NIDDM are stressed by infection myocardial infarction, trauma heat, humidity, general fatigue.
or job-related stresses, insulin therapy may be required to control the metabolic abnormalities.
Often such insulin therapy can be discontinued when the stressful situation subsides.
The etiology of NIDDM involves the interplay of environmental factors superimposed upon a genetic susceptibility Overeating and obesity are the major environmental factors Some degree of insulin resistance characterizes ail noninsulin-dependent patienb.
Medical' treatment of the noninsulin-taking patient involves dietary regulation, exercise, with or without the administration of oral hypoglycemic agents.
The chronic complications of diabetes mellitus, namely, large blood vessel disease (macroangiopathy) and small blood vessel disease (microangiopathy). as well as involvement of the peripheral and autonomic nervous system and precocious appearance of cataracts, occur in people with noninsulin-taking diabetes as well as in those requiring insulin In a report from the Carter Center at Emory University.
the prevalence of noninsulin-dependent diabetes in the United States was stated as 5,069,000.
However, surveys suggest that almost double thn number of individuals have undiagnosed diabetes or impaired glucose tolerance.
Of individuals in the United States with diabetes, between 85-90 percent fall into the category of noninsulin-dependent diabetes of whom approximately one-third (1.5 million) require insulin therapy.
Currnetly, the regulatory criteria specify the examination guidelines that apply to commercial motor vehicle drivers with diabetes.
The actual medical standards are found in Federal Motor Carrier Safety Regulations (49 C.F.R. section'391.41).
These criteria state:
o Anyone with an established medical history or clinical diagnosis of diabetes mellitus currently requiring insulin for control is prohibited from driving a commercial bus or truck in interstate traffic or foreign commerce.
o If the diabetes can be controlled by the use of oral medication and diet, then an individual may be qualified under the present rule.
o Persons with an arm, foot, or leg which interferes with the ability to perform normal tasks associated with operating a motor vehicle are unqualified to drive a commercial motor vehicle unless they apply for and are granted a waiver.
5
o Persons with established neuromuscular or vascular disease which interferes with their ability to control or operate a motor vehicle safely may not be certified to operate a commercial motor vehicle in interstate commerce.
o Persons with visual acuity with correction that is less than 20/40 in each eye separately may not be certified to operate a commercial motor vehicle in interstate commerce.
(ITDM) from receiving permission to drive commercial vehicles in interstate traffic has been
The major reason for the exclusion of people with insulin-treated diabetes mellitus
the concern for hypoglycemia and its consequences--particularly if hypoglycemia occu rs without wa rning Hypoglycemia is rare among diabetic patients not taking insulin.
The mo st freque nt cause of hypoglycemia in such patients relates to the use of oral hypoglycemic agents.
In the United States.
the only oral hypoglycemic agents available are me mb ers of the sulfonylurea family.
One group of these agents has been available in the United States since 1955 and comprises `the fiit generation compounds"; the second group, . available in the United States Y1 since 1983.
are known as `second generation compounds."
on In all instances, the basic chemical structure of the compounds is similar.
Although relatively rare, hypoglycemia can be a complication of oral agent therapy The longer-acting agents, chlorpropamide and glyburide, have a greater hypoglycemic potential but an y oral agent may produce hypoglycemia.
Elderly people with diabetes are paricularly susceptible to hypoglycemia from these agents., Renal or hepatic disease or congestive heart failure also potentiate these agents.
In addition to these various abnormal clinical states, the effects of the sulfonylurea drugs may be potentiated by other drugs including sulfonamides, salicylates, and pyrazolone derivatives such as phenylbutazone The duration of sulfonylurea action is Prolonged by the anticoagulant, dicuma rol and the antibiotic chloramphenicol Salicylates, beta-adrenergic blocking agents, as well as alcohol may' enhance the hypoglycemic effects of the sulfonylureas Irregular meals or excessive physical activity also can be associated with hypoglycemia.
Currently regulations that affect interstate commercial drivers do not mention oral hyppoglycemic agents or, in fact, those pharmacological agents that might potentiate their action To this end:
o Physicians examining applicants with diabetes should take a detailed medical history and record whether the individuals are taking oral hypoglycemic agents and/or other sompounds that may augment the effects of such agents.
o
sulfonylureas.
Federal guidelines should require that informational material be given drivers taking oral hypoglycemic agents to inform them of the consequences of missed meals and the effects of other pharmacological agents on the duration of action of the
Poor diabetic control can lead to fatigue, lethargy, and sluggishness.
Any and all of these symptoms may be detrimental to a driver of an interstate vehicle.
Current guidelines require the examining physician to assess the level of diabetic control, but no definitive
6
guidelines are provided.
Guidelines suggested by the American Diabetes Association for varying degrees of control are: I TABLE I-l: Biochemical Indlces of Mctabollc Control: Top Limits ' ' Acceptable Fasting plasma glucose Postprandial (2-hr) plasma glucose 115 140 140 200 P oo r ~200 mg/dl 
The status of a patient's `control" needs to be reported.
Certification of drivers demonstrating poor control by these guidelines should be deferred until diabetic control has improved.
When improved control is achieved, full certification may be appropriate.
For continued certification, driven with diabetes who do not use insulin are required to be reasseued (not recertified) by their own physician at a minimum of every six months.
Self-monitoring of blood glucose levels is an important adjunct in the management of noninsulin-requiring diabetes.
Regular monitoring as advised by their personal physician is strongly encouraged as an indicator of metabolic control.
Fifty percent of all patients with diagnosed diabetes mellitus for ten years or more have element of diabetic retinopathy.
Since the duration of diabetes mellitus in the patient with NIDDM is often unknown, patients with this form of diabetes mellitus should receive regular funduscopic examinations.
Background retinopathy with microaneurysms and intraretinal hemorrhages is common after 5-7 years of diabetes mellitus.
In many cases, the retinopathy does not progress beyond this stage.
However, visual impairment in patients with background retinopathy may be due to a macular edema and/or hard exudates in the proximity of the macula Hard exudates are usually detected by direct ophthalmoscopy while macular edema may require slit lamp examination.
some
For certificatiom o o All applicants with diabetes should be evaluated by an ophthalmologist (or should receive a careful eye exam by their physician).
Any major decrease in visual acuity in the patient with diabetes mellitus also warrants ophthalmological evaluation.
7
Many physical and mental demands drivers use perceptual d d an other driving tasks that are associated with large vehicles.
The presence of peripheral neuropathy may hinder the ability0 f a d tiver to perform such routine tasks Se . deficits involving the extremities, characteristics of diabetic aeuropathy may imipairresponce time in the application of bra k es or the adjustment of foot movements oa the accelerator A careful neurological examination to asse th e d ver's qualifications under regulation 49 ri e C.F.R. section 391.41(b)(2) and (9) ahould be performed with each certification examination.
Accelerated atherosclerosis is a major complication of diabetes involving the coronary cerebral, and peripheral ve ssels.
People with diabetes mellitus have an i* ncreased incidence of cardiovascular disease compared with nondiabetic individuals and are twice as likely to die of coronaru disease.
People with diabetes also ha ve a higher incidence of `silent' or pain l es mycar di al i nf ar cti ons th an nondiabetic people As with those individuals with o insulin-taking diabetes, every person with noninsulin-taking diabetes mellitus should be required to have an electrocar di gram s biennially.
Ifca rdiovascular dise ase is detected the io regulatory criteria for cardiovascular disease (49 c F R secti 391 41(b)(4)) ahould be followed.
Since hypertension is a major risk factor in diabetes and its comlications blood pressure values exceeding 160 mmHg systolic* and 90 mmHg diastolic requires evaluation and therapeutic intervention.
Followup shoul d be in accordance with regulation 49 C.F.R. section 391.41(b)(6) and its criteria.
8
TASK FORCE II REPORT: DIABETES MELLITUS WITH INSULIN Dr. Robert Ratner (Chairman) Dr. Get-aid Friedman Dr. Orville Kolterman Dr. Julio Santiago Dr. Donna Younger
DIABETES MELLITUS WITH INSULIN Our charge is to determine if overriding concerns for safety on the highways of America will be endangered by allowing individuals with insulin-treated diabetes mellitus (ITDM) to engage in careers as commercial drivers in interstate commerce.
Regulatory decisions depriving large classes of citizens of their right to pursue gainful employment should be based upon data demonstrating danger or risk in excess of that already accepted.
To be fair to all parties, we must avoid making recommendations based upon anecdotes not reflective of the community at large.
This task force report will approach the issue of certification of persons with ITDM as interstate commercial drivers.
We will first review the historical experience of drivers with diabetes, followed by a risk analysis of the effects of certification relative to accident rates.
Possible means of reducing these risks will be reviewed, and comparison to current accident rates will be made.
At the present time, the Federal Motor Carrier Safety Regulations section 391.41(b)(3) specifically excludes from certification to drive a commercial motor vehicle in interstate commerce any individual with `an established medical history or clinical diagnosis of diabetes April 22, 1970).
Because mellitus currently requiring insulin for control' of this ruling, there are no U.S. data concerning accident rates among I TDM interstate commercial drivers.
Although not strictly comparable, it may be useful to examine studies of outcomes of licensure of ITDM general driven.
It must be remembered, however, that commercial drivers are exposed to variable road and weather conditions and irregul ar hours.
Their driving exposure is five times the exposure of a non-commercial driver.
These studies of the general driving public with ITDM additionally, are flawed by selection bias. ascertainment bias, or the absence of control data and report widely discrepant results in rates of traffic violations, accidents, and hypoglycemia.
Furthermore, the contrast in size and weight between a commercial motor vehicle and a private automobile is sufficiently large to question the wisdom of applying data from studies of the general driving public to commercial vehicle driving.
F ( ed R er al e er , g s t i
Table II-1 summarizes several of these studies performed worldwide.
VIOLATION STUDY n-256 ITDM n-2612 ITDM
ACCIDENT 11.7% 7.7%
Ysander
15.3%
Waller
Davis Crancer 
81/100 116/100
73/100 99/100
27.6/100 36/100
11
a motor vehicle could result Jo a vehicular accident.
Less severe reactions may have an u n p re di c t ab le effect on a dri' ver 's ability to maintain control of a motor vehicle.
For pu r pos e of this analysis, we will assume that severe reactions will result in an accident 12
The re is no
qu es ti on
th at co lla p se
due to severe hypoglycemia
occur ring at the wh ee l of
100% of the time, while a less severe reaction will increease the risk of an accident 10 fold (FAA Report).
Data concerning the incidence of hypoglycemic reactions are limited by under-reporting as well as by the selectivity and therapeutic intervention of the study group.
In prospective studies of insulin therapy.
such as the Diabeta Control and Complications Trial (DCCT), the accurate determination of the occurrence of hypoglycemic episodes is good.
but the frequency may not reflect that of the general diabetic population.
This study is limited to individuals with Type I diabetes and provides no data on the larger population of individuals with Type II insulin-taking diabetes.
Retrospective community-based studies, such as those by Casparie and the Michigan Diabetes Research and Training Center (DRTC), may be more reflective of the general diabetic population, but may suffer similarly from ascertainment errors.
Furthermore, definitions of degrees of hypoglycemia are not uniform.
This is the probable reason for the wide disparity in frequency and prevalence of severe hypoglycemia between there two studies.
Nevertheless, they provide an opportunity to calculate projected accident rates resulting from severe hypoglycemia on a best-are.
wont-case basis.
A commercial driver spends approximately 1760 hours per year on the road (DOT), or 20.13% (1760 hours divided by 8760 houn yearly) of his or her time.
The frequency of hypoglycemic reactions occurring while driving is therefore: (reaction/person/year) x 0.2013 - (reactions/person/year while driving).
Since we amume an accident will result from a severe hypoglycemic reaction 100% of the time, then thii calculation also yields accidents/person/year.
There is no way of predicting the severity of an accident resulting from hypoglycemia and so all de grees of severity are combined.
The projected accident rate per ITDM driver occurring as a result of a severe hypoglycemic reaction is shown in Table
II-2.
TABLE II-2: Projected Hypoplycemic Reactions and Subsequent Accident Rates
STUDY Mulhauser intensive conventional DT CC
PROJECTED R A TO S C I E N S E C I N A CD T
PROJECTED REACTIONS ACCIDENTS
(per person/year)
(per person/year)
0.19 0.54 0.17 0.115
0.038 0.109 0.034 0.023 0.342
___________ __ ___ 0.045
_________
---------
______
_____
Casparie Hiss (Michigan DRTC)
0.009 0.26
1.7
1.3
We will assume that 10% of our eligible population are Type I and 90% are insulin-taking Type II individuals.
Thus, severe hypoglycemic reactions would result in an increase in the number of accidents per year as determined by:
1) (accidents/Type I diabetic driver/year) x (number of Type I diabetic driven), and
13
2) (accidents/Type follows:
II ITDM driver/year) x (number of Type II ITDM driven)
Using data from Casparie and the Michigan DRTC projected ranges of accidents are as TABLE II-3: ProJected Cumulative Accidents Per Year in Diabetic Drivers
Casparie Mich.
DRTC
743
50
5084
176
226 5827
The effect of mild reactions on the accident tate is more difficult to calculate because the frequency of these reactions is more difficult to determine.
The Michigan DRTC reports that 100 percent of peopl e with Type I diabetes and 68 percent of people with insulin-treated Type II diabetes experience mild hypoglycemic reactions.
If we assume that dri vers with Type I diabetes experience 50 mild reactions per year.
while 68 percent driven with insulin-taking Type II diabetes who have any reaction will experience 10 reactions per year.
then; I) 2173 Type I diabetic driven will have 108.650 mild hypoglycemic reactions yearly.
and 2) 19.553 insul in-takin g Type II diabetic driven will have 132.960 mild hypoglycemic reactions yearly.
The frequency of mild hypoglycemia occurring while driving is then:
(number of mild reactions/year x (1760 hours driving/8760 hours/year)
Thus, Type I driven could experience 21.730 mild reactions while driving and insulin-taking Type II drivers could experience 26,592 mild reactions while driving.
The Federal Highway Administration reports a general accident rate for 1985 of 39,273 drivers or 0.00785 accidents/driver/year.
If mild hypoglycemia increases accidents/5,000,000 this risk IO-fold (FAA Report), then the frequency of an accident becomes 0.0785/driver/year.
The cumulative effects of both mild and severe hypoglycemia on vehicular accidentx can then be summarized on Table II-4
TABLE II - 4 ProJected Cumulative Accidents Per Year Due to Hypoglycemia Severe STUDY T ype I R ea ctio ns
Mild Re act io n s
T yp e II
Type I
Typ e II
Total
Casparie Mich.
DRTC
50 743
176 5084
I
1
228 5829
1 14
1
The projected effect of certifying applicants with Type I diabetes would be the addition of 51-744 accidents per year due to both mild and severe hypoglycemia or an increase of 0.13-1.9% Certification of all eligible applicants with insulin-treated Type II diabetes would result in 177-5085 additional projected accidents due to hypoglycemia or an increase.of 0.4- 12.9%.
The cumulative effect of certifying people with ITDM (see Table II-S) would be 228-5829 additional projected accidents due to hypoglycemia or an increase of 0.6-14.8%.
TABLE II- 5: Projected Outcome of Certifiaction of Diabetic Commercial Drivers General Accidents/ year Accidents/ driver/year
Casparie Type II Total
DRTC Ty pe I Ty pe II To t al
39,273 ( 031%) +.
( 0 %) +.
4
( 0.
%) +6
0.007
0.02 0.009 0.011 (+186%) (+28.5%) (+57%)
0.34 (+4757%)
0.26 (+3614%)
0.27 (+3757%)
reactions, or participation in an education program.
Recommendations for reducing the risks of hypoglycemia include self-monitoring of blood glucose together with insulin adjustment and education concerning the premonitory symptoms of hypoglycemia together with appropriate ingestion of rapid-acting carbohydrate for treatment.
In addition, clustering of severe hypoglycemic reactions within a small percentage of a study population has been noted (DCCT), which may allow exclusion of those few individuals with ITDM who are responsible for the largest percentage.of hypoglycemic reactions.
Historical criteria, education, and specific forms of medical intervention may result in substantial lowering in the frequency of hypoglycemia and accidents consequent to it.
Complications related to acute hyperglycemia also may affect a driver's capability of operating a motor vehicle.
Ketoacidosis and hyperosmolar states significantly impair cognitive function, but their onset is gradual and frequency is sufficiently low as to preclude any significant effect on accident rates.
We will assume a negligible effect of acute hyperglycemia on diabetes-related accidents.
This projected increase in accidents due to hypoglycemic events presumes no selection of ITDM drivers on the basis of glycemic control, history of unconscious hypoglycemic
Recommendations All entry-level applicants with ITDM seeking certification as interstate commercial drivers should be excluded, Currently certified interstate commercial drivers who develop ITDM or intrastate driven with established ITDM may be waived fmm exclusion, if they meet the following criteria during the insulin-takiig period prior to certifiacation: o Absence of recurrent hypoglycemia resulting in loss of consciousness or seizure; o Absence of development of seizure or coma without antecedent prodromal symptoms; and
o Absence of recurrent ketoacidosis.
in addition.
individuals seeking a waiver must present documentation of regular medical followup and a regular monitoring system, If these recommendations are adopted, we strongly recommend that appropriate procedures be introduced to determine accurately their impact (e.g., prospective data collection on certified driven with ITDM
16
when driving a commercial vehicle.
Their experience and maturity as commercial drivers should permit the addition of insulin therapy without substantial alteration of risk.
The uncertain impact of ITDM on the driving record of the commercial motor vehicle operator together with the unproven ability of an entry-level driver persuade us to recommend the current exclusion of these latter individuals at this time.
Demographics suggest that this restriction would have a limited impact.
If subsequent data reveal the substantial safety of.driven with ITDM, we envision the inclusion of entry-level ITDM drivers at a future ti me Based on previously recorded statistics, some 6000 ITDM entrylevel drivers might be affected by this exclusion.
We believe this stepwise approach to the introduction of ITDM driven into the commercial driving pool to be prudent in respect to public safety.
Performance criteria including job assessments by supervisors, glycemic logs, and violation and accident rates on all certified ITDM drivers should be maintained in a prospective fashion on a yearly basis.
These dam should be available under the monitoring and recertification systems proposed by task forces 3 and 4 and should be used to assess the impact of these revised regulations.
At an appropriate time in the future, these data will serve as the basis for further rulemaking in regard to commercial motor vehicle drivers with ITDM.
17
Arnold D.R. `Driving License Problems in Diabetics; Rules, Frequency Of Accidents and Legislation," June 1985, 147(24): 1951-1955.
U g e ka s la ger r ,
i Campbell E..
Ellis, KG. "Chronic Medical Conditions and Traffic Violations and Accident ..
Experience of Diabetic Drivers,' .
November 1969 Vol. 24 No. II, 29-31.
M Me od n of C an er a da e cin di
Casparie A.F., Elving L.D. "Se vere hypoglycemic io Diabetic Patients: Frequency, Causes, Pervention," DiabetesCare March-April 1985 8(2): 141-145.
Clarke B., Ward J.D., Enoch B.A. "H ypoglycemia in Insulin-Dependent Diabetic Drivers,' A ugu st 1980.
281(6240):586.
B ishr tM i ed ic al ou J rn al ,
Crancer A..
McMumay L. `Accidents and Violation Rates of Washington's Medically .
Restricted Drivers," Jou rn a of A me ca nA ss o c ati on . .
1968.
205: 272-276.
l ri i Davis T.G., Wahling E.H..
Carpenter R.L. .
A Study Of Selected Medical Conditions,' 1973.
66:322-327.
an Frier B.M., Steel J.M., Matthews D.M. Du nc L.J.P.
`Driving and Insulin-Dependent Diabetes.'
Lancet, June 7, 1980, 1232-1234..
Gratton E., Jeffcoate G.O. `Medical Factors aod Road Accidents,' Journal, 1968, 1: 75-79.
B Me ish itr di ca l
Harrad R-A..
Cockram C.S., Plumb A.P., Stone S..
Feowick P Sonksen P H Hypoglycemia on Visula Function a Clinical and Electrophysiological Study,' Science , 1985, 69: 673-679.
Th Cl
Effect of in ic al
Illness as a Cause of Motor Vehicle Accidents," 1966,23: 37-41.
Herold KC..
Polonsky K.S., Cohen R.M., Levy J., Douglass F "Variable Deterioration in Cortical Function During Insulin-induced Hypoglycimia," Diabetes, 1985 34: 677-685 Hiss R.G..
Lengyel M.C. `Diabetes in Communities," Michigan Diabetes Research and Training Center and Department of Postgraduate Medicine and Health Professions Education, University of Michigan Medical School, Ann Arbor.
Michigan, 1986.
Mulhauser 1..
Berger M., Sonnenberg G., Koch J., Jorgens V., Schernthaner G Scholz v Padagogio 0.
*Incidence and Management Of Severe Hypoglycemia in 434 `Adults with Insulin-Dependent Diabetes Mellitus,' Diabeters Care 1985 May-June, 8(3): 268-273.
National Diabetes Data Group -Diabetes in America Diabetes Data compiled 1984 * US Department Of Health and Human Services, DHS, NIH, N I D D K , N IH Publication No. 85-1468, August 1985.
,
18
Pramming S., Thorsteinsson B..
Theilgaard A., Pinner E.M., Binder.
C. "Cognitive Function During Hypoglycemia in Type I Diabetes Mel litus British Medical Jou rnal, 1986, 292: 647-
650.
The DCCT Research Group.
"Diabetes Control and Complications Trial (DCCT)," Care, January-February 1987, 10(1): l-19.
Diabetes
U.S. Department of Transportation.
Federal Aviation Administration.
"Guide for Aviation Medical Examiners.'
October 1981.
Walller J.A. `Chronic Medical Conditions and Traffic Safety.
Review of the California E x p e r i e n c e , " N e w E. .
- 1965 273(26): 1413-1420.
n Ysander L. Sick and Handicapped Driven.'
i-82.
A
C T A CSr n na v hi , ca di ka i
1970 Supplement,
19
TASK FORCE III REPORT: MEDICAL CERTIFICATION SYSTEM Dr. James Field (Chairman) Dr. Dewitt DeLawter Dr. Frederick Goetz Dr. David Robbins Dr. Karl Sussman
MEDICAL CER TIFICATION SYSTEM If people treated with insulin are to be certified for commercial interstate driving, it is of ut mo st importance to ensure that certification is done under co n ditions that will minimize the likelihood that the pre s e nc e of diabetes would interfere with the safe performance of their job.
No distinction should be made between insulin-dependent diabetes and insulin-treated diabetu individuals.
The best assurance that individuals requiring insulin therapy will perform their job in a safe fashion would be the institution of an appropriate medical evaluation system (see Table III-I).
TABLE III-I: Medical E va luat ion System
Driver with Diabetes Desires Certification 4 Visit to Personal Physician I Applicant does not tak e insulin
Applicant `takes insulin
- Report from 1) Applicant obtains op h th a lm o log is t past 18 month records of medical care 2) Visit with diabetes - EKG ch ec k (if iin dic at ed specialist examiner i (Specialist form made out after visit with specialist and si gn ed by personal physician) I Form sent to MAB Diabetic control poor Report by personal physician to FHWA \ Driver - regarding certification k deferred 1 Driver certified
1
+
+ Driver rejected b t Appeal --I 23
24
the individual could be certified to drive in interstate commerce.
Adequate visual acuity is defined in 49 C.F.R. section 391.41(b)910).
The n e ur o l og i c examination should evaluate the sensory modalities of pain, light touch, Position.
and vibratory sensation in the toes, feet, fingers, and hands.
Motor strength should be tested as well as assessment of the presence of autonomic neuropathy.
The blood pressure and pulse rate should be obtained lying and sta nd ing and the variation of the heart rate with respiration should be determined.
be
In view of the Progressive nature of the complications of diabetes, the individual should recertified once a year.
This system should also include provisions for an appeal of the decision of the Director.
The appeal would be made to the Associate Administrator for Motor Carriers in accord with the administrative procedures of 49 C.F.R. section 386.
TABLE III-2: Medical Evaluation Form This form is to be completed by a Diabetes Specialist.
Form for Medical Evaluation of Insulin-Taking Diabetic Individual for Certification to Drive Commercial Motor Vehicles in Interstate Commerce Applicant's Name Address Date Date of Birth
Type of commercial motor vehicle generally driven How many hours of consecutive driving daily How many hours On
duty not driving daily NO
Loads or unloads the vehicle YES Average
annual mileage driven in a commercial motor vehicle
Other Information:
Date of diagnosis and presenting symptoms Number of hospitalizations for diabetes and reasons during the past two years
Does the individual know the symptoms of YES
hy p ogl yce mi a ?
NO
If the individual has hypoglycemic reactions, does he/she recognize them? YES NO
Does the individual have an explanation for hypoglycemia? YES NO 27
Patient Name
If yes, what is it? How does the individual treat his/her hypoglycemia?
Number of hospitalizations for hypogiycemia in past YEAR: (Hospitalization implies overnight admission to the hospital; an emergency ward visit that did not result in hospitalization does not apply.)
If any, give specific reasons: Number of emergency ward visits for hypoglycemia in past YEAR If any, give specific reasons: How many times during the past YEAR did the patient experience hypoglycemia of such severity that the patient a) lost consciousness without seizure? b) lost consciousness with seizure? How many times during the past YEAR did the patient experience hypoglycemia of such severity that the patient required professional medical assistance, including placement of an IV or an intravenous injection of glucose? How many times during the past YEAR did the patient experience hypoglycemia of such severity as to require the assistance of another parson, such as the administration of parenteral glucagon, but not require any of the assistance described above? How many times during the past YEAR did the patient experience hypoglycemia of such severity as to require the a
Has the patient experienced more than two hypoglycemic seizures and/or coma during the NO past two years? YES Does the patient have a history of recurrent hypoglycemic episodes resulting in cerebral impairment (e.g., coma, severe confusion, seizure) before the development of warning symptoms of hypoglycemia (e.g., excessive sweating, tr em or s etc.)? YES NO 29
Patient Name
Insulin Treatment Types, amounts, and times of injections
Diet (total number of calories, distribution of carbohydrate. protein and fat, time and number of meals and snacks/day.
If available, a copy of meal plan.
Glucose Monitoring YES
NO
a) On the average, how many times per week does the patient monitor his/hers urine for glucose? (IF ZERO, WRITE 00) b) On the average, how many times per week does the patient monitor his/her blood for glucose? (IF ZERO, WRITE 00) c) Does the patient adjust his/her insulin dose based on the results of NO self-blood glucose monitoring YES Results and times of blood glucose tests during last six months includ ing self-monitored glucose determinations)
Number and results of hemoglobin A,, determinations during the previous year (give normal values for the laboratory)
During the pest 18 months how many routine.
scheduled physician visits did the individual have for diabetes care? Date of attendance, address, and telephone number of the diabetes education programs
Other medications
Patient Name Comment on review of 18 month's data from personal physician
Height Supine blood pressure Standing blood pressure .
Ey E xam e
Weight Systolic Diastolic Pulse
Pulse
. on in ati
(see attached ophthalmologic report)
Distant Visual Acuity:
Right Left Binocular
Uncorrected-
Extraocular muscles Pupils Cataract Fundi
Caridova scu larsy stem
Reg ula r Irreg ular
Rhythm A b se nt Pr e se nt
Cardiomegaly Murmurs
-
-
33
Patient Name
Peripheral Pulses: Indicate the grade of the peripheral pulses using the following scale for the right and left pulse.
Carotid Radial Femoral Popliteal Posterior Tibial Dorsalis Pedis
b) Indicate the presence or absence of bruits.
Femoral Carotid Other: -
If present, specify.
Patient Name
Ulceration
Skin discoloration Gangrene Charcot joint Deformity
Pin-prick sensation Light touch Position sensation Vibration sensation Muscle strength Ankle jerks
Knee jerks Laboratory CBC Sediment Normal Abnormal Urinalysis Glucose Bicarbonate Date Performed 37 Sodium HgbA1c Potassium Other Creatinine
Patient Name Please give your assessment of the individual's ability to operate safely a commercial motor vehicle
Physician'sSignatUre Physician's Name
Phone Number Address Certified Internal Medicine Certified Endocrinology and Metabolism YES YES
I certify that information I have provided to the physician concerning my diabetes is accurate.
Falsification of examination information may affect the final determination on medical certification.
Applicant's Signature Date
Initial Examining Physician's Signature Physician's Name
Phone Number Address
TABLE III-3 Job Performance Characteristics Form Few people outside the motor carrier industry fully appreciate the mental and physical demands placed on commercial drivers.
Medical examiners should not apply automobile driving experience to evaluate the fitness of commercial driver applicants.
The physical demands of commercial driving and related tasks vary considerably with the type of vehicle and duties involved.
To effectively match job demands with an applicant's ability to meet these demands, the examining physician must know the type of vehicle driven, job demands, and the environment involved.
This form is to be completed by a motor carrier official (preferably the applicant's immediate supervisor) and co-signed by the subject driver.
The driver or motor carrier will then provide the original copy as part of the driver's waiver application.
The following is a universal job task description.
Direct your attention to those boxes checked as pertinent to the particular driver.
A. Vehicle T e yp [] a .
Straiaht T ru ck s - are used mainly for local pickup and delivery and may have up to five axles, utilizingvan, flatbed, tank or dump bodies.
Drivers may spend hours climbing in and out of the truck and loading and unloading cargo.
i. Gross vehicle weight rating (GVWR) less than 10,000 ii. iii. GVWR between 10,000 and 26,000 pounds GVWR greater than 26,000 pounds pounds
[] []
[]
b. Tractor-Trailers - are used for both local and long haul operations and are comprised of a power unit (tractor) and one or more trailers.
Assume a GVWR of greater than 26.000 pounds.
i. Short-relay drives 4-5 hours to a turnaround point.
. exchanges trucks and drives back to the starting point.
ii. ] iii.
Long-relay drives 8-10 hours, sleep for 8 hours and returns to the starting point.
Straight-through to destination, including coast to coast operations; typically nights at a time.
away from home for iS
[] []
iv. Sleeper-team drives constantly for 4 hours followed by 4 hours in the bunk nights at a while co-driver drives; typically is away from home for time.
41
B. Environmental Factors The particular driver may be subject to:
[] []
a.
Abrupt duty hour changes b. Sleep deprivation c. Irregular work/rest cycles d. Temperature and weather extremes e. Long trips without regular meals f. Short notice of assignment of run g. Tight delivery schedule h. Delay en route i.
Other:
Moderate physical activity levels are associated with commercial vehicle driving.
Perceptual skills are needed to monitor the driving situation for relevant information.
Manipulation skills are needed to turn the steering wheel, apply brakes and shift gears, etc.
The demands imposed on the particular driver's sensory organs and musculoskeletal systems are briefly described below.
[]
Gear Shifting: the movement of the gear shift lever(s) requires moderate strength, timely coordination, and complex manipulation skills of the upper right and lower left extremity.
This individual's vehicle will have a speed manual transmission.
Vehicle is equipped with a fully automatic transmission.
Control of steering wheel requires strength, mobility and power grip of upper extremities while maintaining stability of trunk.
Operation of break and accelerator pedal requires moderate strength, mobility and coordinated movement in lower extremities.
Various tasks during driving, such as operating light switches, windshield wipers, directional signals, emergency lights and horn. etc.; requires moderate strength, mobility and manipulative skills of upper extremities.
Backing and parking: requires good depth perception, strength and coordinated manipulative skills.
43
[] []
[] []
[]
[]
Vehicle inspection: driver must evaluate the mechanical condition of the various vehicular system such as tires, brakes, suspensions, engines and cargo.
Climbing, bending.
kneeling, crawling, reaching, stretching, turning and twisting are essential for proper vehicle inspection.
Cargo handling and inspection: drivers may be required to handle cargo, climb up and down perpendicular ladders, and enter/leave the cab or cargo body many times a day.
Coupling and uncoupling: tractor-trailer drivers may hook up one or more trailers; this requires strength and full range of motion to climb, balance.
turn, grip -and pu ll
[]
[]
[] []
Mounting snow chains on tires requires pulling and lifting 35-90 pounds.
motions
in the range of
Changing tires requires a combination of pulling, pushing and lifting motions in the range of 100-175 pounds.
Vehicle modification(s) made for the particular driver are
Motor Carrier signature
Company Official Telephone Number
Date
Driver signature Reviewed by: Personal Physician DiabetesSpecialist
Date
Date Date
45
TASK
FORCE IV REPORT
MONITORING, COMPLIANCE, AND RECERTIFICATION Dr. Dr. Dr. Dr. Roland Hiss (Chairman) Donald Dawson Roger Mazze Chris Saudek
47
MONITORING, COMPLIANCE, AND RECERTIFICATION ns for Annual Monitorina of Diabetic Status and Recertification Process We recognize that individuals with diabetes treated with insulin are subject to acute and chronic complications that may interfere with their ability to drive commercial motor vehicles.
These complications are hypoglycemia, retinopathy, cardiovascular disease, and neurological disorders.
These conditions require careful and frequent monitoring by qualified health care personnel.
Additionally, we recognize that diabetes care must also include a continuing program of education to promote maintenance of self-care, compliance to self-testing, and recognition of acute and chronic complications.
The introduction of waivers and the resulting need for medical surveillance mandates greater operational participation by the Federal Highway Administration in the certification and recertification of drivers.
Whereas the detection and management of both hyperglycemia and hypoglycemia are important aspects of the overall medical management of a person with diabetes, the detection and management of hypoglycemia is more relevant to safety considerations in the' certification of commercial motor vehicle drivers.
A severe hypoglycemic reaction is defined as one in which the individual is so incapacitated that he/she is unable to take corrective action and.
if driving, would be unable to maintain control of the vehicle.
Estimates have been made of the frequency of serious hypoglycemic events in insulin-treated diabetes and extrapolated to the setting of commercial drivers, These estimates are inherently unreliable, however, since the assumptions involved are unyerifiible.
It is not known, for example, how many people with insulin-treated diabetes will choose driving as a profession or choose to remain driving.
Nor is it known whether excluding.
people with known susceptibility to serious hypoglycemia will eliminate the risk of new serious hypoglycemic events.
Therefore, while it is assumed that the risk of accidents due to serious hypoglycemia is present in ITDM, this risk cannot be quantified by currently available data but can be minimized by the recommended certification and recertification requirements.
Significant advances in the monitoring of blood glucose levels now make it possible to obtain accurate and reliable data pertaining to the level of metabolic control throughout the day.
It is to be emphasized that a substantial percentage of hypoglycemic reactions occur without evidence of prodromal clinical signs.
For all individuals with insulin-taking diabetes it is essential to monitor blood glucose levels at six hour intervals during work periods to reduce the chance of hypoglycemia.
Recent evidence has shown that many individuals with diabetes could obtain more accurate and reliable blood glucose data by using reflectance meters designed not only to measure blood glucose instantaneously but also to record these data for later recall.
Such memory-based reflectance meters can store up to 330 glucose values with the time and date of each value.
These data can be recalled by the patient or physician and used to determine how well-controlled he/she is throughout a single day, week, or month.
Data from memory-based reflectance meters can be transmitted by home telephone modem to diabetes centers reducing the need for frequent office visits while permitting expert evaluation of glucose patterns.
These reflectance meters can be purchased in 1987 for $175 - $225 with additional cost for the chemical strips which reflect the blood glucose level.
Processed by a microcomputer, data from the memory-based reflectance meter can also determine the periods of time when there is a pattern of hypoglycemia or hyperglycemia.
49
N ew methods of evaluating metabolic control using this technology have also been developed which will help both patient and physician identify consistent patterns of hypoglycemia and ' hyperglycemia and suggest ways of improving treatment.
These approaches may identify repeated hypoglycemic events and can quickly gauge whether a different treatment modality will be effective.
The combination of memory-based reflectance meters computer analysis and new mea n s of interpretation will ha the effect of reducing the likelihood of hypoglycemic and ve hyperglycemic events, by reinforcing appropriate patient performance and providing reliable and verified glucose data.
We recognize three methods for evaluating hypoglycemia: 0 Self-reported events during medical history determined by the following questions.
.
--Have You had emergency treatment for hypoglycemia (insulinreaction, low lblood su g ar loss of consciousness, confusion or other event), which may have been due to low blood su ga r ?
The Federal Highway Administration should establish a review mechanism, through either iin-house ca ci of co nta ct , to review medical history, glycemic logs, and accident his tory pa ty to determine if serious hypoglycemia has occurred.
If such review raises the question that se r i ou s hypoglycemia occurred, the certification of the driver involved should be terminated, it is envisioned that this review mechanism will require a small office involving one or two staff Persons trained in the process.
50
Op h th a lm ol o gi ca l
Review
The recommendations of the National Eye Institute (applicable to all patients with diabetes) shall be observed for ITDM d ri.vers.
Each ITDM driver shall have an annual evaluation by an ophthalmologist and a written report from this physician submitted as part of th e annual recertification process.
To be recertified, an ITDM driver must have visual acuity of at least 20/40 corrected, no active proliferative or preproliferative retinopathy, and meet the other Federal vision requirements.
C ar di o va s ul ar Review
The recommendations of Task Force 1 pertaining to original certification will continue to be observed at each annual recertification.
The examining physician shall annually determine that the driver's neurologic status will permit safe and proper driving mechanics.
With the exception of an ophthalmologic review, most of the components of assessing a driver's cardiovascular and neurologic status should be considered to be part of a normal physical examination conducted by a qualified primary care physician.
Prior to certification, each ITDM driver shall have completed a formal diabetes education program that shall include, at a minimum, instruction on: symptoms of hypoglycemia and hyperglycemia and their management, insulin administration, self-monitoring of blood glucose, food care, diet to synchronize with insulin use, ,ophthalmologic aspects of diabetes, and management of Intercurrent illness.
Each ITDM driver shall attend a diabetes education update Program at least every five years.
Documentation of participation should be part of the driver's record.
51
Appendix A CONFERENCE PARTICIPANTS
Fred Whitehouse, M.D.** (Chairman) Head, Division of Metabolic Diseases Henry Ford Hospital Detroit, Michigan Ronald Arky, M.D.** Charles S. Davidson Professor of Medicine Harvard Medical School Chief of Medicine Mt. Auburn Hospital Cambridge, MA Paul Beisswenger, M.D. Associate Professor of Clinical Medicine Division of Endocrinology Dartmouth Medical School Hanover, New Hampshire Donald Dawson, M.D.** Program Consultant International Brotherhood of Teamsters Concord, Massachusetts Dewitt DeLawter, M.D. Professor of Medicine Georgetown University Washington, DC.
James B. Field, M.D.** Rutherford Professor of Medicine Division of Endocrinology Baylor College of Medicine Houston, Texas Gerald Friedman, M.D.** Professor of Clinical Medicine Mt. Sinai School of Medicine Medical Director United Parcel Service New York, New York
** Steering Committee Member
53
Conference Participants (cont.)
Joseph Frith Director, Environmental Control Overnite Transportation Company Richmond, Virginia Frederick Goetz, M.D. Professor of Medicine Department of Medicine University of Minnesota School of Medicine Minneapolis, Minnesota Donald Director Preston Preston, Hansen of Safety Trucking Company, Inc.
Maryland
Roland 0.
Hiss, M.D.** Coordinator, Training and Information Transfer Division, Michigan Diabetes Research and Training Center University Of Michigan Medical School Ann Arbor, Michigan Orville G. Kolterman, M.D. Associate Professor of Medicine Division of Endocrinology and Metabolism Department of Medicine University of California, San Diego San Diego, California Roger S. M a zz e Ph.D.
Professor of Epidemiology and Social Medicine Co-Director, Diabetes Research and Training Center Albert Einstein College of Medicine Bronx, New York William Morgan Director, Traffic Services Frito Lay, Inc.
Dallas, Texas Robert R at ne r M.D.** Assistant Professor of Medicine Division of Endocrinology and Metabolism George Washington University Medical School Washington, DC l
* Steering Committee Member 54
Conference Participants (cont.)
Harold Rifkin, M.D. Professor of Clinical Medicine Albert Einstein College of Medicine New York, New York David Robbins, M.D. Associate Professor of Medicine Department of Medicine University of Vermont School of Medicine Burlington, Vermont Julio V. Santiago, M.D. Professor of Medicine Co-Director, Pediatric Endocrinology and Metabolism Washington University Medical School St. Louis Children's Hospital St. Louis, Missouri Christopher Saudek.
M.D. Associate Professor of Medicine Johns Hopkins University School of Medicine Baltimore, Maryland Todd Spencer Editor Owner-Operators Independent Drivers Association of America Grain Valley, Missouri Karl E. Sussman.
M.D. Professor of Medicine University of Colorado School of Medicine Associate Chief of Staff VA Medical Center Denver, Colorado John Turner Interstate Driver International Brotherhood of Teamsters WaShingtOn, DC.
Zeke Wineglass Interstate Driver International Brotherhood of Teamsters Washington, DC.
Donna Younger, M.D. Joslin Diabetes Center Boston, Massachusetts l
* Steering Committee Member
Appendix B OTHER PARTICIPANTS AND ATTENDEES Frank Austin, M.D. Former Federal Air Surgeon Office of Aviation Medicine Federal Aviation Administration U.S. Department of Transportation Washington, D.C.
Neill Dar m st a d te r Senior Safety Engineer American Trucking Associations Alexandria, Virginia William Hark, M.D. Certification Specialist Air Medical Standards Federal Aviation Administration U.S. Department of Transportation Washington, D.C.
Vernon McDougell
Representative Department of Safety and Health International Brotherhood of Teamsters Washington, DC.
Dennis P. McEachen Highway Safety Specialist Office of Motor Carrier Standards Federal Highway Administration U.S. Department of Transportation Washington, D.C.
Michael F. Trtntacostt Director Office of Motor Carrier Standards Federal Highway Administration U.S. Department of Transportation Washington, D.C.
Eliane Vintr Medical Assistant Office of Motor Carrier Standards Federal Highway Administration US.
Department of Transportation Washington, D.C.
57
Appendix C CONFERENCE SPEAKERS
Dennis P. McEachen, Highway Safety Specialist, Office of Motor Carrier Standards, Federal Highway Administration, U.S. Department of Transportation, Washington, D.C.
Robert Ratner, M.D., Assistant Professor of Medicine, Division of Endocrinology 
Michael F. Trentacoste, Director, Office of Motor Carrier Standards, Federal Highway Administration, U.S. Department of Transportation, Washington, D.C.
Fred Whitehouse, M.D., Head, Division of Metabolic Diseases, Henry Ford Hospital, Detroit, Michigan.
59
Appendix D CONFERENCE AGENDA
1230 p.m.
I:00 p.m.
REGISTRATION CALL TO ORDER and INTRODUCI?ONS --Fred Whitehowe.
M.D., Steering Committee Chairman REGULATORY MEDICINE AND COMMERCIAL DRIVERS --Michael F. Trentacoste, Office of Motor Carrier Standards MEDICAL CERTIFICATION SYSTEM FOR COMMERCIAL DRIVERS --Dennis P. McEachen, Office of Motor Carrier Standards
200 p.m. 4730 p.m. 415 p.m.
DIABETES MELLlTUS WITH INSULIN --Robert Ramer.
M.D., George Washington University BREAK TASK FORCE MEETINGS
230 a.m. 8:OO a.m.
IO:00 a.m.
IO:30 a.m.
I 1200 p.m.
CONTINENTAL
BREAKFAST
TASK FORCE MEETINGS BREAK TASK FORCE REPORTS EXECUTIVE SUMMARY and CLOSING REMARKS --Fred Whitehouse, M.D. STEERING COMMITTEE MEETING
61
