Anthrax: The latest bomb scare By Patrick M. Collins Technical Instructor, Technological Hazards
[anthrax1.jpg] Over the past several years, authorities have dealt with a series of anthrax scares across Virginia.
Even though these threats turned out to be hoaxes, first responders need to take them seriously because anthrax is a potentially lethal infectious bacterial disease.
Some of the delivered envelopes or packages contained an inert powder and an accompanying note warning the recipient of exposure to anthrax.
Others have merely contained a written statement advising the reader of the presence of anthrax, although no foreign substance was found.
Nationally, more than 400 anthrax hoax letters have been reported since the late 1990s.
To date, none has contained any anthrax spores.
[anthrax4.jpg] Anthrax, a naturally occurring infectious disease caused by the spore-forming bacterium, Bacillus anthracis, infects livestock including sheep, cattle, horses, goats and pigs.
Although anthrax may be transferred to humans through skin exposure, spore inhalation or ingestion, it is not contagious.
No cases human-to-human infection have been reported.
Even in the unlikely event that a letter or package contains actual anthrax spores, contamination would be localized to the immediate area.
The chance of the letter or package containing infectious anthrax spores is very remote.
If the delivered envelope or package remains sealed, first responders should not take any action except to notify the Virginia Emergency Operations Center at (800) 468-8892.
VDEM will contact the Federal Bureau of Investigation.
Quarantine, evacuation, decontamination, and chemo-prophylaxis efforts are not needed as long as the envelope or package remains unopened.
If the package is opened and you handled the item, wash your hands with soap and water.
Have medical personnel assess your potential exposure.
Isolate the area and treat as a crime scene.
Frequently Asked Questions
How can Anthrax infect a human being? Anthrax spores are harmful only if inhaled, ingested, or when introduced into an open cut or the eyes.
A person can become infected with anthrax: * By breathing anthrax spores (inhalation anthrax).
The resultant pneumonia rapidly causes respiratory distress followed by death.
Meningitis can also develop.
Pulmonary and meningeal anthrax are 90 percent fatal despite therapy.
The incidence of inhalation anthrax is very rare.
* Through cuts in the skin or through contact with infected animal wool, hide or tissue (cutaneous anthrax).
* By eating infected meat (rare in western countries where livestock are routinely immunized).
What if I receive a letter or package containing alleged anthrax? 1.
Isolate the letter or package.
Unopened letters or packages do not pose a risk.
Remain calm.
2.
Remove and isolate all personnel from the room, and deny further entry into the room.
3.
Immediately contact the local police department or fire department.
4.
If you have handled the item, wash your hands with soap and water.
Have medical personnel assess your potential exposure.
5.
The FBI will conduct a thorough risk assessment.
The item will be taken to a laboratory for testing to verify the contents.
6.
You will be notified of the initial test results as soon as possible.
If you become ill in the interim, seek medical assistance.
Inform medical personnel of the potential exposure.
What suspicious characteristics should I look for?
In the past, envelopes containing alleged anthrax have had the following characteristics: 1.
Return addresses are typed on adhesive labels, purportedly a business, or address of another facility.
2.
Words are spelled incorrectly.
Return address and postmark don't match.
The business is unfamiliar.
3.
The envelope is addressed generically to: "Medical Director" or "Security Director."
4.
Envelopes or packages come from businesses without business stationary.
5.
Packages are unexpected or come from businesses or people you are not familiar with.
Is the use or threatened use of anthrax a crime?
Both the use and threatened use of a weapon of mass destruction is a federal crime and should be reported to law enforcement as soon as possible.
VDEM has developed three training courses that deal with terrorism.
If you would like more information about the terrorism training program or would like to schedule a class, contact Patrick M. Collins, Technological Hazards Division, by e-mail at pcollins@vdem.state.va.us, or at (804) 897-6500, ext. 6568.
