I International Cooperative Agreements Manual Iceland SUBJECT: MEMORANDUM OF UNDERSTANDING The Fresh and Fresh Frozen Oysters, Clams, and Mussels Between MINISTRY OF FISHERIES GOVERNMENT OF ICELAND FDA Agreement No.
(FDA-225-794008
And the (Previously 7156k.01) CPG
FOOD AND DRUG ADMINISTRATION DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH, EDUCATION, AND WELFARE UNITED STATES OF AMERICA of Iceland and the Food and Drug of Health, affirm Education, and their by this document
The Ministry Notes: The contact for this MOU Phil Spiller, 400 Tel.
No. 202418-3133 This MOU effective indefinite is y. person is HFS-
of Fisheries
Administration Welfare
(FDA) of the Department States of America
of the United
intention to cooperate in assuring that fresh and fresh frozen oysters, clams, and mussels exported to the United States are safe, wholesome, and have been harvested, accordance Program Cosmetic 1.
(NSSP) Act.
transported, processed, and labeled Food, Drug, in and with the provisions of the National Shellfish Sanitation
and requirements
of the Federal
TERMS For purposes following of this Memorandum, both parties agree to the
definitions: of primary produced containers or units of the same size, as nearly uniform as and in code or marking,
Dept. of Health, Educ., 
Lot - A collection type, and style, possible, any event, Central
under conditions container production.
where
designated
by a common
no more than a day's
file- The single location data, and reports
shellfish
control
program
information, Coliform negative, formation
are stored and maintained.
and facultative ferment C. as defined under the within 24 anaerobic, lactose with gramgas
groupwithin
All of the aerobic 48 hours at 35°
nonsporeforming
bacilli which
Fecal coliform
group- Any bacteria
coliform group which will produce gas in E. coli medium hours at 44.5 C ( +0.2 ) in a water bath.
Bait shellfishShucked shellfish labeled and intended
for bait use
only: not for human Shellfish-
consumption.
bivalves except scallop are
All edible species of molluscan
species from the family Pectinidae.
Only molluscan bivalves that offered for entry into the United States as fresh or fresh frozen
129
Iceland
International
Cooperative
Agreements
Manual
Notes:
products areintended Understanding.
forcoverage
under this Memorandum
of
Marine biotoxins-Natural toxins produced by marine dinoflagellates such as Gonvaulaz catenella, Gonvaulax tamarensis, and Gvmnodinium process.
Il.
FOOD AND DRUG ADMINISTRATION A. Both parties channels 1.
2.
3.
4.
agree to provide AND MINISTRY OF FISHERIES proposed breve and concentrated by shellfish during the feeding
information
concerning
in the following: and procedures of analysis.
of confirmation.
guidelines, tolerance, specification standards, for sampling.
Methods Methods Methods
Administrative
and nomenclature.
5.
6.
Reference Inspectional standards.
procedures.
each other on a timely basis of the
B. Both parties following: 1.
2.
3.
4.
Proposed Proposed Proposed Proposed Program.
agree to inform
modification
of existing
Federal or local regulations.
new Federal regulations.
new legislation.
modifications to the National Shellfish Sanitation
c.
Both parties
agree to name a liaison officer
who will coordinate
all
matters relating to this Memorandum. responsible for facilitating exchanges expeditiously informing
The liaison officers of information and parties within
will be
other interested
their
respective countries on shellfish control problems requiring prompt attention.
Each party agrees to provide notification of any changes in liaison officer appointments.
Such notification shall constitute an amendment to, and not require a revision of, this agreement.
130
International
Cooperative
Agreements
Manual
Iceland
Notes:
The Iceland Thordur Deputy
liaison officer Asgeirsson Secretary
is:
General is:
The FDA liaison officer Director, Seafood (Currently: Spiller) Phil Office of
J. David Clem Chief, Shellfish D.
Sanitation
Branch.
language for documents
Both parties agree that the working exchanged under this Memorandum
shall be in English.
Ill.
MINISTRY A.
OF FISHERIES of Fisheries agrees to classify its shellfish harvesting
The Ministry
water in accordance with the procedures and standards set forth in the National Shellfish Sanitation Program (NSSP).
The Ministry of Fisheries will assure that only fresh and fresh frozen shellfish harvested from areas which meet NSSP approved water quality and marine guidelines B. biotoxin standards and processed according to NSSP will be exported to the United States.
harvesting, with the
The Ministry transporting, shellfish NSSP sanitary
of Fisheries agrees to inspect and processing control operations frequency practices.
of fresh and fresh frozen
at sufficient
to assure compliance
c.
The Ministry
of Fisheries
agrees to issue certifications
only to
those fresh and fresh frozen shellfish shipping firms that comply with NSSP recommended practices and to notify FDA of the name, location, and certification number of these firms on Form FD-3038b "Shellfish Certification".
To cancel a firm's Form certification, the Ministry of Fisheries FD-3038c "Certification Cancellation" D.
The Ministry of America number, Federal E. will send a completed to FDA.
all containers to the United and certification required by the
of Fisheries agrees to require shellfish exported to be identified with by lot number Act.
of all lots States
of fresh and fresh frozen together
all other information
Food, Drug, and Cosmetic of Fisheries
The Ministry
agrees to facilitate
joint inspections
by
FDA and Ministry of Fisheries officials of Iceland's certified fresh and fresh frozen shellfish processing firms, approved growing waters, and related harvesting and handling practices.
Such inspections will be made on an annual basis or at a frequency deemed appropriate to determine that the Ministry of Fisheries shellfish sanitation control program is equivalent to the NSSP recommended practices and that only safe and wholesome fresh and fresh frozen shellfish are being exported to the United States.
121
Iceland
International
Cooperative
Agreements
Manual
Notes:
F.
The Ministry
of Fisheries
agrees to make travel inspections within
arrangements team Iceland.
for,
and pay transportation while the team G.
The Ministry
expenses
of, the FDA inspection
is conducting
of Fisheries
agrees to participate laboratory quality
to the maximum programs.
extent possible in FDA's These may include: 1.
Participation a.
assurance
in the analysis
of split samples
of: bacteria or
Seawater and shellfish pathogens.
Shellfish meats
meats for indicator
b.
for heavy
metals
or other chemical
or
radionuclide 2.
contaminants
as may be necessary.
The evaluation of new methods and procedures, including and reagents, media, or other materials and instruments equipment performance.
of Fisheries agrees to the establishment and maintain a central routine monitoring formats of a centrai file of and
H.
The Ministry office quality within laboratory reporting
Iceland to collate including programs.
results,
data and data from for collecting
assurance
Standard
data will be used. shellfish are imported into the United States are for
1.
If lots of shucked
use as bait, the Ministry of Fisheries will assure that each container is labeled "Not for human use" and the contents decharacterized J. Promulgation growing, shellfish by use of a permanent and enforcement processing, by Iceland colored dye. governing the
of regulations and shipment for export
harvesting, produced
of fresh or frozen States are
to the United
the sole responsibility K.
of the Ministry
of Fisheries.
The Ministry of Fisheries cannot be held liable for damages resulting from defects or noncompliance of Icelandic fresh or fresh frozen MOU. shellfish products produced under the provisions of this
IV.
FOOD AND DRUG ADMINISTRATION A. FDA agrees to publish the names, locations, and certification
numbers of certified firms submitted The firms will appear in the monthly SHELLFISH SHIPPERS LIST.
by the Ministry of Fisheries.
INTERSTATE CERTIFIED
132
International Notes:
Cooperative B.
Agreements Upon request personnel growing
Manual FDA will provide limited training to technical
Iceland
in laboratory
procedures,
classification
of shellfish procedures.
areas, and inspection
and administrative
C.
Whenever Icelandic shellfish are detained by FDA due to noncompliance with NSSP agreed upon practices or applicable laws or regulations, FDA will inform the Ministry of Fisheries will of the reason or reasons include: 1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
Commodity for the detention.
This information
lot and certification
number.
Name and address
of the shipper.
Reason for the detention.
Sampling Methods procedure.
of analysis and confirmation.
Administrative
guidelines.
arrangements for, and pay round trip team between the
D.
FDA agrees to make travel transportation United States inspection expenses and Iceland.
of, its inspection
FDA will also pay all per diem of the
team.
SANITATION PROGRAM of Fisheries Shellfish becomes Sanitation of research for an
V. NATIONAL
SHELLFISH
Upon signing this agreement, active participating member
the Ministry of the National
program (NSSP).
As a full member of the NSSP, the Ministry Fisheries may participate in national workshops, cooperative programs, the timely resolution Fisheries A. seminars, exchange may also: in a joint evaluation exports of the United States training courses, and other activities of technical information, assistance, confronting the NSSP.
The Ministry
designed and joint of
of problems
Participate pertains
program
as it
to shellfish
to Iceland.
and improvements in NSSP
B.
Make recommendations for changes guidelines, methods, and standards.
Be advised by FDA in the event
c.
a State
or local food control
official questions the certification, safety or wholesomeness of Iceland's imported shellfish.
FDA will, if so informed, seek to determine the reason for the problem and inform the Ministry of Fisheries of any action taken relative to State and local laws or regulations governing such shellfish imports.
133
Iceland
International
Cooperative
Agreements
Manual
Both parties agree that this Memorandum Notes:
shall become
effective
on the
date it is signed by both parties.
It shall remain in effect, and govern all fresh and fresh frozen shellfish exported to the United States of America, pending revision or revocation at the request of either agency.
Upon signature of both parties, this Memorandum of Understanding will be published in the FEDERAL REGISTER.
A copy of the Memorandum will be available for public review at the office of the Hearing Clerk (HFA-305), Food and Drug Administration, MD.
In witness whereof, /s/ the agencies have executed Donald this Memorandum.
Kennedy /s/ Rm. 4-65, 5600 Fishers Lane, Rockville,
Secretary General, Iceland Ministry of Fisheries currentiy: Koibeinsson is Mr. Arni
Jon L. Arnalds
Secretary General Iceland Ministry of Fisheries
Commissioner Food and Drug Administration Department Education, of Health and Welfare 28, 1978.
FDA Commissioner is currentiy A. Kessier, David M.D.
Date:
October date.
28,
25,
1978.
Date:
December became
Effective December is
This Memorandum 1978.
of Understanding
effective
Dept. of Heaith, Educ., 
References 1.
U.S. Department
of Health,
Education,
and Welfare,
Public Health
Service, National Shellfish Sanitation Program, Manual of Operations: Part I Sanitation of Shellfish Growing Areas, 1965 Revision; Part II Sa n itat ion of the Harvest ina and Process inu of Shellfish, 1965 Revision; Part Ill ~ublic-Health Se rvice Appraisal of Stat e Shellfish Sa nitat ion Program, 2.
Officiai of Anaiysis, Ed., AOAC Methods 16th
1965
Revision,
PHS Publication
ND. 33.
2.
"Official Methods of Analysis," 12th Ed., Association of Official Analytical Chemists, Box 540, Benjamin Franklin Station, Washington, D.C. 20044, 1975.
"Interstate Certified Shellfish Shippers and
481 N. Frederick Rd., Gaithersburg, MD 20877-2417
3.
Food and Drug Administration, List, " published monthly
and distributed
to food control
officials
3.
FDA, Center for Food Safety and Applied Office (HFS-400) Nutrition, of Seafood,
other interested persons by FDA, Bureau of Foods, Shellfish Sanitation Branch (HFF-41 7), 200 C St. SW., Washington, D.C. 20204.
4.
Federal Code, 5.
Food, Drug, and Cosmetic Title 21.
and Labeling Act, Pub. L. 89-755, approved November Act, as amended, United States
Fair Packaging 3, 1966.
6.
American Inc., 1015
Public Health 18th
Association,
the Examination
of Seawater St. NW.,
"Recommended Procedures for and Shellfish, " 4th Ed., 1970, APHA, D.C. 20036.
Washington,
134
International Notes:
Cooperative 7.
Agreements
Manual
Iceland
Food and Drug Administration, "Current Good Manufacturing Practice in Manufacturing Processing, Packing, or Holding Human Food" regulations, 21 CFR Part 110.
for Food,
8.
Food and Drug Administration, Definitions and Standards "Fish and Shellfish" regulations, 21 CFR Part 161.
lFiled as part of the original document
135
q
