OREGON STATE HOSPITAL MEDICAL AND ALLIED HEALTH PROFESSIONAL STAFF BYLAWS TABLE OF CONTENTS PREAMBLE DEFINITIONS ARTICLE 1: NAME ARTICLE 2: MEMBERSHIP NATURE OF STAFF MEMBERSHIP REQUIREMENTS FOR QUALIFICATIONS OF MEMBERSHIP NONDISCRIMINATION RESPONSIBILITIES AND REQUIREMENTS OF STAFF MEMBERSHIP CATEGORIES ACTIVE MEDICAL STAFF Qualifications for Active Status Prerogatives of Active Status Obligations of Active Status Chief Medical Officer and Supervising Physicians ACTIVE ALLIED HEALTH PROFESSIONAL STAFF Qualifications for Active Allied Health Professional Status Prerogatives of Active Allied Health Professional Status Obligations of Active Allied Health Professional Status PROVISIONAL STAFF Qualifications for Provisional Status Prerogatives of Provisional Status Obligations of Provisional Status Observation of Provisional Staff Members Term of Provisional Staff Status Action at Conclusion of Provisional Staff Status CONSULTING MEDICAL STAFF Qualifications for Consulting Status Prerogatives of Consulting Staff Status HONORARY STAFF Qualifications of Honorary Status Prerogatives of Honorary Status RESIDENT Qualifications for Resident Prerogatives of Resident Status Obligations of Resident Status ARTICLE 3: APPOINTMENT AND REAPPOINTMENT GENERAL DURATION OF APPOINTMENT AND REAPPOINTMENT PRACTITIONERS PROVIDING CONTRACTUAL PROFESSIONAL SERVICES Qualifications and Selection APPLICATION FOR INITIAL APPOINTMENT Application Form Effect of Application Burden of Producing Information Appointment Process Executive Committee Action Recommendation to Defer the Application Effect of Executive Committee Action Favorable Recommendation Adverse Recommendation Action on the Application Reapplication After Adverse Appointment Decision Time Periods for Processing REAPPOINTMENT AND REQUESTS FOR MODIFICATION OF STAFF STATUS OR PRIVILEGES Application of Reappointment Effect of Application Standards and Procedures for Review BASIS OF RECOMMENDATIONS Extension of Appointment Failure to File Reappointment Application ARTICLE 4: CLINICAL PRIVILEGES EXERCISE OF PRIVILEGES DELINEATION OF PRIVILEGES IN GENERAL Requests Basis for Privileges Determination PROVISIONAL PERIOD General Failure to Obtain Recommendation TEMPORARY CLINICAL PRIVILEGES Temporary Clinical Privileges Circumstances Pendency of application Care of specific patients Termination ARTICLE 5: CORRECTIVE ACTION RULES FOR CORRECTIVE ACTION Grounds for Corrective Action Rules for Corrective Action Initiation of Corrective Action Requests Investigation Action by the Executive Committee Action by the Governing Body SUMMARY RESTRICTION OR SUSPENSION Criteria for Initiation Executive Committee Action AUTOMATIC SUSPENSION OR LIMITATION Licensure Controlled Substances ARTICLE 6: HEARINGS INITIATION OF HEARING Grounds for Hearing When Deemed Adverse HEARING PROCEDURES FINAL ACTION BY THE GOVERNING BODY ARTICLE 7: OFFICERS OFFICERS OF THE STAFF Identification Qualifications Nominations Elections Term of Elected Office Recall of Officers Vacancies in Elected Office DUTIES OF OFFICERS President President-Elect Immediate Past President Secretary-Treasurer ARTICLE 8: COMMITTEES DESIGNATION GENERAL PROVISIONS Terms of Committee Members Removal Vacancies EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE Duties Meetings MEDICAL RECORDS COMMITTEE Composition Duties Meetings UTILIZATION REVIEW COMMITTEE Composition Duties Meetings PHARMACY AND THERAPEUTICS COMMITTEE Composition Duties Meetings INFECTION CONTROL COMMITTEE Composition Duties Meetings BYLAWS COMMITTEE Composition Duties Meetings MEDICAL DEPARTMENT CONTINUOUS QUALITY IMPROVEMENT COMMITTEE Composition Duties Meetings MORBIDITY AND MORTALITY COMMITTEE Composition Duties Meeting ETHICS COMMITTEE Composition Duties Meetings ARTICLE 9: MEETINGS Annual Meeting Regular Meetings Agenda Special Meetings COMMITTEE AND DEPARTMENT MEETINGS Regular Meetings Special Meetings QUORUM Staff Meetings Department and Committee Meetings MANNER OF ACTION MINUTES ATTENDANCE REQUIREMENTS Regular Attendance Absence From Meeting CONDUCT OF MEETINGS ARTICLE 10: CONFIDENTIALITY, IMMUNITY AND RELEASES AUTHORIZATION AND CONDITIONS CONFIDENTIALITY OF INFORMATION IMMUNITY FROM LIABILITY For Action Taken For Providing Information ACTIVITIES AND INFORMATION COVERED Activities RELEASES CREDENTIALS FILE Credentials File Content Access Correction, Deletion or Additions to Information in File ARTICLE 11: ADOPTION OF/AND AMENDMENTS TO BYLAWS PREAMBLE WHEREAS, Oregon State Hospital is a state psychiatric hospital responsible to the Assistant Director of Human Resources for Mental Health and Developmental Disability Services and organized under the laws of the State of Oregon; WHEREAS, its purpose is to serve as a psychiatric hospital providing (1) evaluation, patient care and treatment; and (2) protection to public, patient and staff; THEREFORE, the Medical and Allied Health Professional Staff practicing in this hospital, organize themselves into a Medical and Allied Health Professional Staff in conformity with these bylaws.
DEFINITIONS
1.OREGON REVISED STATUTES (ORS) means the currently approved acts of the Oregon Legislative Assembly and state electors.
2.HOSPITAL means Oregon State Hospital.
(ORS 426.010) 3.GOVERNING BODY of the hospital means the Assistant Director of Human Resources for the Mental Health and Developmental Disability Services Division (MHDDSD), also referred to as the Administrator of the MHDDSD.
(ORS 430.110) 4.SUPERINTENDENT means the Chief Executive Officer of the hospital who is appointed by the Assistant Director of Human Resources for Mental Health and Developmental Disability Services to act on his behalf in the management of the hospital and who has delegated authority from the Assistant Director.
(ORS 426.020) 5.CHIEF MEDICAL OFFICER means the physician staff member appointed by the Administrator of the Mental Health and Developmental Disability Services Division (MHDDSD) to serve as the Senior Medical Officer.
(ORS 426.020) 6.MEDICAL AND ALLIED HEALTH PROFESSIONAL STAFF ("STAFF") means the formal organization of all staff who are privileged to attend patients in the hospital.
7.EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE means the Medical and Allied Health Professional Staff Executive Committee.
8.CLINICAL PRIVILEGES (PRIVILEGES) means authorization granted by the governing body to a practitioner to provide specific patient care services in the hospital within defined limits, based on an individual practitioner's license, education, training, experience, competence, health status, and judgment.
(JCAHO:AMH(1995)) 9.PREROGATIVE means participatory right granted by virtue of staff status or otherwise, to a member and exercisable subject to the conditions imposed in these bylaws and in other hospital and Medical and Allied Health Professional Staff policies.
10.PRACTITIONER means any professional staff member applying for or exercising clinical privileges in this hospital, who is permitted by law and by the hospital to provide patient care services without direction or supervision, within the scope of his or her license and in accordance with individually granted clinical privileges.
11.STAFF MEMBER means a member of the Medical and Allied Health Professional Staff who has applied for and has obtained current membership pursuant to these bylaws.
12.PHYSICIAN means an individual with an M.D. or D.O. degree, who is licensed to practice in the state of Oregon.
(ORS 677) 13.PSYCHOLOGIST means an individual with a Ph.D. or Psy.D. degree licensed to practice in the state of Oregon.
(ORS 675.010 through 675.150) 14.MEDICAL STAFF means an M.D. or D.O., privileged to attend patients in the hospital.
15.ALLIED HEALTH PROFESSIONAL (AHP) means a licensed individual other than a physician, who exercises judgment within the areas of his professional competence, and who is qualified to independently provide care under an appropriate level of supervision by or in coordination with a physician who has been accorded privileges to provide such care in the hospital.
The following are deemed allied health professionals: Dentists, Podiatrists, Optometrists, Clinical Psychologists, Social Workers, Certified Nurse Practitioners, and Master's Level Rehabilitation Therapists.
16.PERSONAL PRONOUNS: The use of personal pronouns in the bylaws is consistent throughout and should be taken to refer to either or both genders.
17.SPECIAL NOTICE means written notification by certified or registered mail, return requested, dated the day of mailing and addressed to the affected practitioner at either the office or home address stated on their most recent application for staff appointment or such other address as contained in the hospital files relating to that person or personally hand delivered written notification to the affected practitioner dated the day of delivery.
Special notice shall be deemed to have been given as of the date appearing on the face of the notice.
18.STAFF YEAR means the period from January 1 to December 31.
19.EX-OFFICIO means service as a member of a body by virtue of an office or position held and, unless otherwise expressly provided, does not have the privilege to vote.
20.MEDICAL DEPARTMENT consists of practitioners with an M.D. or D.O. degree.
ARTICLE 1: NAME
The name of this organization shall be the "Medical and Allied Health Professional Staff of Oregon State Hospital."
ARTICLE 2: MEMBERSHIP
2.1NATURE OF STAFF MEMBERSHIP Membership in the Medical and Allied Health Professional Staff of the Oregon State Hospital is a privilege extended to practitioners who continuously meet and satisfy the qualifications, standards, and requirements set forth in these bylaws and are professionally qualified to provide services.
Appointment to and membership on the staff shall confer on the appointee or member only such clinical privileges and prerogatives as have been granted by the Governing Body in accordance with these bylaws.
2.2REQUIREMENTS FOR QUALIFICATIONS OF MEMBERSHIP GENERAL QUALIFICATIONS Applicants for membership on the staff shall:
(a)be currently licensed by the state of Oregon to practice his profession and to exercise privileges applied for or held; (b)document his background, experience, and training and possess demonstrated competence, including current knowledge, judgment and technique in his specialty area and for all privileges applied for or held; (c)be free of or have under adequate control any significant physical or mental behavioral impairment that interferes with or presents substantial probability of interfering with patient care, the exercise of privileges, the assumption and discharge of responsibilities or cooperative working relationships; (d)agree to abide by the professional ethics of their profession.
2.3NONDISCRIMINATION
Staff membership or particular clinical privileges shall not be denied on the basis of sex, race, creed, color, national origin, age, sexual preference, or physical handicap.
The basis for denial may include other criteria related to the delivery of quality patient care in the hospital, professional qualification, and/or for the hospital's purposes, need and/or capabilities.
2.4RESPONSIBILITIES AND REQUIREMENTS OF STAFF MEMBERSHIP
Acceptance of staff membership, including temporary privileges, shall constitute the staff member's agreement to:
(a)abide by the ethics of his profession, and avoid acts and omissions constituting unprofessional conduct under the state licensing laws and regulations, or fraud or other actionable conduct; (b)provide patients with care at the generally recognized professional level of quality and efficiency; (c)abide by the staff bylaws, rules and regulations, and administrative memoranda; (d)accept and appropriately discharge such staff committee and hospital assignments and obligations for which he is responsible by appointment or election; (e)prepare and complete in a timely and legible fashion medical records for all patients in whose care he is involved; (f)make arrangements with another practitioner to provide professional care for any patient in the hospital when otherwise unable to attend his patients; (g)notify the Superintendent promptly of changes in licensure and of any restriction, denial or surrender of his clinical privileges or membership elsewhere, any professional liability claim, criminal charge, or any drug or alcohol charge; (h)work cooperatively with staff members, nurses, hospital administration and others so as not to adversely affect patient care or disrupt the operation of the hospital.
2.5CATEGORIES
The categories of the staff shall include the following: active medical staff, active allied health professional, provisional, consulting, resident, and honorary.
At the time of reappointment the member's staff category shall be determined.
2.6ACTIVE MEDICAL STAFF
2.6.1Qualifications for Active Status The active staff shall consist of members who:
(a)meet the general qualifications for membership set forth in Section 2.2; (b)regularly admit patients to or otherwise are involved in the care of patients in the hospital facilities; (c)are regularly employed by the hospital; (d)except for good cause shown as determined by the Executive Committee, have completed at least one year of satisfactory performance on the provisional staff.
2.6.2Prerogatives of Active Status
Except as otherwise provided, the prerogatives of an active staff member shall be to:
(a)admit patients and exercise such clinical privileges as are granted pursuant to Article 4; (b)attend and vote on matters prescribed at general and special meetings of the staff and of the department and committees of which he is a member; (c)serve as a voting member of committees to which he is duly appointed or elected by the staff.
2.6.3Obligations of Active Status
An active staff member shall:
(a)serve on hospital staff committees; (b)reasonably participate as requested in the quality review, education, risk management, and utilization review activities of the hospital as may be required of the staff; (c)satisfy the meeting attendance and special appearance requirements as found in these bylaws; (d)perform assigned on-call duties and assignments; (e)pay all staff dues and assessments as may be set forth in these bylaws, rules, and regulations.
2.6.4Chief Medical Officer and Supervising Physicians
The Chief Medical Officer and supervising physicians must achieve this status by the procedure provided in Article 4.
Clinical privileges must be delineated in accordance with Article 4.
2.7ACTIVE ALLIED HEALTH PROFESSIONAL STAFF
2.7.1Qualifications for Active Allied Health Professional Status The active allied health professional staff shall consist of members who:
(a)meet the general qualifications for membership set forth in Section 2.2; (b)are regularly employed by the hospital; (c)except for good cause shown as determined by the Executive Committee, have completed at least one year of satisfactory performance on the provisional staff.
(d)regularly provide direct clinical care to patients within the scope of their licenses, or serve as director of psychology, social work or occupational therapy/rehabilitation services.
2.7.2Prerogatives of Active Allied Health Professional Status
Except as otherwise provided, the prerogatives of an active allied health professional staff member shall be to:
(a)attend and vote on matters prescribed at general and special meetings of the staff and of the department and committees of which he is a member; (b)serve as a voting member of committees to which he is duly appointed or elected by the staff.
2.7.3Obligations of Active Allied Health Professional Status
An active allied health professional staff member shall:
(a)serve on hospital staff committees; (b)reasonably participate as requested in the quality review, education, risk management, and utilization review activities of the hospital as may be required of the staff; (c)satisfy the meeting attendance and special appearance requirements as found in these bylaws; (d)perform assigned on-call duties and assignments; (e)pay all staff dues and assessments as may be set forth in these bylaws, rules, and regulations.
2.7.4 Directors of Psychology, Social Work and Occupational Therapy/Rehabilitation Services must achieve active allied health professional status by the procedure in Article 4.
They are not eligible for membership on the Executive Committee.
2.8PROVISIONAL STAFF
2.8.1Qualifications for Provisional Status The provisional staff shall consist of members who:
(a)meet the general qualifications for membership as set forth in Section 2.2; (b)are regularly employed by the hospital or are under personal service contract with the hospital, but not yet eligible for active status.
2.8.2Prerogatives of Provisional Status
A provisional staff member may:
(a)exercise such clinical privileges as are granted pursuant to Article 4; (b)attend meetings of the staff and the department of which that person is a member, including open committee meetings and educational programs, and shall have the right to vote at such meetings; (c)provisional staff members are not eligible to hold office in the staff organization, but may serve on committees.
2.8.3Obligations of Provisional Status
A provisional staff member must:
(a)serve on appropriate staff committees as appointed; (b)reasonably participate as requested in the quality review, education, risk management, and utilization management activities of the hospital as may be required of the staff; (c)satisfy the meeting attendance and special appearance requirements as found in these bylaws; (d)pay all staff dues and assessments as may be set forth in these bylaws or rules and regulations.
2.8.4Observation of Provisional Staff Members
Each provisional staff member shall undergo a period of observation by department supervisors or their designees.
The observation shall be to evaluate the member's (1) proficiency in the exercise of clinical provisions initially granted and (2) overall eligibility for continued staff membership and advancement within staff categories.
Observation of provisional staff members shall follow the frequency and format each department deems appropriate in order to evaluate the provisional staff member.
The results of the observations shall be communicated by the department supervisor to the Executive Committee and the provisional staff member.
2.8.5Term of Provisional Staff Status
A member shall remain on the provisional staff for a period of one (1) year, commencing upon employment or contract, unless that status is extended by the Executive Committee.
2.8.6Action at Conclusion of Provisional Staff Status
(a)If the provisional staff member has satisfactorily demonstrated his ability to exercise the clinical privileges initially granted and otherwise appears qualified for continued staff membership, the member shall be eligible for placement in the active or consulting staff as appropriate, upon recommendation of the Executive Committee.
(b)In all other cases, the appropriate department shall advise the Executive Committee which shall make its recommendation to the Superintendent regarding continued provisional status, modification or termination of clinical privileges or termination of staff membership.
In this case, the member is entitled to the hearing rights of Section 6.
2.9CONSULTING MEDICAL STAFF
2.9.1Qualifications for Consulting Status Any member of the staff in good standing may consult in his area of expertise, however, the consulting staff shall consist of such practitioners who:
(a)are willing and able to come to the hospital on schedule or promptly respond when called to render clinical services within their area of competence; (b)are licensed in Oregon; and (c)have satisfactorily completed appointment in the provisional staff category.
2.9.2Prerogatives of Consulting Staff Status
The consulting staff member shall be entitled to:
(a)exercise such clinical privileges as are granted pursuant to Article 4; and (b)attend meetings of the staff and the department of which that person is a member, including open committee meetings and educational programs, but shall have no right to vote at such meetings, except within committees when the right to vote is specified at the time of appointment.
(c)Consulting staff members shall not be eligible to hold office in the staff organization, but may serve on committees.
2.10HONORARY STAFF
2.10.1Qualifications of Honorary Status
(a)The honorary staff shall consist of practitioners who have actively practiced at the hospital and are deemed deserving of membership by virtue of their previous long-standing service to the hospital, and who continue to exemplify high standards of professional and ethical conduct.
(b)Membership is conferred by a two-thirds majority vote of the Medical and Allied Health Professional Staff, after nomination by the s Committee.
2.10.2Prerogatives of Honorary Status
(a)Honorary staff members may serve upon committees without vote.
They may attend staff and department meetings, including open committee meetings and educational programs.
They are not eligible to vote or hold office in the staff organization.
(b)Honorary staff members are not required to pay staff dues. (c)Honorary staff members shall receive appropriate certification.
2.11RESIDENT
2.11.1Qualifications for Resident
The resident staff shall consist of members who:
(a)meet the general qualifications for membership set forth in Section 2.2; (b)are involved in the care of patients in the hospital facilities by virtue of their participation in an approved residency program; (c)are supervised by a designated active staff member throughout their length of appointment.
2.11.2Prerogatives of Resident Status
Except as otherwise provided, the prerogatives of a resident staff member shall be to:
(a)exercise such clinical privileges as are granted pursuant to Article 4; (b)attend general and special meetings of the staff and of the department and committees of which he is a member, but shall have no right to vote at such meetings, except within committees when the right to vote is specified at the time of appointment.
2.11.3Obligations of Resident Status
A resident staff member must:
(a)participate in clinical activities under direct supervision; (b)reasonably participate as requested in the quality review, educational, risk management, and utilization management activities of the hospital as may be required of the staff; (c)satisfy the expectations of residency supervisors concerning ongoing educational activities.
ARTICLE 3: APPOINTMENT AND REAPPOINTMENT 3.1GENERAL By applying to the Medical and Allied Health Professional Staff for appointment or reappointment (or, in the case of members of the honorary or resident staff, by accepting an appointment to that category), the applicant acknowledges responsibility to first review these bylaws and agrees that throughout any period of membership that person will comply with the responsibilities of staff membership and with the bylaws and rules and regulations of the staff as they exist and as they may be modified from time to time.
Appointment to the staff shall confer on the appointee only such clinical privileges granted in accordance with these bylaws.
3.2DURATION OF APPOINTMENT AND REAPPOINTMENT Appointments to the staff and grants of clinical privileges shall be for a period of two (2) years, except in the case of provisional staff status provided for in 2.8.
A continuous process of reappointment shall review a portion of membership each year.
3.3PRACTITIONERS PROVIDING CONTRACTUAL PROFESSIONAL SERVICES
3.3.1Qualifications and Selection A practitioner who is or who will be providing specified professional services pursuant to a contract with the hospital must meet the same appointment qualifications, must be evaluated for appointment, reappointment and clinical privileges in the same manner and must fulfill all of the obligations of this category as any other applicant or staff member.
3.4APPLICATION FOR INITIAL APPOINTMENT
3.4.1Application Form Each application for initial appointment to the staff shall be in writing, submitted on the prescribed form with all provisions completed (or accompanied by an explanation of why answers are unavailable), and signed by the applicant.
When an applicant requests an application form, the applicant shall be given a copy of these bylaws, the staff rules and regulations, and summaries of other applicable policies related to clinical practice in the hospital, if any.
An application form shall be developed by the Executive Committee or its designee.
The form shall require detailed information which shall include, but not be limited to, information concerning:
(a)the applicant's qualifications, including, but not limited to, professional training and experience, current licensure, current Drug Enforcement Agency (DEA) registration and experience, certification of CPR training, and continuing education information related to the clinical privileges to be exercised by the applicant; (b)peer references familiar with the applicant's professional competence and ethical character; (c)requests for membership categories, departments, and clinical privileges; (d)past or pending professional corrective action, licensure limitations, or related matters; (e)malpractice claims history; (f)physical and mental health status; (g)for contract practitioners, a certificate of professional liability insurance in such amounts as may be required by the Governing Body.
3.4.2Effect of Application In addition to the matters set forth in Section 3.1, by applying for appointment to the staff each applicant:
(a)attests to the correctness and completeness of all information furnished; (b)agrees to abide by these bylaws and rules and regulations of the staff; (c)signifies willingness to appear for interviews in connection with the application; (d)authorizes the hospital, the Credentials Committee, the Executive Committee and the appropriate department to consult with members of the staff and with others who may have information bearing on the applicant's professional qualifications, ethical standing and competence; (e)consents to inspection of records and documents that may be material to an evaluation of the applicant's qualifications and ability to carry out clinical privileges requested, and authorizes all individuals and organizations in custody of such records and documents to permit such inspection and copying; (f)releases from any liability, to the fullest extent permitted by law, all persons for their acts performed in reasonable belief in connection with investigating and evaluating the applicant; (g)releases from any liability, to the fullest extent permitted by law, all individuals and organizations who provide information regarding the applicant, including otherwise confidential information; (h)consents to the disclosure to appropriate licensing boards or other organizations as required by law, any information regarding the applicant's professional or ethical standing that the hospital or staff may have, and releases the staff and the hospital from liability for so doing to the fullest extent permitted by law; (i)agrees to cooperate openly and fully in an impartial physical or mental examination.
3.4.3Burden of Producing Information
In connection with all applications for appointment, reappointment, advancement or transfer, the applicant shall have the burden of producing information for an adequate evaluation of the applicant's qualifications and suitability for the clinical privileges and staff category requested, of resolving any reasonable doubts about these matters, and of satisfying requests for information.
This burden may include submission to a medical or psychological examination, at the applicant's expense, if deemed appropriate by the Executive Committee, which may select the examining physician after conferring with the practitioner being reviewed.
No application is complete or deemed received until all requested information is provided.
3.4.4Appointment Process
Upon receipt of the completed signed application, the Chief Medical Officer will seek to verify its content and collect additional information as follows:
(a)verification of licensure or status from the Oregon Board of Medical Examiners (BME), Board of Psychologist Examiners, or other appropriate licensing or certifying boards or agencies, and from all current or past states of licensure; (b)all information held by the Secretary of the Department of Health and Human Services (National Practitioners Data Bank); (c)copies of certificates or letters confirming completion of an accredited school and training program.
After receipt of the completed application, timely verification of its contents and receipt of additional information, the Chief Medical Officer shall transmit the application and all supporting materials to the Credentials Committee the Executive Committee (physicians) and the appropriate department for evaluation.
Credentials Committee Action The Credentials Committee shall review the application, evaluate the supporting documentation, the department supervisors report and recommendations, and any other relevant information.
The Credentials Committee may elect to interview the applicant and seek additional information.
Within thirty (30) days after receipt of all necessary information, the Credentials Committee shall transmit to the Executive Committee a written report and its recommendations as to appointment and, if appointment is recommended, as to membership category, department affiliation, service affiliation, clinical privileges to be granted, and any special conditions to be attached to the appointment.
The committee may also recommend that the Executive Committee defer action on the application.
3.4.5Executive Committee Action
At its next regular meeting after receipt of the application and recommendation of the discipline director,the s Committee report and recommendation, or as soon thereafter as is practicable the Executive Committee shall consider the report and any other relevant information.
The Executive Committee may request additional information, return the matter to the discipline director for further investigation, and/orreturn the matter to the Credentials Committee for further investigation and/or elect to interview the applicant.
The Executive Committee shall forward to the Superintendent, for prompt transmittal to the Governing Body, a written report and recommendation as to staff appointment and, if appointment is recommended, as to membership category, department affiliation, service affiliation, clinical privileges to be granted, and any special conditions to be attached to the appointment.
The committee may also defer action on the application.
The reason for each recommendation shall be stated.
3.4.6Recommendation to Defer the Application
When the recommendation of the Credentials Committee, Executive Committee, and/or the appropriate department service committee is to defer the application for further consideration, it must be followed up sixty (60) days within sixty (60) or thirty (30) days either by a subsequent recommendation for provisional appointment with the specified clinical privileges, or a recommendation that the application for staff membership be rejected.
3.4.7Effect of Executive Committee Action
(a)Favorable Recommendation: When the recommendation of the Executive Committee is favorable to the applicant, the Superintendent shall endorse and promptly forward it, together with supporting documentation, to the Governing Body and the applicant.
(b)Adverse Recommendation: When a recommendation of the Executive Committee is adverse to the applicant, the Superintendent shall inform the applicant by special notice, who shall then be entitled to the procedural rights provided in Article 6 of these bylaws.
"Adverse recommendation" by the Executive Committee, is defined as a recommendation to deny appointment, requested staff category, or to deny or restrict requested clinical privileges.
No such adverse recommendations will be forwarded to the Governing Body until after the applicant has exercised or has been deemed to have waived his rights to a hearing as provided in Article 6 of these bylaws.
3.4.8Action on the Application
(a)When the recommendation of the Executive Committee is favorable to the practitioner, the Governing Body shall act on it at its next scheduled meeting.
If the Governing Body's decision is favorable to the applicant, the Superintendent shall be authorized to transmit this decision to the applicant.
(b)If the Governing Body's decision is adverse to the employee, the Superintendent shall notify said practitioner of the adverse decision, and such adverse decision shall be held in abeyance until the employee has exercised or has been deemed to have waived his rights under Article 6 of these bylaws.
The fact that the adverse decision is held in abeyance shall not be deemed to confer privileges when none existed before.
3.4.9Reapplication After Adverse Appointment Decision
An applicant who has received a final adverse decision regarding appointment shall not be eligible to reapply to the staff for a period of one (1) year.
Any such reapplication shall be processed as an initial application, and the applicant shall submit such additional information as may be required to demonstrate that the basis for the earlier adverse action no longer exists.
The applicant shall designate that his application is a reapplication.
3.4.10Time Periods for Processing
Applications for staff appointments shall be considered in a timely manner by all persons and committees required by these bylaws to act thereon.
While special or unusual circumstances may constitute good cause and warrant exceptions, the following time periods provide a guideline for routine processing of applications:
(a)evaluation, review, and verification of application and all supporting documents: 30 days from receipt of all necessary documentation; (b)review and recommendation by the Credentials Committee: 30 days after receipt of all necessary documentation;(b)review and recommendation by the Committee: 30 days after receipt of all necessary documentati(b)review and recommendation by Executive Committee: 30 days after receipt of all necessary documentation; (c)final action: 7 days after receipt of necessary documentation or conclusion of hearings.
3.5REAPPOINTMENT AND REQUESTS FOR MODIFICATION OF STAFF STATUS OR PRIVILEGES
3.5.1Application of Reappointment
(a)At least ninety (90) days prior to the expiration date of the current staff appointment (except for temporary appointments), a reapplication form shall be mailed or delivered to the member.
If an application for reappointment is not received at least thirty (30) days prior to the expiration date, written notice shall be promptly sent to the member advising that the application has not been received.
At least sixty (60) days prior to the expiration date, each staff member shall submit to the Executive Committee the completed application form for renewal of appointment to the staff for the coming year, and for the renewal or modification of clinical privileges.
(b)The member shall have furnished in writing on the application form for reappointment, complete information and all documents necessary to reapprise the staff members at the time of reappointment, including current licenses, health status changes, professional liability insurance coverage if applicable, and experience, and other institutional affiliation and status, board certification status, disciplinary actions pending or completed, continuing education and training during the preceding period.
The member shall provide evidence that clinical work at Oregon State Hospital has been monitored through the appropriate Quality Improvement program.
(c)The staff member must sign the reappointment application, and in so doing accept the same conditions as stated in Section 3.1 of this Article in connection with the initial application.
(d)As with the initial application, the staff member shall bear the burden of completing the application form and producing all information in the same manner as stated in Section 3.4.3 of this Article, in connection with the initial appointment.
(e)A staff member who seeks a change in staff status or modification of clinical privileges may submit such a request at any time upon a form specified by the Executive Committee, except that such application may not be filed within one (1) year of the time a similar request has been denied.
This request must include specific requests for additions to or deletions from the clinical privileges presently held with any bases for changes.
3.5.2Effect of Application
The effect of an application for reappointment or modification of staff status or privileges is the same as that set forth in Section 3.4.2.
3.5.3Standards and Procedures for Review
When a staff member submits the first application for reappointment, and every two (2) years thereafter, or when the member submits an application for modification of staff status or clinical privileges, the member shall be subject to an in-depth review generally following the procedures set forth in Sections 3.4, in addition to reviewing the information found in the staff member's s file.
3.6BASIS OF RECOMMENDATIONS
Each recommendation concerning the reappointment of the staff member and the clinical privileges to be granted upon reappointment, shall be based upon such member's: (a)clinical and/or technical skills as demonstrated in the findings of quality review or other monitoring activities; (b)sanctions imposed or pending, voluntary terminations of staff memberships or voluntary or involuntary limitation, reduction, or loss of clinical privileges at another hospital; (c)previously successful and currently pending challenges to any licensure or registration (state or district, Drug Enforcement Administration) or the voluntary relinquishment of such licensure or registration; (d)participation as a staff official, committee member or chairman, and in on-call coverage rosters; (e)timely, accurate, and legible preparation and completion of medical records; (f)physical and mental health; (g)ethics and conduct; (h)continuing education, attendance at staff meetings, and participation in staff affairs, compliance with these bylaws or rules and regulations of the staff; (i)cooperation with hospital personnel, use of the hospital's facilities for patients, relations with other practitioners; (j)other reasonable indicators of continuing qualifications.
3.6.1Extension of Appointment If an applicant for reappointment has not been fully processed by the expiration date of a member's appointment, the staff member shall maintain membership status and clinical privileges until such time as the processing is completed unless the delay is due to the member's failure to timely complete and return the reappointment application form or provide other documentation or cooperation, in which case the appointment may, upon recommendation of the Executive Committee, be terminated by the Governing Body.
Any extension of an appointment pursuant to this section does not create a vested right in the member for continued appointment through the entire next term, but only until such time as processing of the application is conducted.
3.6.2Failure to File Reappointment Application Failure without good cause to timely file a completed application for reappointment shall result in the automatic suspension of the member's privileges and prerogatives at the end of the current staff appointment, unless otherwise extended by the Governing Body.
If the member fails to submit a completed application for reappointment after thirty (30) days past the date it was due, the member shall be deemed to have resigned membership in the staff.
In the event membership terminates for the reasons set forth herein the procedures set forth in Article 6 shall not apply.
ARTICLE 4: CLINICAL PRIVILEGES
4.1EXERCISE OF PRIVILEGES
Except as otherwise provided in these bylaws, a practitioner providing clinical services at this hospital shall be entitled to exercise only those clinical privileges specifically granted by the Governing Body.
Said privileges and services must be hospital specific, within the scope of any license, certificate or other legal authorizing practice in this state and consistent with any restrictions thereon, and shall be subject to the rules and regulations of the clinical department, the authority of the clinical department chief, and the staff.
Staff privileges may be granted, continued or modified, only upon recommendation of the Executive Committee of the Medical and Allied Health Professional Staff, only for reasons directly related to quality of patient care and other provisions of the staff bylaws, and only following the procedures outlined in these bylaws.
4.2DELINEATION OF PRIVILEGES IN GENERAL
4.2.1Requests Each application for appointment and reappointment to the Medical and Allied Health Professional Staff must contain a request for the specific clinical privileges desired by the applicant.
A request by a member for modification of clinical privileges may be made at any time, but such requests must be supported by documentation of training and/or experience supportive of the request.
4.2.2Basis for Privileges Determination Requests for clinical privileges shall be evaluated on the basis of the practitioner's education, training, experience, demonstrated professional competence and judgment, clinical performance, and the documented results of patient care and other quality review and monitoring which the staff deems appropriate.
Privilege determinations may also be based on pertinent information concerning clinical performance obtained from other sources, especially other institutions and health care settings where a practitioner exercises clinical privileges.
The practitioner's physical and mental health status shall be compatible with the privileges requested.
4.3PROVISIONAL PERIOD
4.3.1General All grants of initial clinical privilege are subject to the requirements of the provisional period as outlined in Section 2.8 of these bylaws.
At the conclusion of the provisional period, the clinical department chief verifies that the applicant appears to meet all the qualifications for practice in that department, has discharged all the responsibilities of staff membership and has not exceeded or abused the prerogatives of the category to which the appointment was made.
When the applicant is the clinical discipline director, this verification is done by the chief medical officer.
4.3.2Failure to Obtain Recommendation If an initial appointee fails within the time of provisional membership to obtain the recommendation from his clinical department that the appointee has met all of the qualifications of that department, the member shall be entitled to a hearing upon request, pursuant to Article 6.
4.4TEMPORARY CLINICAL PRIVILEGES
4.4.1Temporary Clinical Privileges
Temporary clinical privileges may be granted only in the circumstances and under the conditions described in Section 4.4.2; only to an appropriately licensed practitioner, only when the information available including, at a minimum, information obtained from the Secretary of Health and Human Services, or his designee, through the National Practitioners Data Bank (NPDB) pursuant to the Health Care Quality Improvement Act of 1986, and the Oregon State Board of Medical Examiners, or other appropriate licensing boards substantially supports a favorable determination regarding the requesting practitioner's qualifications, ability and judgment to exercise the privileges requested.
Special requirements of consultation and reporting may be imposed by the Chief Medical Officer.
Under all circumstances, the practitioner requesting temporary privileges must agree in writing to abide by these bylaws and related manuals, rules and regulations of the staff and those of the hospital in all manners relating to his activities in the hospital.
4.4.2Circumstances
Temporary clinical privileges may be granted on written recommendation of the Chief Medical Officer.
The Superintendent may grant temporary privileges in the following circumstances:
(a)Pendency of application:
1.Temporary clinical privileges may be granted to an applicant for staff membership, but only after receipt of a completed application for staff appointment, including a request for specific temporary privileges; consultation with the staff president; and verification of the qualifications for membership required by these bylaws.
2.Temporary privileges may be granted in this circumstance for an initial period of ninety (90) days with subsequent renewals not to exceed the pendency of the application.
Any such renewal shall be made upon written recommendation of the Chief Medical Officer where the renewed privileges have been exercised and the written concurrence of the Superintendent and may be made only when the information available continues to support a favorable determination regarding the practitioner's application for membership and privileges.
Under no circumstances may they be initially granted or renewed if the application is still pending because the applicant has not responded to a request for clarification or for a matter of additional information.
(b)Care of specific patients:
Temporary clinical privileges may be granted to a practitioner for the evaluation and care of a specific patient, after receipt of a request for the specific privileges desired.
Temporary privileges of this nature may not be granted for more than five (5) patients in any twelve (12) month period and are restricted to the specific patients for which they are granted.
In urgent situations where the health and well being of a patient so requires, the Superintendent, in consultation with the Chief Medical Officer, may grant temporary privileges for the evaluation and/or care of a specific patient.
The Superintendent will then promptly obtain the information as set forth in 4.4.1.
4.4.3Termination
(a)Temporary privileges may at any time be terminated by the Superintendent on discovery of any information or occurrence of any event of a nature which raises a question about the practitioner's professional qualifications, ability to exercise any or all the privileges granted, or the life or well-being of a patient is determined to be endangered.
In the event of any such termination, the practitioner's patients that are in the hospital will be assigned to another member of the staff, by the Chief Medical Officer or president of the Executive Committee.
(b)Rights of the practitioner: Where a practitioner's request for temporary privileges is refused or such privileges are terminated or suspended, the affected practitioner is entitled to review per Article 6 .
ARTICLE 5: CORRECTIVE ACTION
5.1RULES FOR CORRECTIVE ACTION
5.1.1Grounds for Corrective Action For the purposes of this Article 5, any corrective action must be taken:
(a)in the reasonable belief that the action is in the furtherance of quality health care; (b)after a reasonable effort to verify the facts of the matter in the manner outlined in this Article 5; (c)after the notice and hearing procedures set forth in this Article 5 and Article 6 or after such other procedures as are fair to the practitioner under the circumstances; (d)in the reasonable belief that the action was warranted by facts known after such reasonable effort to obtain facts; (e)after the above referenced adequate notice and hearing procedures.
5.1.2Rules for Corrective Action
Rules for correction are not intended to conflict with state rules and regulations, or with the collective bargaining agreement; if a conflict exists with these bylaws, the state rules and regulations, and the collective bargaining agreement shall prevail.
Any person may provide information to the staff or Governing Body about the conduct, performance or competence of a staff member.
Grounds for corrective action include, but are not limited to, a reasonable belief in the following:
(a)acts, demeanor or conduct below applicable professional standards; (b)conduct detrimental to patient safety or the delivery of substandard quality patient care within the hospital; (c)unethical practice; (d)conduct which is reasonably likely to be unduly disruptive of hospital operation; (e)conviction of a felony; (f)violation of these bylaws and rules and regulations of the staff; (g)personal abuse of drugs and/or alcohol; (h)notification by an appropriate agency of the revocation or suspension of a person's license, or of being placed on probation; (i)failure to maintain professional liability insurance in amounts as may be required by the Governing Body.
5.1.3Initiation of Corrective Action
Corrective action against any member of the staff may be requested by any one of the following: Governing Body, Superintendent, Chief Medical Officer or president of the staff.
5.1.4Requests
When the corrective action requested constitutes modification, suspension or expulsion from staff membership, or modification or suspension of staff privileges, such requests shall be made in writing to the Executive Committee, and shall set forth in substantial detail the activities or conduct which constitutes the grounds for the request that corrective action be taken.
5.1.5Investigation
(a)The Executive Committee, upon receipt of a request for corrective action, will assign the task of investigation and corrective action to the appropriate hospital department.
(b)Upon request by all of the following: (1) the practitioner whose practice is being reviewed; (2) the Executive Committee; and (3) the Governing Body, the Oregon Board of Medical Examiners (BME), Board of Psychologist Examiners, or other appropriate licensing or certifying boards or agencies, pursuant to ORS 441.055, may appoint the person or persons to investigate the matter.
(c)The committee appointed to investigate the request for corrective action shall give special notice to the affected member that a complaint which could result in corrective action has been made.
The notice shall describe the specific allegation(s) contained in the complaint and shall inform the member of his rights under this article and Article 6.
(d)The affected member shall be permitted to meet with the investigating committee to make a statement in his own behalf.
This appearance shall not constitute a hearing, shall be informal in nature and none of the procedural rules, hereinafter set forth with respect to hearings shall apply.
(e)If the investigation is delegated to an officer or committee, such officer or committee shall proceed with the investigation in a prompt manner and shall forward a written report of the investigation to the Executive Committee within thirty (30) days after receipt of the request for corrective action.
If the investigation is conducted by the Executive Committee, it shall conclude its investigation within thirty (30) days after the receipt of the request for corrective action.
The Executive Committee will meet within fifteen (15) days at the conclusion of the investigation and shall take action at that time upon the request for corrective action.
(f)As part of the investigation, the Superintendent, with the consultation of the Executive Committee, may require the member to procure an impartial physical or mental examination.
The practitioner who will conduct the examination shall be named by the investigating committee and fees for the examination shall be paid by the hospital.
5.1.6Action by the Executive Committee
(a)The action of the Executive Committee may include a recommendation to the Governing Body acting through the Superintendent that no corrective action be taken, with dismissal of the complaint; issuance of a warning or a letter of admonition, censure or reprimand; that the member's clinical privileges be suspended, reduced, or made subject to requirement of consultation, or his staff membership be suspended or revoked.
Special notice of the Executive Committee's recommendation shall be given to the affected member.
(b)If the action is a recommendation for reduction or suspension of clinical privileges, for a requirement or consultation, or for revocation or suspension of staff membership, the notice shall advise the affected member of his right to a hearing and shall be accompanied by a copy of Article 6 of these bylaws.
If the member submits to the Executive Committee a written request for a hearing, the recommendation shall not be effective, nor final unless the procedures set forth in Article 6 of these bylaws have been fully complied with and final action taken by the Governing Body.
5.1.7Action by the Governing Body
Within fourteen (14) days after receipt of the recommendation of the Executive Committee, the Governing Body shall act thereon.
Such action may be to affirm, to modify by increasing or reducing the corrective action recommended, or to reject the recommendation.
The Superintendent shall notify the Executive Committee in writing and the member by special notice, of the action and of the basis for the Governing Body's decision.
5.2SUMMARY RESTRICTION OR SUSPENSION
5.2.1Criteria for Initiation Whenever a member's conduct appears to require that immediate action be taken to protect the life or well being of patient(s), or to reduce a substantial and imminent likelihood of significant impairment of the life, health, safety of any patient, prospective patient, or other person, the Superintendent may summarily restrict or suspend the staff membership or clinical privileges of such member.
Unless otherwise stated, such summary restriction or suspension shall become effective immediately upon imposition, and the Superintendent shall promptly give notice to the member, the Governing Body and Executive Committee.
The summary restriction or suspension may be limited in duration and shall remain in effect for the period stated or, if none, until resolved as set forth herein.
Unless otherwise indicated by the terms of the summary restriction or suspension, the member's patients, shall be promptly assigned to another member by the Chief Medical Officer.
5.2.2Executive Committee Action No later than fifteen (15) days after such summary restriction or suspension has been imposed, a meeting of the Executive Committee shall be convened to review and consider the action.
Upon request, the member may attend and make a statement concerning the issues under investigation, on such terms and conditions as the Executive Committee may impose, although in no event shall any meeting of the Executive Committee, with or without the member, constitute a "hearing" within the meaning of Article 6, nor shall any procedural rules apply.
The Executive Committee shall issue its decision within five (5) days of the meeting.
The Executive Committee may also modify, continue, or terminate the summary restriction, subject to review by the Superintendent and the Governing Body, but in any event it shall notify the affected member of its decision.
If the Executive Committee does not terminate the summary restriction or suspension, Article 6 shall apply.
5.3AUTOMATIC SUSPENSION OR LIMITATION
5.3.1Licensure
(a)Revocation and Suspension: Whenever a member's licensure or other legal authorizing practice in this state is revoked or suspended, staff membership and clinical privileges shall be automatically revoked as of the date such action becomes effective.
(b)Restriction: Whenever a member's license or other legal authorizing practice in this state is limited or restricted by the applicable licensing or certifying authority, any clinical privileges which the member has been granted at the hospital which are within the scope of said limitation or restriction shall be automatically limited or restricted in a similar manner, as of the date such action becomes effective and throughout its term.
(c)Probation: Whenever a member is placed on probation by the applicable licensing or certifying authority, his or her membership status and clinical privileges shall automatically become subject to the same terms and conditions of the probation as of the date such action becomes effective and throughout its terms.
5.3.2Controlled Substances
(a)Whenever a member's DEA certificate is revoked, limited, or suspended, the member's right to prescribe such medications shall automatically become subject to the same terms, as of the date such action becomes effective and throughout its term.
ARTICLE 6: HEARINGS
6.1INITIATION OF HEARING
6.1.1Grounds for Hearing The following recommendations of the Executive Committee if proposed to be made by the Superintendent shall be grounds for hearing upon timely and proper request by the affected practitioner:
(a)denial of initial staff appointment;
(b)denial of reappointment; (c)suspension of staff membership; (d)revocation of staff membership; (e)denial of requested appointment in staff classification or failure to advance; (f)reduction in staff classification; (g)suspension or limitation of the right to admit patients; (h)denial or restriction of requested clinical privileges; (i)reduction in clinical privileges; (j)suspension of clinical privileges; (k)revocation of clinical privileges; (l)application or increased scope of mandatory consultation requirement after completion of the provisional period.
6.1.2When Deemed Adverse
A recommendation or action listed in part 6.1.1 above is adverse only when it has been:
(a)recommended or approved for forwarding to the Governing Body as provided in the appointment, reappointment, corrective action and hearing provisions of these bylaws, by the Executive Committee; (b)taken by the Governing Body under circumstances in which no prior right to request a hearing existed.
6.2HEARING PROCEDURES
The hospital employee shall be afforded all the hearing and appeal procedures available under the MHDDSD Directive 8.005 (Grievance Procedure--Management Service, Executive Service, and Unclassified Service Employees) and the grievance procedure as defined by Articles 18 and 19 of the collective bargaining agreement.
No part of these bylaws is intended to conflict with this agreement or with MHDDSD Directive grievance procedure, or Public Law 99-660, Title IV, Section 412.
If a conflict exists, the collective bargaining agreement shall prevail.
6.3FINAL ACTION BY THE GOVERNING BODY
Within forty-five (45) days after receipt of the Superintendent's recommendations, the Governing Body shall make its final decision in the matter and send special notice thereof to the Superintendent and to the affected practitioner.
The decision of the Governing Body shall be effective five (5) days after a decision is mailed to the affected practitioner unless specified otherwise in such notice.
ARTICLE 7: OFFICERS
7.1OFFICERS OF THE STAFF
7.1.1Identification The officers of the staff shall be the president, president-elect, past president, and secretary-treasurer.
7.1.2Qualifications Officers must be members of the active medical staff at the time of their nominations and election, and must remain active members in good standing during their term of office.
Failure to maintain such status shall create a vacancy in the office involved.
In addition, officers must be physicians working in direct clinical positions.
7.1.3Nominations
(a)A Nominating Committee shall be appointed by the Executive Committee not later than thirty (30) days prior to the annual staff meeting or at least fourteen (14) days prior to any special election.
The Nominating Committee shall consist of the current president (who shall act as chair), the president-elect, and one other member of the Executive Committee, and two (2) members chosen from among the active medical staff who are not then members of the Executive Committee.
The Nominating Committee shall nominate one or more nominees for each office.
The nominations of the committee shall be reported to the Executive Committee at least fourteen (14) days prior to the annual meeting and shall be delivered or mailed to the voting members of the staff at least ten (10) days prior to the election.
(b)Except as provided in Section 7.1.5, further nominations may be made to any office by any voting member of the staff, provided that the name of the candidate is submitted in writing to the chair of the Nominating Committee and bears the candidate's written consent.
Nominations from the floor will be recognized if the nominee consents.
7.1.4Elections
The president-elect and secretary-treasurer shall be elected by physician members of the staff at the annual meeting of the staff.
Voting shall be by secret ballot, and authenticated sealed mailed ballots may be counted.
Written ballots shall include handwritten signatures on the envelope for comparison with signatures on file, when necessary.
A nominee shall be elected upon receiving a majority of the valid votes cast.
If no candidate for the office receives a majority vote on the first ballot, a run-off election shall be held promptly between the two candidates receiving the highest number of votes.
In the case of a tie on the second ballot, the majority vote of the Executive Committee shall decide the election at its next meeting.
7.1.5Term of Elected Office
Each officer shall serve a one (1) year term, commencing on the first day of the calendar year following his election.
Each officer shall serve in each office until the end of that officer's term or until a successor is elected, unless that officer shall sooner resign or be removed from that office.
At the end of that officer's term, the president shall automatically assume the office of past president and the president-elect shall automatically assume the office of president.
7.1.6Recall of Officers
Except as otherwise provided, recall of a staff officer may be initiated by the Executive Committee, or be initiated by a petition signed by at least one-third of the members of the staff eligible to vote for officers.
Recall shall be considered at a special meeting called for that purpose.
Recall shall require a two-thirds vote of the staff members eligible to vote for staff officers.
7.1.7Vacancies in Elected Office
Vacancies in office occur upon death or disability, resignation, change of clinical duties, or removal of the officer, or loss of membership in the staff.
Vacancies, other than that of the president, shall be filled by appointment by the Executive Committee until the next regular election.
If there is a vacancy in the office of president, then the president-elect shall serve out that remaining term and shall immediately appoint an ad hoc nominating committee to decide promptly upon nominees for the office of president-elect.
Such nominees shall be reported to the Executive Committee and to the staff.
A special election to fill the position shall occur at the next regular staff meeting.
If there is a vacancy on the office of president-elect, that office need not be filled by election, but the Executive Committee shall appoint an interim officer to fill this office until the next regular election, at which time the election shall also include the office of president.
7.2DUTIES OF OFFICERS
7.2.1President The duties of the president shall include, but not be limited to:
(a)enforcing the staff bylaws and rules and regulations, and promoting compliance with procedural safeguards where corrective action has been requested or limited;
(b)calling, presiding at, and being responsible for the agenda of all meetings of the staff; (c)serving as chair of the Executive Committee; (d)serving as an ex officio member of all other staff committees without vote, unless his membership in a particular committee is required by these bylaws; (e)interacting with the Chief Medical Officer and the Superintendent, as representative of the staff, for the quality and efficiency of clinical services and professional performance within the hospital.
The president should work closely with the Chief Medical Officer and Superintendent to keep them well informed about important issues of mutual interest; (f)recommending to the Superintendent committee members for all standing and special staff, liaison, or multi-disciplinary committees, except where otherwise provided by these bylaws; (g)performing such other functions as may be assigned to the president by these bylaws or by the Executive Committee.
7.2.2President-Elect
The president-elect shall assume all duties and authority of the president in the absence of the president.
The president-elect shall be a member of the Executive Committee and shall perform such other duties as the President may assign or as may be delegated by these bylaws, or by the Executive Committee.
7.2.3Immediate Past President
The immediate past president shall be a member of the Executive Committee and shall perform such other duties as may be assigned by the president or delegated by these bylaws, or by the Executive Committee (e.g., introduction of guest speakers at continuing medical education (CME) events).
7.2.4Secretary-Treasurer
The secretary-treasurer shall be a member of the Executive Committee.
The duties shall include, but not be limited to:
(a)keeping accurate and complete minutes of all Executive Committee and general staff meetings; (b)calling meetings on the order of the president or Executive Committee; (c)attending to all appropriate correspondence and notices on behalf of the staff; (d)receiving and safeguarding all funds of the staff; (e)performing such other duties as ordinarily pertain to the office or as may be assigned from time to time by the president.
ARTICLE 8: COMMITTEES
8.1DESIGNATION Staff committees shall include, but not be limited to, the staff meeting as a committee of the whole; meetings of clinical departments; meetings of committees established under Article 9; and meetings of special or ad hoc committees created by the Executive Committee (pursuant to this section).
The committees described in this article shall be the standing committees of the staff.
Special ad hoc committees may be created by the Executive Committee to perform specified tasks.
Unless otherwise specified, the chairman and members of all committees shall be appointed by and may be removed by the Superintendent, upon recommendation of the president, subject to consultation with and approval by the Executive Committee.
Staff committees shall be responsible to the Executive Committee.
8.2GENERAL PROVISIONS
8.2.1Terms of Committee Members Unless otherwise specified, committee members shall be appointed for a term of one (1) year, and shall serve until the end of this period or until the member's successor is appointed, unless the member shall sooner resign or be removed from the committee.
8.2.2Removal If a member of a committee ceases to be a member in good standing of the staff, or loses employment or a contract relationship with the hospital, suffers a loss or significant limitation of practice privileges, or if any other good cause exists, that member may be removed by the Executive Committee.
8.2.3Vacancies Unless otherwise specifically provided, vacancies on any committee shall be filled in the same manner in which an original appointment to such committee is made; provided however, that if an individual who obtains membership by virtue of these bylaws is removed for cause, a successor may be selected by the Executive Committee
8.3EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE
The Executive Committee shall consist of the following persons:
(a)the officers of the staff; (b)six (6) at-large physician members of the active staff who shall be nominated and elected for one (1) term by the physician members of the staff; (c)two (2) at-large non-physician members of the active staff who shall be nominated and elected for one (1) term by non-physician members and who are not directors of their disciplines; (d)Superintendent (ex officio member); (e)Chief Medical Officer (ex officio member).
8.3.1Duties The duties of the Executive Committee shall include, but not be limited to:
(a)representing and acting on behalf of the staff in the intervals between staff meetings, subject to such limitations as may be imposed by these bylaws; (b)coordinating and implementing the professional and organizational activities and policies of the staff; (c)receiving and acting upon reports and recommendations from staff departments, divisions, committees, and assigned activity groups; (d)recommending actions to the Governing Body through the Superintendent on matters of a medical-administrative nature; (e)establishing the structure of the staff, the mechanism to review credentials and delineate individual clinical privileges, the organization of quality assurance activities and mechanisms of the staff, termination of staff membership and fair hearing procedures, as well as other matters relevant to the operation of an organized staff; (f)evaluating the medical care rendered to patients in the hospital; (g)participating in the development of all staff and hospital policy, practice, and planning; (h)reviewing the qualifications, credentials, performance and professional competence, and character of applicants and staff members, and making recommendations to the Governing Body regarding staff appointments and reappointments, assignments to departments, clinical privileges, and corrective action.
The Executive Committee shall meet in closed session with only physician members present when dealing with disciplinary issues of physicians.
(i)taking reasonable steps to promote ethical conduct and competent clinical performance on the part of all members including the initiation of and participation in staff corrective or review measures when warranted; (j)taking reasonable steps to develop continuing medical education activities and programs for the staff; (k)designating such committees as may be appropriate or necessary to assist in carrying out the duties and responsibilities of the staff and approving or rejecting appointments to those committees by the president; (l)reporting to the staff at each regular staff meeting; (m)assisting in the obtaining and maintenance of accreditation and/or licensing; (n)developing and maintenance of methods for the protection and care of patients and others in the event of internal or external disaster; (o)appointing such special or ad hoc committees as may seem necessary or appropriate to assist the Executive Committee in carrying out its functions and those of the staff; (p)reviewing the quality and appropriateness of services provided by contract physicians.
8.3.2Meetings
The Executive Committee shall meet as often as necessary, but at least once a month and shall maintain a record of its proceedings and actions.
8.4CREDENTIALS COMMITTEE
8.4.1Composition They shall consist of not less than six (6) members of the active staff selected on a basis that will ensure, insofar as feasible, representation of major clinical specialties.
Initial or reappointment applications of physicians will be done in the Executive Committee.
The Executive Committee shall meet in closed session with only physician members present when dealing with disciplinary issues of physicians.
8.4.2Duties They shall:
(a)review and evaluate the qualifications of each non-physician practitioner applying for initial appointment, reappointment, or modification of clinical privileges, and, in connection therewith, obtain and consider the recommendations of the appropriate departments; (b)submit required reports and information on the qualifications of each practitioner applying for membership or particular clinical privileges including recommendations with respect to appointment, membership category, department affiliation, clinical privileges, and special conditions; (c)investigate, review and report on matters referred by the president regarding the qualifications, conduct, professional character or competence of any applicant or staff member; (d)submit periodic reports to the Executive Committee on its activities and the status of pending applications.
8.4.3Meetings
The credentials committee shall meet as often as necessary at the call of its chairman.
The committee shall maintain a record of its proceedings and actions and shall report to the Executive Committee.
8.4MEDICAL RECORDS COMMITTEE
8.4.1Composition The Medical Records Committee shall consist of, insofar as possible, at least two (2) physician representatives and two (2) non-physician representatives from the Medical and Allied Health Professional Staff, as well as representatives from the nursing service, the medical records department, and hospital administration.
8.4.2Duties The duties of the Medical Records Committee shall include:
(a)review and make recommendations for staff and hospital policies, rules and regulations relating to medical records, including completion, forms and formats, filing, indexing, storage, destruction, availability and methods of enforcement; (b)provide liaison with hospital administration and medical records personnel in the employ of the hospital on matters relating to medical records practices; and (c)maintain a record of all actions taken and submit periodic reports to the Executive Committee concerning medical records practices in the hospital.
8.4.3Meetings
The Medical Records Committee shall meet as often as necessary at the call of its chair, but at least monthly.
It shall maintain a permanent record of its proceedings and activities, and shall report to the Executive Committee.
8.5UTILIZATION REVIEW COMMITTEE
8.5.1Composition The Utilization Review Committee shall consist of sufficient members to afford, insofar as feasible, representation from all program areas.
Subcommittees may be appointed by the committee for departments or divisions as the committee may deem appropriate.
8.5.2Duties The duties of the Utilization Review Committee shall include:
(a)conducting utilization review studies designed to evaluate the appropriateness of admissions to the hospital, lengths of stay, discharge practices, use of medical and hospital services and related factors which may contribute to the effective utilization of services.
The committee shall communicate the results of its studies and other pertinent data to the Executive Committee and shall make recommendations for the utilization of resources and facilities commensurate with quality patient care and safety; (b)establishing a utilization review plan which shall be approved by the Executive Committee; and (c)obtaining, reviewing, and evaluating information and statistical data obtained or generated by the hospital's case management system.
8.5.3Meetings
The Utilization Review Committee shall meet as often as necessary at the call of its chair, but at least monthly.
It shall maintain a record of its findings, proceedings and actions, and shall make a monthly report of its activities and recommendations to the Executive Committee.
8.6PHARMACY AND THERAPEUTICS COMMITTEE
8.6.1Composition The Pharmacy and Therapeutics Committee shall consist of at least three (3) physician representatives from the staff, including the chairperson, a voting representative from the pharmaceutical service, nursing service, and hospital administration.
8.6.2Duties The duties of the Pharmacy and Therapeutics Committee shall include:
(a)assisting in the formulation of professional practices and policies regarding the evaluation, appraisal, selection, procurement, storage, distribution use, safety procedures, and all other matters relating to drugs in the hospital, including antibiotic usage; (b)advising the staff and the pharmaceutical service on matters pertaining to the choice of available drugs; (c)making recommendations concerning drugs to be stocked on the nursing unit floors and by other services; (d)periodically developing and reviewing a formulary or drug list for use in the hospital; (e)evaluating clinical data concerning new drugs or preparations requested for use in the hospital; (f)establishing standards concerning the use and control of investigational drugs and of research in the use of recognized drugs; (g)maintaining a record of all activities relating to pharmacy and therapeutics functions and submitting periodic reports and recommendations to the Executive Committee concerning those activities; (h)reviewing untoward drug reactions.
8.6.3Meetings
The committee shall meet as often as necessary at the call of its chair but at least bimonthly.
It shall maintain a record of its proceedings and shall report its activities and recommendations to the Executive Committee.
8.7INFECTION CONTROL COMMITTEE
8.7.1Composition The Infection Control Committee shall consist of representatives from the staff, nursing service, administration, and an individual employed in a surveillance or epidemiological capacity.
The chair of the committee shall be the physician epidemiologist.
The committee is established pursuant to Administrative Memorandum 1.002.
8.7.2Duties The duties of the Infection Control Committee shall include:
(a)developing a hospital-wide infection control program and maintaining surveillance over the program; (b)developing a system for reporting, identifying and analyzing the incidence and cause of nosocomial infections, including assignment of responsibility for the ongoing collection and analytic review of such data, and follow-up activities; (c)developing and implementing a preventive and corrective program designed to minimize infection hazards, including establishing, reviewing and evaluating aseptic, isolation and sanitation techniques; (d)developing written policies defining special indications for isolation requirements; (e)coordinating action on findings from the staff's review of the clinical use of antibiotics; (f)acting upon recommendations related to infection control received from the president of the staff, the Executive Committee, departments and other committees; and (g)reviewing sensitivities or organisms specific to the facility.
8.7.3Meetings
The Infection Control Committee shall meet as often as necessary at the call of its chair but at least quarterly.
It shall maintain a record of its proceedings and shall submit reports of its activities and recommendations to the Executive Committee.
8.8BYLAWS COMMITTEE
8.8.1Composition The Bylaws Committee shall consist of at least four (4) physician members of the staff, including at least the president-elect of the staff as the chairperson, immediate past president, and one (1) non-physician member of the staff.
8.8.2Duties The duties of the Bylaws Committee shall include:
(a)conducting a biennial review of the staff bylaws, as well as the rules and regulations and forms promulgated by the staff, its departments and divisions; (b)submitting recommendations to the Executive Committee for changes in these documents as necessary to reflect current staff practices; and (c)receiving and evaluating for recommendation to the Executive Committee suggestions for modification of the items specified in subdivision (a).
8.8.3Meetings
The Bylaws Committee shall meet as often as necessary at the call of its chair but at least annually.
It shall maintain a record of its proceedings and shall report its activities and recommendations to the Executive Committee.
8.9MEDICAL DEPARTMENT CONTINUOUS QUALITY IMPROVEMENT COMMITTEE
8.9.1Composition
The Medical Department Continuous Quality Improvement Committee shall consist of such physician members as may be designated by the Executive Committee.
8.9.2Duties
The Medical Department Continuous Quality Improvement Committee shall perform the following duties:
(a)recommend for approval of the Executive Committee plans for maintaining quality patient care within the hospital.
These may include mechanisms to:
1.establish systems to identify potential problems in patient care; 2.set priorities for action on problem correction; 3.refer priority problems for assessment and corrective action to appropriate departments or committees; 4.coordinate quality improvement activities; and
(b)submit regular confidential reports to the Executive Committee on the quality of medical care provided and on quality review activities conducted.
8.9.3Meetings
The committee shall meet as often as necessary at the call of its chair, but at least monthly.
It shall maintain a record of its proceedings and report its activities and recommendations to the Executive Committee and Governing Body, except that routine reports to the Governing Body shall not include peer evaluations related to individual members.
8.10MORBIDITY AND MORTALITY COMMITTEE
8.10.1Composition The Morbidity and Mortality Committee shall consist of members of the staff and may include, at the discretion of the Executive Committee and Superintendent, health professionals and such other representatives as are appropriate to the function to be discharged.
The chairperson shall be a physician.
8.10.2Duties The Morbidity and Mortality Committee has the following duties and responsibilities:
(a)Review all deaths that occur at Oregon State Hospital in accordance with the Morbidity and Mortality protocol.
Submit a written report of committee findings to the Medical Quality Improvement/Education Committee, Superintendent, Chief Medical Officer, president of the staff, and current committee members The committee should also review serious suicide and homicide attempts clinical significant incidents, transfers to a higher level of care, and deaths within thirty (30) days of discharge.
A psychiatrist appointed by the Superintendent from outside the hospital may act as consultant in suicide reviews.
(b)Select certain cases for clinical review before the staff.
There shall be at least one presentation before the staff each calendar year.
(c)Be aware of the ORS and Oregon State Hospital procedures regarding reporting of medical examiner cases.
(d)Nothing of the above shall preclude the Superintendent or Chief Medical Officer from requesting any professional or professionals from performing an ad hoc review of any death on an urgent or emergent basis.
8.10.3Meeting
The Morbidity and Mortality Committee shall meet as often as necessary at the call of its chair but at least quarterly.
It shall maintain a record of its proceedings and shall submit reports of its activities and recommendations to the Executive Committee.
8.11ETHICS COMMITTEE
The Ethics Committee is to be advisory only.
8.11.1Composition The Ethics Committee chairman shall be a staff physician.
The committee membership shall be composed of a majority of physicians, including at least one (1) internist or family physician.
Other members will include persons representing clinical departments and the community, as deemed appropriate by the Executive Committee.
A subcommittee on education named by the chairman will include an ad hoc member from the Education Department.
8.11.2Duties The Ethics Committee shall:
(a)evaluate ethical issues involved in policy decision; (b)serve as a resource to staff, patients, and family on issues of ethics; (c)sponsor an annual education meeting for hospital staff on ethical issues.
8.11.3Meetings
The Ethics Committee shall meet as often as necessary at the call of its chair but at least quarterly.
It shall maintain a record of its proceedings and shall submit reports of its activities and recommendations to the Executive Committee.
ARTICLE 9: MEETINGS
9.1MEETINGS
9.1.1Annual Meeting
There shall be an annual December meeting of the staff.
The president of the staff or other officers, such as the Executive Committee may designate, shall present reports on actions taken during the preceding year and on other matters of interest and importance to the members.
Notice of this meeting shall be given to the members at least fourteen (14) days prior to the meeting.
9.1.2Regular Meetings Regular meetings of the members shall be held quarterly, except that the annual meeting shall constitute the regular meeting during the quarter in which it occurs.
The date, place and time of the regular meetings shall be determined by the Executive Committee, and adequate notice shall be given to the members.
9.1.3Agenda The order of business at a meeting of the staff shall be determined by the president and Executive Committee.
The agenda shall include, insofar as feasible:
(a)reading and acceptance of the minutes of the last regular and all special meetings held since the last regular meeting; (b)administrative reports from the president, committees, the Chief Medical Officer, and the Superintendent; (c)election of officers when required by these bylaws; (d)reports by responsible officers and committees on the overall results of patient care audits and other quality review, evaluation, and monitoring activities of the staff and on the fulfillment of other required staff functions; (e)old business; (f)new business.
9.1.4Special Meetings
Special meetings of the staff may be called at any time by the president of the Executive Committee, the Chief Medical Officer, or Superintendent.
The person requesting the special meeting shall state the purpose of such meeting in writing.
The meeting shall be scheduled by the Executive Committee within thirty (30) days after receipt of such request.
No later than ten (10) days prior to the meeting, notice shall be mailed or delivered to the members of the staff which includes the stated purpose of the meeting.
No business shall be transacted at any special meeting except that stated in the notice calling the meeting.
9.2COMMITTEE AND DEPARTMENT MEETINGS
9.2.1Regular Meetings Except as otherwise specified in these bylaws, the chairmen of committees may establish the times for the holding of regular meetings.
The chairmen shall make every reasonable effort to ensure the meeting dates are disseminated to the members with adequate notice.
9.2.2Special Meetings A special meeting of any staff committee may be called by the chairman thereof, the Executive Committee, or the president.
9.3QUORUM
9.3.1Staff Meetings The presence of two-thirds of the total members of the active staff at any regular or special meeting in person or through written ballot shall constitute a quorum for the purpose of amending these bylaws or the rules and regulations of the staff or for the election or removal of staff officers.
The presence of fifty (50) percent of such members shall constitute a quorum for all other action.
9.3.2Department and Committee Meetings A quorum of fifty (50) percent of the voting members shall be required for Executive and meetings.
For other committees, a quorum shall consist of fifty (50) percent of the voting members of a committee but in no event less than two (2) voting members.
9.4MANNER OF ACTION
Except as otherwise specified, the action of a majority of the members present and voting at a meeting at which a quorum is present shall be the action of the group.
A meeting at which a quorum is initially present may continue to transact business notwithstanding the withdrawal of members, if any action taken is approved by at least a majority of the members present for such meeting, or such greater number as may be specifically required by these bylaws.
Committee action may be conducted by telephone conference which shall be deemed to constitute a meeting for the matters discussed in that telephone conference.
Valid action may be taken without a meeting by a committee, if a record setting forth the action taken is signed by at least two-thirds of the members entitled to vote.
9.5MINUTES
Except as otherwise specified herein, minutes of meetings shall be prepared and retained.
They shall include, at a minimum, a record of the attendance of members and the vote taken on significant matters.
The original of the minutes shall be signed by the presiding officer of the meeting and forwarded to the Executive Committee to be retained in the staff office.
Any minutes, (including the original and copies), which are privileged under ORS 41.675, as provided for in Article 12, Section 12.2, shall be marked: "Privileged and Confidential" under ORS 41.675.
9.6ATTENDANCE REQUIREMENTS
9.6.1Regular Attendance Except as stated below, each member of the active, and provisional staff, and all members of the temporary staff during the term of appointment who are entitled to attend meetings under Article 3 shall be required to attend:
(a)the annual staff meeting; (b)at least fifty (50) percent of all other general staff meetings duly convened pursuant to these bylaws; and (c)at least fifty (50) percent of all meetings of each committee of which he or she is a member.
9.6.2Absence From Meeting
Any member who is compelled to be absent from any staff or committee meeting shall promptly provide to the regular presiding officer thereof the reason for such absence.
Unless excused for good cause by the presiding officer, failure to meet the attendance requirements may be grounds for removal from such committee or for corrective action.
9.7 CONDUCT OF MEETINGS
Unless otherwise specified, meetings shall be conducted according to Robert's Rules of Order; however, technical or non-substantive departures from such rules shall not invalidate action taken at such a meeting.
ARTICLE 10: CONFIDENTIALITY, IMMUNITY AND RELEASES
10.1AUTHORIZATION AND CONDITIONS
By applying for clinical privileges, an applicant:
(a)authorizes representatives of the hospital and the staff to solicit, provide, and act upon information bearing upon, or reasonably believed to bear upon, the applicant's professional ability and qualifications; (b)authorizes persons and organizations to provide information concerning such practitioner to the staff; (c)agrees to be bound by the provisions of this Article and to waive all legal claims against any representative of the staff or the hospital who acts in accordance with the provisions of this Article; and (d)acknowledges that the provisions of this Article are express conditions to an application for staff membership, the continuation of such membership, and to the exercise of clinical privileges at this hospital.
10.2CONFIDENTIALITY OF INFORMATION
Any information in connection with training, supervision, or discipline of practitioners, or in connection with a grant, denial, restriction, or termination of clinical privileges, including, without limitation, written reports, notes and records of the hospital or the staff or any committee or representative of the hospital or its staff for the purpose of evaluating and improving the quality and efficiency of patient care, reducing morbidity and mortality, contributing to teaching or clinical research, determining that health care services are professionally indicated, or were performed in compliance with the applicable standard of care, or establishing in and enforcing guidelines to keep health care costs within reasonable bounds, is privileged.
Such information shall not be disseminated to anyone other than a representative of this hospital or staff, nor be used in any way except as provided herein, or except as otherwise required by law or authorized by the practitioner.
Such information shall be maintained in a confidential manner by Oregon State Hospital.
Any such information required or permitted by these bylaws or law to be disseminated to the Executive Committee, Superintendent, or others, shall be marked: "Privileged and Confidential Under ORS. 41.675."
10.3IMMUNITY FROM LIABILITY
10.3.1For Action Taken Each representative of the staff and hospital shall be exempt, to the fullest extent permitted by law, from liability to an applicant or member for damages or other relief for any action taken or statements or recommendations made within the scope of duties exercised as a representative of the staff or hospital.
10.3.2For Providing Information Each representative of the medical staff and hospital and all third parties shall be exempt, to the fullest extent permitted by law, from liability to an applicant or member for damages or other relief by reason of providing information to a representative of the staff or hospital concerning such person who is, or has been, an applicant to or member of the staff or who did, or does, exercise clinical privileges or provide services at this hospital.
10.4ACTIVITIES AND INFORMATION COVERED
10.4.1Activities The confidentiality and immunity provided by this Article shall apply to all acts, communications, reports, recommendations, or disclosures performed or made in connection with this or any other health care facility's or organization's activities concerning, but not limited to:
(a)application for appointment, reappointment, or clinical privileges; (b)corrective action; (c)hearings and reviews; (d)utilization reviews; (e)other department, or division, committee, or staff activities related to monitoring and maintaining quality patient care and appropriate professional conduct; (f)peer review organizations, Board of Medical Examiners (BME) and National Practitioners Data Bank (NPDB) or similar reports.
10.5RELEASES
Each applicant or member shall, upon request of the staff or hospital, execute general and specific releases in accordance with the express provisions and general intent of this Article.
Execution of such releases shall not be deemed a prerequisite to the effectiveness of this Article.
10.6CREDENTIALS FILE
10.6.1Credentials File There shall be one credentials file for each member of the Medical and Allied Health Professional Staff and it shall be deemed confidential pursuant to ORS 41.675.
10.6.2Content
(a)Applications, reapplications; (b)Licenses, DEA Number; (c)Evidence of education, experience, Board Certifications (if any); (d)Reference and correspondence related to professional qualifications; (e)All credentials material; (f)National Practitioner Data Bank queries and responses; (g)Quality or disciplinary documents (if any); (h)Other documents and correspondence related to practice; and (i)Other information and practitioner requests to be included.
10.6.3Access
Access to such records is limited to authorized persons with a need to know, i.e. medical and allied health professional staff officers, persons serving on committees, administration personnel, and staff, and only for the purposes of discharging authorized activities and responsibilities.
A practitioner may have access to the practitioner's own credentials file, subject to the following conditions.
(a)The staff member must request access from the president of the medical staff or designee.
Access will be granted within a reasonably short time after the request or the practitioner will be given the reason for denial.
(b)Review shall take place in the office where the records are maintained, during normal business hours with a member of the medical staff office or administration present.
(c)Review is limited to those documents prepared or provided personally by the practitioner.
All other information shall be disclosed only in written summary form.
The summary shall contain the substance, but not the source of the information.
(d)In the event of a corrective action or a hearing, the practitioner shall have access to the information in the file, as required by Sec. 5.1 of the Bylaws. (e)A practitioner may request copies of those documents available for review.
The practitioner may be charged a fee for copying not to exceed the reasonable cost to copy the documents.
A practitioner shall not remove, cancel, destroy, obliterate or change any document in the file.
10.6.4Correction, Deletion or Additions to Information in File
A practitioner may request corrections, deletions or additions to information in the practitioner's file.
The president shall review the request within a reasonable time and decide whether the request will be granted or denied.
If granted, the appropriate action will be taken and the practitioner will be so notified.
If the request is denied, the practitioner will be notified of the reasons for denial.
The practitioner may request a review of the president's decision by the Executive Committee.
This review is not a hearing pursuant to Article 7.
Not withstanding the above, a practitioner has the right to add a short reasonable, relevant, written statement to the practitioner's file to support or rebut any other information contained therein.
ARTICLE 11: ADOPTION OF/AND AMENDMENTS TO BYLAWS
11.1ADOPTION AND AMENDMENT OF BYLAWS Any proposed repeal, amendment or adoption of these bylaws shall be accomplished through a cooperative process involving both the staff and the Governing Body.
Any proposed repeal, amendment or adoption of these bylaws shall be initiated by the Executive Committee in accordance with the following:
(a)the secretary shall notify each staff member of the proposed amendment no later than seven (7) days prior to the anticipated vote; (b)affirmative vote of a majority of qualified staff members present at a regular business meeting with a quorum; (c)bylaws, rules, or regulations are effective upon approval of the Governing Body.
Any proposed repeal, amendment or adoption of these bylaws shall become effective only after such action is approved by the staff and the Governing Body.
Approval shall not be unreasonably withheld by either.
Neither the staff nor the Governing Body shall withhold approval if such repeal, amendment, or adoption is mandated by law, statute, or regulation, or is necessary to obtain or maintain accreditation, or to comply with fiduciary responsibilities or if failure to approve would subvert the stated moral or ethical purposes of the hospital.
STATE OF OREGON
DEPARTMENT OF HUMAN RESOURCES
MENTAL HEALTH AND DEVELOPMENTAL
DISABILITY SERVICES DIVISION
OREGON STATE HOSPITAL
SALEM, OREGON
MEDICAL STAFF BYLAWS
APPROVED BY: President of the Medical Staff_________________________________________________Date_____________ __________
APPROVED BY: Chief Medical Officer________________________________________ Date_______________________
APPROVED BY: Superintendent____________________________________________ Date_______________________
APPROVED BY: Administrator_____________________________________________ Date________________________
Mental Health and Disability Services Division
