[seal.gif] Contact the Mayor Press Releases Speeches Neighborhood City Halls Initiatives Office of Neighborhood Commercial Revitalization Homeland Security PRESS RELEASES FOR RELEASE: June 12, 2003 For More Information Contact: For Immediate Release For More Information Contact: Office of the Mayor Howard Hughey Direct: (313) 224-4034 MAYOR KILPATRICK AND POLICE CHIEF JERRY OLIVER WELCOME AGREEMENT Mayor Kwame M. Kilpatrick and Detroit Police Chief Jerry Oliver said Thursday they welcome an agreement reached with the U.S. Department of Just
There are two separate agreements between the City and the department.
One deals with the use of force as well as arrest and witness detention practices while the other deals with conditions of confinement of prisoners.
"When I took office, I pledged in my inaugural message to undertake a major restructuring of the Police Department," the Mayor said.
"The agreements we have reached provide for exactly the kinds of reforms I had in mind when I made that pledge.
That was why I brought in Chief Jerry Oliver - because he had demonstrated the creativity and resolve needed to bring about fundamental change."
Oliver said, "The agreements reached today with the U.S. Department of Justice is a major milestone in our efforts to bring about constructive change within the Detroit Police Department.
In fact, working with the Board of Police Commissioners we already have implemented or begun implementing some of the revisions to policies, procedures, training, management, supervision and discipline spelled out in this agreement."
The agreement calls for the appointment of an independent monitor, Sheryl L. Robinson of Kroll Associates.
The monitor will provide technical assistance to the department; ensure that the DPD complies with the agreement and issue periodic reports on progress in implementing the reforms.
Among the provisions of the agreement related to the use of force are requirements that the Detroit Police Department: * Revise its policies governing use of force to specify the types of conduct by individuals that would justify the use of various levels of force and specify that de-escalation, area containment or calling in specialized units are often appropriate responses to a situation.
* Require Detroit Police officers to successfully qualify with their department-issued firearms every six months.
* Select an intermediate force device between chemical spray and firearms for use by officers, such as a collapsible baton.
* Revise its chemical spray policy to require a verbal warning and time for a subject to comply with an order prior to the use of chemical spray.
Among the provisions of the agreement related to arrest and witness detention policies are: * The DPD will require written supervisory review of all arrests for probable cause.
* The DPD will develop an internal process to ensure prompt judicial review.
* The DPD will require a court order prior to taking a material witness into custody.
* The DPD will require an accurate and auditable record identifying the length and basis of each detention.
Conditions of the agreement related to confinement of prisoners include: * The DPD will develop and implement a comprehensive fire detection, suppression and evacuation program for all holding cells.
* The DPD will develop a comprehensive medical and mental health screening program for all persons who are arrested.
* The DPD will provide appropriate clothing to all prisoners placed under suicide watch, remove all hazards from holding cells and ensure adequate prisoner checks.
* The DPD will ensure that all holding cells are cleaned and sanitary.
Other conditions of the agreement include: * Revised procedures for receiving, investigating and reviewing misconduct allegations.
* Enhanced supervisory oversight of incidents involving injury of a prisoner and use of force.
* Expansion and enhancement of the department's risk management system.
* Training for all officers and recruits regarding conditions of the agreement between DPD and DOJ.
"I appreciate the openness, candor and commitment that Ralph Boyd and Jeffrey Collins and their staffs and Detroit Corporation Counsel Ruth Carter and her staff have brought to this process," the Mayor said.
"They have worked long and hard to arrive at agreements that serve the best interests of both the people of Detroit and the men and women of the Detroit Police Department.
"I want to emphasize my belief that the men and women who make up the Detroit Police Department are dedicated public servants who literally put their lives on the line every day for the people of this city.
However, the problems that brought in the Justice Department and that are the focus of this agreement are very real problems and this agreement was arrived at out of a shared commitment to eliminating them."
Chief Oliver said the department already has begun implementing changes that are called for in the agreement.
"For instance," he said, "after years of having minimal annual firearms qualifications by department members, a concerted effort by our training staff resulted in more than 3,500 members of the department qualifying with firearms by the end of last year.
Last August we began random audits and inspections of facilities with holding cells and the Detroit Fire Department approved all department emergency action plans.
"In December we purchased the computer hardware needed for a state of the art records management system.
This March we began distributing a completely revised departmental policy manual.
Also in March we reached an agreement to implement a pilot program with Wayne County Sheriff Warren Evans to house prisoners arrested for major/violent crimes at the Wayne County Jail.
"In March and April we began risk management training for all department executives as well as quarterly labor relations seminars for department executives for the first time in department history.
And we have purchased and installed nearly 640 in-car video cameras.
"These are just some of the changes already underway that are mandated by today's agreements.
I look forward to working with the independent monitor as we move forward with these and the other reforms to which we have committed ourselves.
These reforms will produce the kind of police department the people of Detroit want and deserve."
MR-03-59
Directory of City Departments | Office of the Mayor | City Council | City-Clerk Culture and Entertainment | Economic Development | Disclaimer © 2002 - City of Detroit Communications and Creative Services and Information Technology Services Departments.
For information about the City of Detroit's Web site, e-mail Rose Love, Supervising Publicist.
All material is the property of the City of Detroit and may only be used with permission.
