City of Troy Monument Square [spacer_white.gif] [spacer_white.gif]
Claire Davis takes a look at the neighborhood in "the old days" by talking with two sisters who have lived in it all of their lives.
Pleasant DeSpain gives an overview of the neighborhood now by talking with a couple new to it.
Then
By Claire Davis
The Egan sisters, Marion and Shirley, long-time residents of Third Street, still live in the home their parents bought in 1926.
Now aged 80 and 75, they vividly recall their childhood neighborhood from the 1930s to the 1950s.
It abounded with mom-and-pop stores, mostly run by Irish proprietors.
The Bride's and Castle's stores sold candy, toothpaste, paper goods and groceries.
Miller's and McGuiness's grills served food and drink and Leahy's Livery Service and Gas Station cared for transportation needs.
Second Street was the main shopping street.
Marion and Shirley went to Glass' Pharmacy, Bell's and the SS Meat Markets, Teitch's and Backaus' Bakeries, Deihl's and Scarlotta's dry goods stores, The Rivoli Theatre (10 cents in the 1930s for a four-hour show), Powers Plumbing and Burr's General Store.
See OSGOOD, B3 þ
Ice cream was bought at Valley's and shirts were washed and pressed at Kilduff's Laundry.
Suits were tailored at Izzy Gaies' store.
For 2 cents, the Egan children bought "Mary Janes," a yellow paper-wrapped taffy, from an elderly woman on Fourth Street.
Babies were born in St. Joseph's Maternity Hospital on Fourth Street, and kids ice-skated at the nearby rink.
Old-timers were buried by Purcell's Style's or Healy's funeral parlors.
Freihofer's delivered bread from a horse-drawn wagon until the 1950s.
Marion and Shirley remember feeling safe in their neighborhood, as the police substation was right next to the Osgood Firehouse.
The policemen walked the beat and knew all the families by name.
A "peeping tom" began harassing the neighborhood in the 1940s.
The Egan sister's only brother, Jimmy, and a few of his friends, followed a suspicious fellow from Miller's Grill and caught him in the act.
Marion and Shirley's lives centered around family and church.
All seven siblings attended St. Joseph's School and went to the church hall for dances, roller-skating, basketball and talent shows.
Life was pleasant in the Osgood neighborhood.
Neighbors were friendly and watched out for each other.
Today, the Eagans still enjoy their younger neighbors who shovel their walk and check up on them.
They only wish that present day residents had more stores, recreational and social activities like before.
They are pleased that green space will be created under the river front revitalization plan and hope that families will gather there for picnics and sports.
Marion and Shirley hope that the old and new Osgood residents will become friends that last a lifetime, and that their memories will be as wonderful as theirs.
Now
By Pleasant DeSpain
Adam and Michael, an urban couple in their early 30', moved from Albany's Center Square to the Osgood Neighborhood two and a half years ago.
Adam, an anthropologist and Michael, who works in the field of health insurance, both hail from Connecticut.
Weary of renting, they made the decision to purchase their first home.
Friends already living in Troy suggested they explore various grant programs such as TRIP and TAP.
Searching for an affordable Greek Revival or Italianate, single-family home with a garden, they spotted a for sale sign on a house, meeting each requirement, on Third Street.
Asked "Why Troy?" Adam responded, "architecture, diversity, and affordability."
He went on to say that one of his favorite experiences during the past two years has been inviting friends to garden parties during summer evenings in order to listen to the bagpipe bands practicing at Hibernian Hall on Second Street, across the ally.
Adam also remembers the violent shaking of their house on an early Saturday morning, and rushing outside to witness a flag-draped Sherman tank rumbling down Third Street on its way to the Flag Day Parade.
"Only in Troy," he said.
"And it's Troy's emerging culture, the music, restaurants and antique shops that help make our lives more enjoyable.
We like Troy."
If Adam and Michael have a complaint about their neighborhood, it deals with the Police Department's general non-enforcement of noise ordinances.
"Our old windows rattle, shake and even shatter due to extreme sound-systems in cars, the lack of mufflers on motorcycles, and far too many 18-wheelers roaring down Third Street."
"Our vision for Troy during the next ten years is an abundance of citywide green spaces.
We're both involved with community gardens and want to see more beautification.
We also hope for more artistic and cultural venues to attract others to Troy.
The clean-up of the industrial wasteland of our riverfront is vital to this effort."
The Osgood Neighborhood is a better place to live due to recent neighbors such as Adam and Michael.
[spacer_white.gif] Home :: Contact Us :: Employment :: FAQ's :: Other Community Resources :: Site Map :: Privacy Policy
Web Service by: Light 
