Skip Global State Navigation Maine.gov State Agencies | Web Policies | My Maine.gov | Email this page __________________ Go! 2001-2002 STATE OF MAINE DEPARTMENT OF EDUCATION INSTRUCTIONS FOR COMPLETING EF-S-206EZ APPLICATION FOR GIFTED AND TALENTED EDUCATIONAL PROGRAM APPROVAL AND APPROVAL OF PROGRAM COSTS FOR STATE SUBSIDY
Maine law requires school administrative units to establish educational programs that are aligned with the system of Maine's Learning Results for gifted and talented children in the schools of the unit by 2002-2003.
Chapter 104 outlines the requirements for program approval and receipt of State subsidy aid.
Annually, the Office for Gifted and Talented Education of the Maine Department of Education disseminates applications for program approval and approval of program costs for state subsidy to all school administrative units in the state.
The application for approval for the 2001-2002 school year may represent partial or full implementation of the gifted and talented program in the schools of the unit.
School administrative units seeking such approval must demonstrate that all program components they do implement are in full compliance with the rules, principles and procedures delineated in Chapter 104, Educational Programs for Gifted and Talented Children.
The superintendent of the school administrative unit is responsible for supplying all information necessary for a determination that the program is entitled to approval.
The application form must be signed by the superintendent certifying that the form contains information that is accurate at the time of reporting.
Approval status shall be awarded when the Commissioner determines that the program complies with all approval standards related to the degree of implementation of the program.
Upon obtaining approval by the Commissioner, the school unit shall be entitled to operate an approved gifted and talented program and to receive State subsidy.
As of September 30, 2002, approval status shall be awarded when the Commissioner determines that the program complies with all approval standards and represents the full implementation of a comprehensive program for grades kindergarten through twelve.
To maintain program approval status in subsequent years, the following information shall be required annually of each school unit and reported on the EF-S-206 GT Application - EZ.
Each year another component of information may be required to provide information on statewide implementation of gifted and talented programs.
1.
Certification that the gifted and talented program is aligned with the system of Maine's Learning Results and meets state standards as outlined in Chapter 104 and that full documentation of required program components, policies and procedures is available on request.
2.
Any information that represents an alteration, addition, or deletion to any program category as reported and approved in previous applications.
3.
For 2001-2002, the unit's evaluation plan and a copy of the unit's annual evaluation report.
4.
The grade levels served by the program, the numbers of students participating in the program, and the total number of students in the school population.
5.
Regional program information (if applicable).
Currently, regional programs are the only allowable costs under "Tuition-Students".
7.
Program budget.
8.
The EF-S-202, the Annual Update of the Gifted and Talented Educational Program Phase-In Plan.
In this document, all school units report the status of program goals and desired outcomes and report new goals and outcomes as determined through the annual self-evaluation process.
2001-2002 APPLICATION
The following information is required to be on record in the local school administrative unit and available on request, and must reflect the degree of program implementation at the time of reporting.
Information to be submitted on the EF-S-206 EZ is bolded in the following descriptions.
I. PROGRAM PHILOSOPHY : SHARED VISION AND GUIDING PRINCIPLES
The program philosophy or vision statement describes the commitment of the school administrative unit to the education of gifted and talented children and serves as the framework for program design and implementation.
A statement of the gifted and talented program philosophy indicates how this philosophy complements the overall philosophy of the school administrative unit and is an expression of the system's shared vision for learner-centered teaching, learning, and education.
II.
PROGRAM ABSTRACT: STUDENT CENTERED LEARNING
OPPORTUNITIES
A gifted and talented educational program offers opportunities to learn that are aligned with the system of Maine's Learning Results and differentiated from the regular school program in order to meet the advanced, developmental needs of identified children and provide a brief description of the children to be served and the program(s) to be implemented in the school(s) of the unit.
III.
GIFTED AND TALENTED PROGRAM : GOALS, OBJECTIVES AND ACTIV-ITIES : ALIGNMENT OF CURRICULUM, INSTRUCTION, AND ASSESSMENT
A.
For Local Programs a narrative description of the gifted and talented program(s) and services to be offered locally.
Describe specifically the desired program and learner outcomes, goals, objectives and activities of each program component, K-12, and explain how they will be carried out.
Designate the grade level(s), subject area(s), instructional strategies, and delivery model for each component.
Describe program content and specify the amount of time students spend in the program.
State how the program will be personalized to meet identified student needs, what you expect students to gain from the program, and how their accomplishments will be assessed.
Explain how curriculum, instruction and assessment are connected and based on the desired learning results for these students.
For Secondary Programs include a syllabus and curriculum outline describing each course offering.
Secondary courses are limited to 15 students all who have been identified using the district's process of identifying gifted and talented students.
B.
For Regional Programs complete the Regional Program Participant Section of the EF-S-206 EZ if the school administrative unit participates at the secondary level.
Complete the Regional Program Fiscal Agent Section only if the school administrative unit serves as a fiscal agent/host for a regional program.
IV.
IDENTIFICATION PROCESS
Maintain on file in the district, a description of the student selection team, procedure and criteria used for the assessment and selection of students for the program, as well as the policies and procedures established for the review of identification.
(See Chapter 104.10) Please be advised, that to receive program approval and approval for subsidy, that the number of students identified and served in the program may not exceed the requirements of Chapter 104.
V. PROFESSIONAL DEVELOPMENT
A description of the training in which program personnel have participated and the staff development efforts planned.
This may include professional development opportunities for program specialists as well as activities that provide all educators training in ways to personalize education for students.
VI.
PROGRAM STAFFING AND MANAGEMENT: COORDINATION OF PEOPLE, PROGRAMS, AND RESOURCES
An explanation of how the gifted and talented program is organized and managed.
Include a description of the administrative design including staffing patterns, and scheduling of student time in the program, and how people, programs, and resources are linked to create a supportive environment for student learning.
For secondary programs, maintain a copy of the school master schedule.
Highlight the gifted and talented program offerings and note personnel responsible.
For professional staff, auxiliary staff, and independent contractors, complete the information required on page 5.
VII.
PROGRAM EVALUATION
In 2001, submit a description of the annual program self-evaluation process and the results of the annual program evaluation as well as a summary of progress on the school administrative unit's program phase-in plan.
Special circumstances should be noted on the application.
Information may also be provided to describe the relationship and connections between gifted and talented program efforts and school improvement and reform initiatives that recognize and address the learning needs of individual students.
VIII.
BUDGET
All school administrative units applying for program approval must provide an estimate of the total costs of the gifted and talented program as well as the detail on program personnel.
These costs should represent all expenses related to operating the program that are allowable for gifted talented subsidy under Special Education.
Such expenditures must comply with conditions outlined in Chapter 104, Part 4.
The budget section uses the codes of the uniform financial accounting and reporting structure for public elementary and secondary schools in the State of Maine as outlined in Handbook IIR.
Please refer to CHAPTER 104, PART 4 ALLOWABLE COSTS (attached) in preparing the budget page 5.
