1998 Ballot Propositions |
TEXT OF THE AMENDMENT
Be it enacted by the People of the State of Arizona:
Title 13, Chapter 29 is proposed to be amended as follows if approved by a majority of the qualified electors voting thereon and on proclamation of the Governor:
Sec. 1.
Title 13, Chapter 29, A.R.S. is amended by adding new sections 13-2910.03 and 13-2910.04, to read: § 13-2910.03.
COCKFIGHTING; CLASSIFICATION A.
A PERSON COMMITS COCKFIGHTING BY KNOWINGLY: 1.
OWNING, POSSESSING, KEEPING OR TRAINING ANY COCK WITH THE INTENT THAT SUCH COCK ENGAGE IN AN EXHIBITION OF FIGHTING WITH ANOTHER COCK. 2.
FOR AMUSEMENT OR GAIN, CAUSING ANY COCK TO FIGHT WITH ANOTHER COCK OR CAUSING ANY COCKS TO INJURE EACH OTHER.
3.
PERMITTING ANY ACT IN VIOLATION OF PARAGRAPH 1 OR 2 TO BE DONE ON ANY PREMISES UNDER HIS CHARGE OR CONTROL.
B. COCKFIGHTING IS A CLASS 5 FELONY.
C. FOR PURPOSES OF THIS SECTION AND SECTION 13-2910.04, COCK MEANS ANY MALE CHICKEN, INCLUDING GAME FOWL EXCEPT WILDLIFE AS DEFINED IN A.R.S § 17-101.
§ 13-2910.04.
PRESENCE AT COCKFIGHT; CLASSIFICATION ANY PERSON WHO IS KNOWINGLY PRESENT AT ANY PLACE OR BUILDING WHERE PREPARATIONS ARE BEING MADE FOR AN EXHIBITION OF THE FIGHTING OF COCKS, OR IS PRESENT AT SUCH EXHIBITION, IS GUILTY OF A CLASS 1 MISDEMEANOR.
Sec. 2 Renumber
Sections 13-2910.03 and 13-2910.04, Arizona Revised Statutes, are renumbered as 13-2910.05 and 13-2910.06 respectively.
Sec. 3.
Section 13-2910.05, A.R.S., as renumbered, is amended to read: § 13-2910.05.
Exempt activities Activity involving the possession, training, exhibition or use of an animal in the otherwise lawful pursuits of hunting, ranching, farming, rodeos, shows and security services shall be exempt from the provisions of §§ 13-2910.01, [DEL: and :DEL] 13-2910.02, 13-2910.03 AND 13-2910.04.
Sec. 4.
.
Section 13-2910.06, A.R.S., as renumbered, is amended to read: § 13-2910.06.
Defense to cruelty to animals and bird fighting It is a defense to §§ 13-2910, 13-2910.01, [DEL: and :DEL] 13-2910.02, 13-2910.03 AND 13-2910.04 that the activity charged involves the possession, training, exhibition or use of a bird or animal in the otherwise lawful sports of falconry, animal hunting, rodeos, ranching or the training or use of hunting dogs.
ANALYSIS BY LEGISLATIVE COUNCIL
(In Compliance With A.R.S.
Section 19-124)
Proposition 201 would amend state law to create the crime of cockfighting by prohibiting a person from knowingly:
1.
Owning, possessing, keeping or training a male chicken ("cock") with the intent that the cock fight with another cock.
2.
Causing any cock to fight with or injure another cock for the amusement or gain of the person.
3.
Allowing any of the above described acts to occur on the person's property.
In addition, state law would prohibit a person from knowingly being present at a place where preparations are being made for a cockfight or where a cockfighting exhibition takes place.
Cockfighting would be classified as a class 5 felony, generally punishable by a possible fine of up to $150,000 and a possible prison term ranging from nine months to two years.
Presence at a cockfight would be classified as a class 1 misdemeanor, generally punishable by a possible fine of up to $2,500 and a possible jail term of up to six months.
This proposition would extend existing state law animal cruelty exemptions and defenses that apply to lawful hunting, ranching, farming, rodeos and related activities to also apply to cockfighting.
ARGUMENT "FOR" PROPOSITION 201
It's Time to End the Cruelty
Hundreds and sometimes even thousands of roosters fight and die in a single weekend at Arizona's 45 cockfighting pits.
They are usually first injected with stimulants and they always have steel blades strapped to their legs.
At the start of each fight, and when they stop fighting, the birds are held in each others face to make them angry.
Whether this practice exists because some people enjoy watching animals die or because it makes gambling more interesting, it is clearly wrong.
A "yes" vote on this measure would ban cockfighting.
There are good reasons why most states banned this barbaric practice more than 100 years ago.
It is obviously cruel.
It is unhealthy for the children who are routinely brought to the fights.
And it is bad for Arizona's image to be a haven for animal fighting.
Vote "yes" on Proposition 201.
End the cruelty!
Jamie Massey, Chairperson Citizens Against Cockfighting Tucson
ARGUMENT "FOR" PROPOSITION 201
VOTE `YES' ON PROPOSITION 201 TO BAN COCKFIGHTING COCKFIGHTING IS CRUEL, BARBARIC, AND REPREHENSIBLE
It is cruel and inhumane to set roosters against one another in a "pit" and force them to fight to the death.
It subjects these animals to excruciating suffering for mere human entertainment.
The American Veterinary Medical Association "condemns" cockfights.
COCKFIGHTERS ATTACH KNIVES OR OTHER SHARP IMPLEMENTS TO THE BIRDS' LEGS
Cockfighters attach razor-sharp knives or gaffs (1 ½ to 3 inch blades curved like bayonets) to the birds' legs to diminish the likelihood of a long fight and to assure that spectators see blood.
The knives and gaffs puncture lungs, gouge eyes, pierce heads and inflict all manner of injuries during fights, assuring that there are no winners in cockfighting.
COCKFIGHTERS PUMP THE ANIMALS FULL OF STIMULANTS
Cockfighters pump the birds full of stimulants to enhance their aggression and assure that they will attack one another in the pit.
COCKFIGHTING SENDS THE WRONG MESSAGE TO CHILDREN
Encouraging children to watch cockfights desensitizes them to the suffering of animals.
Children who are cruel to animals often direct their violent tendencies to people.
HUMANE ADVOCATES, LAW ENFORCEMENT OFFICIALS, CHILDREN'S ADVOCATES, HISPANIC ASSOCIATIONS, AND ARIZONA'S MAJOR NEWSPAPERS OPPOSE COCKFIGHTING.
The fights not only involve animal cruelty and desensitizing of children, but also drug use and gambling among spectators.
That's why so many organizations and groups support Proposition 201.
The Arizona Republic (5/29/98) says cockfighting is "a terrible spectacle during which hapless combatants are bullied and bloodied for no good reason."
ARIZONA SHOULD BECOME THE 46^TH STATE TO BAN COCKFIGHTING
It is time for Arizona to ban this blood sport.
THE HUMANE SOCIETY OF THE UNITED STATES URGES A "YES" VOTE ON PROPOSITION 201 Paul G. Irwin, President Wayne Pacelle, Senior Vice President The Humane Society of the Communications and Government Affairs United States The Humane Society of the United States Washington, DC Washington, DC
ARGUMENT "FOR" PROPOSITION 201
Argument For Proposition 201
On behalf of the Humane Farming Association, the nation's largest farm animal issues organization, I join with members of Arizona's law enforcement community, veterinarians, and other concerned citizens in urging a YES on proposition 201.
Almost every state in the union has long ago outlawed cockfighting in order to prevent needless suffering, as well as to stop the criminal activity that has long been associated with cockfights.
Don't let those who profit from misery cloud the facts.
The issue is clear.
Cockfighting is a cruel and barbaric blood sport that has no place in a civilized society.
Your vote can now be a powerful expression of compassion.
Please vote YES on 201.
Bradley S. Miller Cynthia Kaufman National Director Vice President The Humane Farming Association The Humane Farming Association San Rafael, California San Rafael, California
ARGUMENT "FOR" PROPOSITION 201
Argument "For" Proposition 201
I endorse the initiative to ban cockfighting in Arizona.
I believe that cockfighting is a cruel bloodsport whose time has come and gone.
In addition, I support the proposed ban because a variety of criminal activities including gambling, drug possession, rape, illegal weapon possession, and homicide have been associated with cockfighting.
As a member of the law enforcement community, I want to voice my support for this measure.
A cockfighting ban in Arizona will help curb this ongoing, associated criminal activity.
Clarence W. Dupnik Tony Estrada Frank R. Reyes Pima County Sheriff Santa Cruz County Sheriff Pinal County Sheriff Tucson Nogales Florence
Larry A. Dever Joe D. Richards Allen Williams Cochise County Sheriff Coconino County Sheriff Greenlee County Sheriff Bisbee Flagstaff Clifton
Joe M. Rodriguez Ralph E. Ogden Marvin L. Hare Sr. Gila County Sheriff Yuma County Sheriff La Paz County Sheriff Globe Yuma Parker
Tom Sheahan Mohave County Sheriff Kingman
Paid for by Citizens Against Cockfighting; Jamie Massey, Chairperson
ARGUMENT "FOR" PROPOSITION 201
Argument "For" Proposition 201
It is the policy of the American Veterinary Medical Association that cockfighting is cruel and that it should be illegal in all 50 states.
As veterinarians, we agree with this policy and urge you to vote Yes on Proposition 201.
Cockfighting is cruelty to animals.
The steel blades that are tied to the roosters' legs puncture lungs and put out eyes.
The losers die a very pointless death.
Often the "winning" birds die of their injuries as well.
We feel as our clients do.
We are amazed that cockfighting is still legal in Arizona and that citizens have to go to such lengths to abolish this cruel and unnecessary practice.
Yes on 201.
Janet M. Forrer, DVM Donald L. DeShazer, DVM Alexander B. Koss, DVM Tucson Tucson Phoenix
Michael P. Lent, DVM Jack E. Quick, DVM Randy Walker, DVM Tucson Tucson Chandler
Clifford L. Wright, DVM Kristen E. Nelson, DVM Sophia Kaluziacki, DVM Kingman Kingman Green Valley
Patricia Johnson, DVM Barbara L. Swahlen, DVM Paul Hurtado, DVM Phoenix Tucson Tucson
Debra Agapito, DVM Irwin A. Ingram, DVM Mary K. Klein, DVM Mesa Scottsdale Tucson
Paula Tyler, DVM Carl Wm. Oberg, DVM S. Bradley Fairall, DVM Benson Tucson Tucson
Berney Mangone, DVM Michael J. Ames, DVM Chris Burgess, DVM Tucson Douglas Page
H. Arlene Ross, MD John P. Lindsay, DVM Pam Clark, DVM Phoenix Bullhead City Bullhead City
Debera Butler, DVM Tracy Wight, DVM Karen S. Claus Glendale Chandler Tempe
Sandra Rogers-Vannett, Tim Ireland, DVM Rainy Teegerstrom, DVM DVM Tucson Tucson Prescott
Candy D. Burton, DVM Jan Sauerwein Enderle, Jon R. Underwood, DVM Tucson DVM Dewey Mesa
Sally C. Underwood, DVM Julia Lynn, DVM Dana S. Luse, DVM Dewey Prescott Valley Prescott Valley
A. Annette Brunner, DVM Cheri Lynn Potter, DVM Judi Keller, DVM Prescott Valley Prescott Valley Tucson
Rebecca L. Marche, DVM Kelly Moffet, DVM Kim R. Perkins, DVM Tucson Mesa Sierra Vista
Paid for by Citizens Against Cockfighting; Jamie Massey, Chairperson
ARGUMENT "FOR" PROPOSITION 201
Argument In Favor of Prop. 201
Arizona's leading newspapers are asking voters to say YES to Proposition 201, which would make cockfighting a crime.
What do they say? o Cockfighting is cruel and uncivilized.
The event involves strapping razor-sharp knives on the legs of birds, which are often drugged to make them more aggressive, and watching them slash each other to death ... you, the humane reader, have a chance to end the nastiness" (The Arizona Republic, May 29, 1997).
The Republic also recognizes cockfighting as "animal abuse" that "desensitizes children and adults to violence and suffering."
o If you thought cockfighting was illegal long ago, or should be, you're not alone.
Many Arizonans don't realize this horrific spectacle that goes on routinely features curved steel knives on the bird's legs to puncture lungs, break wings and leg bones, and gouge eyes.
Yet it is still legal in Arizona - - one of only five states where this barbarity goes on."
(The Arizona Daily Star, February 9, 1998.)
o "There can be no logical reason to continue allowing such a cruel and disgusting `sport' to be practiced in Arizona."
(The Tucson Citizen, June 10, 1997). o "The activity is cruel, vicious and inhumane.
It exposes children to sanctioned cruelty to animals and many experts fear that `gambling on death' can desensitize children to violence against animals."
(The Green Valley News and Sun, June 4, 1997.)
o The Sun Times of La Paz County called cockfighting arenas its coverage area "a haven for gambling ... regularly attended by children who witness the bloody massacre of animals."
The Mesa Tribune, The Scottsdale Progress Tribune and the Douglas Dispatch have also endorsed Proposition 201.
End the cruelty, the bloodshed, the violence.
Join Arizona's leading newspapers and vote YES on Proposition 201.
Douglas Tessendorf Kenneth D. White President Executive Director Arizona Humane Society Board of Arizona Humane Society Directors Scottsdale Mesa
Paid for by the Arizona Humane Society; Kenneth D. White, Executive Director
ARGUMENT "FOR" PROPOSITION 201
Argument In Favor of Prop. 201
At long last, Arizona voters have the opportunity to ban the cruel blood sport of cockfighting by voting YES on Proposition 201.
Arizona is one of five states where this barbaric practice is still legal; where children can watch as birds are drugged with stimulants, fitted with steel blades and forced to fight to a bloody death before spectators, many of whom bet illegally on which bird will die first.
By voting YES on Proposition 201, you are outlawing a blood sport which not only glorifies violence and killing in these increasingly violent times, but also desensitizes children to the needless suffering and death of innocent beings.
And you are not alone.
A 1997 survey by an independent polling firm found 80 percent of those questioned said they will support this initiative.
Ninety percent said cockfighting is cruel and inhumane; 66 percent said cockfighting exposes children to violence and animal cruelty and teaches them that cruelty is okay; and 59 percent said "gambling on death" is not acceptable.
The survey found support for the ban regardless of voters' race, age, gender, political affiliation, education or income.
In addition, the sheriffs of 10 Arizona counties support a YES vote on Proposition 201.
They agree cockfighting is a cruel blood sport and believe it is linked to murder, rape, drug possession and other crimes.
While some legislators have not made this issue a priority, Arizona voters have.
More than 188,000 of you signed petitions so this initiative would be on the November ballot.
With your approval, cockfighting will be a Class 5 felony - - the same as dog fighting in Arizona.
Spectators at cockfights will be guilty of a Class 1 misdemeanor.
And Arizona will be among the majority of states where this barbaric practice is a crime.
Kenneth D. White, Executive Director Philip Morton, Arizona Humane Society Vice-President For Finance Scottsdale The Arizona Humane Society Scottsdale
ARGUMENT "FOR" PROPOSITION 201
At a recent Executive Board Meeting, we discussed the subject of cockfighting in Arizona and we are in agreement with the position of the American Veterinary Medical Association which is: the AVMA actively supports law against the use of dogs for dog fights and poultry for cock fights.
Further, the AVMA recommends that dog fighting and cock fighting be considered a felony offense.
The AzVMA agrees with this position statement.
If you need further information, please don't hesitate to contact me.
Judy Grana Mark H. Trueblood, DVM Executive Director Past President, AzVMA Arizona Veterinary Medical Association Arizona Veterinary Medical Phoenix Association Glendale
Paid for by the Arizona Humane Society; Kenneth D. White, Executive Director
ARGUMENT "FOR" PROPOSITION 201
MUJER, INC., a non-profit organization established in 1981, concentrates on making Hispanic women aware of the need to focus on modern-day issues.
I am pleased to announce our support of the initiative to ban cockfighting in Arizona.
We agree that cockfighting is a cruel and inhumane practice in which animals suffer and die for the pleasure of spectators.
We agree that it exposes children to violence and animal cruelty and desensitizes children to animal suffering.
We understand that it has been suggested that cockfighting is somehow a cultural issue for Arizona's Hispanic Community.
We are insulted by this suggestion.
Arizona's rich Hispanic Heritage will not be impacted by passage of this initiative.
We believe that cockfighting is a cruel anachronism whose time has come and gone.
As Hispanic citizens of Arizona, we want cockfighting made illegal! Gloria Dominguez Iris Garcia Maes President, MUJER, Inc.
Board of Directors member, Phoenix MUJER, Inc.
Chandler
Paid for by Arizona Humane Society; Kenneth D. White, Executive Director
ARGUMENT "AGAINST" PROPOSITION 201
I oppose the initiative to ban cockfighting-Prop 201.
America was founded on life, liberty and the pursuit of happiness, the right to be different as long as it does not harm society.
Not everyone desires to be a clone of the politically correct.
We cause no harm to anyone and simply want to be left alone.
A felony is a serious crime causing irreparable harm, damage to property, public endangerment or loss of human life.
Yet abortion is not even a misdemeanor.
The message seems to be that human rights have lower priority than those of birds.
Birds being scientifically classified beneath animals.
What's wrong with this picture? Cockfighting and ownership a felony, but abortion's acceptable? It is not a felony to own vicious dogs! Gamefowl do not kill people.
Contrary to packaged propaganda and outright lies, we come from all walks of life and ethnic backgrounds.
Hispanics being dominant in Arizona.
No studies exist proving any of the wild accusations maligning cockfighting such as causing criminal behavior or warping minds.
I am a retired Marine and raise gamefowl as my hobby.
I have observed firsthand that cocking around the world has zero impact on society.
My children all grew up normal, all graduated .
Sorry, no police records.
We all love animals, having four dogs and three cats.
No one chose my hobby, but my family affirms my right to practice cocking.
Slaughter chickens are genetically mutated to grow full size in 45 days.
Egg layers are stuffed in small cages, to live until a computer flags egg production down.
Who weeps for them? Game roosters are first tested at two years.
They cannot be forced to fight.
All we do is physically condition them.
Affirm the Bill of rights and vote no!
MSgt F. Allmendinger USMC Retired Phoenix
ARGUMENT "AGAINST" PROPOSITION 201
Citizens of Arizona, please help a person understand why a few parasites can change my life and a long standing tradition.
Should a person be able to live off of other people and not do anything but use misinformation to keep the public so agitated that they don't remember their priorities?
What happened to battered children, the homeless, education, or our older generation that have been abandon?
How can a chicken take precedence over these items?
The only way management of the Humane Society make their six figure salary and large perks is by taking something insignificant such as chicken fighting and agitate the public to a furor.
How many rights will we the public lose before we can't hunt, fish, go to a rodeo, or even a boxing match?
Remember most of us have fought and some died for our rights which are slowly being taken away by people who want nothing more than money in their pockets.
VOTE NO ON PROPOSITION 201
John A. Parker Native Arizonan Officer in Green Berets Businessman Concerned Son of Arizona Phoenix
ARGUMENT "AGAINST" PROPOSITION 201
Anti-cocking forces invariably base their campaigns on certain falsehoods concerning the character of the gamecock and the sport of cockfighting.
One falsehood is that the cocks are trained to fight.
Nothing could be less true.
Gamecocks like all male chickens are genetically programmed to fight.
A vast majority of the roosters that are killed or injured each year by fighting are not gamecocks but commercial breeding roosters in the henhouse.
ALL roosters fight voluntarily.
Gamecocks are never trained to fight!
A second falsehood is that cocks are forced to fight.
A little thought will show that this is impossible.
Imagine trying to force two birds, say two hens or two canaries or two pigeons to fight.
How would you go about it? You can't threaten them.
Male chickens fight spontaneously because they are genetically programmed to fight.
Even in a formal cockfight, a cock can quit fighting at any time.
Even the allegation that cockfighting is cruel is not based on any facts.
Since the cocks fight spontaneously and continue to fight voluntarily despite injuries, isn't that evidence that the cocks do no experience conscious pain such as a human would feel? Remember that the cock can quit fighting at any point in the fight.
Many of the anti-cocking activists also oppose rodeo, hunting and fishing, falconry, and any commercial or medical use of animals.
I believe that part of the reason is a radical and closed mindset that opposes all things rural and all rural traditions.
Is it wrong to be suspicious of activists who find it necessary to use repeated misrepresentations to further their agenda? Because its basic premises and its rationale include several deliberate falsehoods, this Initiative Measure should be defeated.
Donald P. Hollis, Ph.D Chehalis, WA
ARGUMENT "AGAINST" PROPOSITION 201
Against Initiative
My wife and I have both served our country in the military; one in the Marines and one in the Air Force.
I am a retired Police Officer.
Both my wife and I are still employed full time in good positions.
We raised 6 children; a doctor, a math professor, a store manager, an ASU student graduating next spring, and another student graduating in 2 years as well as our newest graduate from ASU this last January... ...6 good kids out of 6!
I have been familiar with gamefowl and cockfighting for forty years in various states and countries.
I have learned that cockfighting is a part of a culture that has been handed down over the centuries.
It has been a part of our own country's early history.
Gamefowl are wild birds, unlike the chickens they resemble.
The males defend their flock, train the young by example and fight to survive.
Each male must be penned separately due to their instinct to fight another male.
These are the natural laws of the wild.
I have raised gamefowl since I was 12 years old.
I find that Gamefowl raising is more than a hobby for me.
It is a commitment to maintain the ethical standards of the sport, to perpetuate a species that may become extinct, and to enjoy the friendships of fellow sportsmen.
This initiative wants to make even the RAISING of gamefowl a FELONY! (Under the present law, a felony is a criminal activity such as criminal damage $2000 - $10,000; theft of property up to $2,000; theft of credit card or fraudulent schemes.)
Protect the rights granted to all of us under our constitution and vote NO on this initiative Prop. 201
James H. Allen Mesa
ARGUMENT "AGAINST" PROPOSITION 201
Against Initiative
In Arizona, gamefowl raisers include my husband, ranchers, school board members, policemen, millionaires, retired people, council members, mechanics, school bus drivers, carpenters, hobbyists and hundreds more from all walks of life.
These are good Arizona families with children not involved in gangs or drugs.
After their schoolwork, home chores and tending to their fowl...little idle time is left.
The daily responsibilities of caring for their fowl builds character and self discipline.
As an 30 year educator, I know how important a strong family life is.
People who raise gamefowl add to the economy of our state.
They buy feed, medicines, fencing, and numerous other items.
They have contributed to the advance of science by finding and using new methods of medicating poultry which, in turn, they pass on to other poultry and bird producers.
Most people involved in this sport and most people who attend the family oriented meets are ethical, honest people who respect and obey the laws of the state and country.
They police their own.
They do not tolerate drugs, or drug use, organized crime, prostitution or Anti-Americanism.
Based on the right of freedom, I urge you to vote "No" .
Prop 201.
Joy Allen Mesa
ARGUMENT "AGAINST" PROPOSITION 201
I oppose the initiative to ban cockfighting
In our state for a hundred or more years cockfighting has been a part of our history and culture along with horse racing, music, and great feasts; Cockfighting has never been a problem in Arizona.
Arizona is a blend of many cultures and races and has been for all of it's history..
Our state is thriving and growing because of our freedoms and rights.
Do not vote to take away any of these freedoms.
Your life style has never been effected by this sport nor will it ever be.
This sport is not for everyone, if you don't like it stay away.
That is one of your rights, but please respect my rights, and think! Your rights may be up next.
VOTE NO ON PROP NUMBER 201
Belton Hodges Phoenix
ARGUMENT "AGAINST" PROPOSITION 201
PLEASE VOTE NO ON THE INITIATIVE SO STOP COCK FIGHTING IN ARIZONA.
THE ACTUAL FIGHTING OF THESE GAMECOCKS THAT ARE A SPECIAL BREED ORIGINATING IN THE JUNGLES AROUND THE WORLD IS ONLY A VERY SMALL PART OF THE HOBBY.
WE RAISE THESE GAMECOCKS FROM THE EGG, THEY ARE GIVEN THE BEST POSSIBLY CARE THAT WE CAN GIVE THEM FROM THE DAY THEY ARE HATCHED THIS IS THE PART THAT WE ENJOY THE MOST.
THESE COCKS ARE TWO YEARS OLD BEFORE THEY ARE CONSIDERED FOR FIGHTING BECAUSE THAT IS WHEN THEY ARE FULLY MATURED, SO WE HAVE SPENT TWO YEARS LOVING, ADMIRING, 
THE HARDIEST THING IS KEEPING THESE COCKS SEPARATE FROM OTHER COCKS BECAUSE CONTRARY TO WHAT THE ANIMAL RIGHTS GROUPS WOULD LIKE YOU TO BELIEVE THESE COCKS WOULD RATHER FIGHT THAN ANYTHING ELSE IN THEIR WORLD.
IF PEOPLE REALLY UNDERSTOOD THESE COCKS THEY WOULD UNDERSTAND WHY WE LOVE AND ADMIRE THEM SO MUCH.
WE DO NOT MAKE THEM FIGHT, IT SEEMS MORE CURL TO NOT ALLOW THEM TO FIGHT SOME TIME IN THEIR LIFE THAN IT DOES TO ALLOW THEM TO FIGHT.
I HAVE ENJOYED THIS HOBBY FOR TWENTY FIVE YEARS I AM IN A MANAGEMENT POSITION OF A VERY LARGE BUSINESS IN PHOENIX.
FEEDING AND NURTURING THESE COCK HAS BEEN A GREAT STRESS RELIEVER FOR ME I DO NOT DRINK OR USE DRUGS, I HAVE RAISED TWO CHILDREN THAT ANY PARENT WOULD BE PROUD OF, I HAVE NEVER BEEN CONVICTED OF ANY CRIME MORE SEVERE THAN A SPEEDING TICKET.
THESE ANIMAL RIGHTS GROUPS WANT TO MAKE IT A FELONY TO RAISE AND FIGHT THESE COCK, THEY WANT TO BE ABLE TO TAKE THEM FROM US SO THEY CAN KILL THEM AND MAKE THEM EXTINCT.
DOES THIS SEEM RIGHT ???
Clifford Osborn Buckeye
ARGUMENT "AGAINST" PROPOSITION 201
I am in opposition to initiative # 201
I would like to clarify a few misconceptions.
Fighting cocks are not forced to fight, they are hatched with this natural biological function.
Chickens do not make true pets.
They are incapable of giving or receiving any of the emotions and feelings dogs, cats, and other mammals are capable of sharing and therefore are not comparable to these animals.
Families that raise game fowl and attend competitions are not desensitized.
Most families that attend cockfights are close knit, still living and teaching "good old fashioned American values" that are now so socially unpopular.
Cockfighters do not raise serial killers and rapists.
Contrary to popular accusations, Ted Bundi, Jeffery Daummers, Charles Manson etc. were not affiliated with nor did they ever attend a cockfight.
Instead of making your favorite professional athlete, doctor, teacher, friend at church or neighbor a felon, please vote "NO" on proposition # 201 that will cause even owning these fowl to be a felony and the fowls themselves to be euthanized.
Russell Mortensen Phoenix
ARGUMENT "AGAINST" PROPOSITION 201
In opposition to Initiative #201
We have a right to choose and these advocates are out right telling us what we can do and what we can't do.
These people that fight game fowl spend hundreds and thousands of dollars in taxes buying feed, medical books and supplements, bands, vaccines, pen scales, etc.
We as Mexican-Americans have fought in wars to defend our country and we will keep on fighting for our rights.
We are within our rights and I as a feed store owner, make a living out of these game fowl and I myself pay thousands of dollars in taxes and permits.
Ramon Trujillo Phoenix
ARGUMENT "AGAINST" PROPOSITION 201
I'm writing this letter to voice my opposition to the initiative-banning cockfighting in Arizona, because this "Initiative" violates my basic human right to pursue happiness the way I choose to.
It also suppresses my tradition and cultural heritage.
My country of origin is the Philippine Islands.
Just as football to America, bull fighting to Spain and soccer to the majority of the world, cockfighting is a cultural pastime that brings the community together.
Why are White, Massey et al trying very hard to ban "Our" sport? We are just a small group minding our own business! Why can't White, Massey et al ban hunting (deer 
What is he talking about, a lot of "B.S."
What about kids shooting and killing kids with guns, youngsters smoking cigarettes? I think White, Massey et al have a misdirected priority.
They should devote their efforts and money to the more serious human problems we have now.
There are millions of dogs and cats that "They" kill each year.
The bottom line is these poor animals are dead too, of a humane way.
I can imagine what will happen if White, Massey et al would try to ban football in America.
To me, football is the American culture sport.
Compared to "Our" sport, I have never heard and seen any human death or suffering directly related to cockfighting.
I have never been affected in any negative way by cockfighting.
I am a caring and loving father of seven wonderful children, who all are mostly professionals, as well as, a caring and loving physician.
This is very much to the contrary to the beliefs of Mr. White, Massey et al.
G. P. Abaqueta, M.D. Phoenix
ARGUMENT "AGAINST" PROPOSITION 201
To the Citizens and Voters of Arizona,
In regards to the cockfighting initiative, what is a CLASS 5 FELONY?
The following qualify as a class 5 felony which has a maximum fine of $150,000 and a maximum penalty of two years in state prison.
- custodial interference - e.g. in a divorce, one parent takes a child across state lines, without court approval, and refuses visitation to the other parent.
- criminal damage to property, the value of which is more than $2000 and less that $10,000.
- credit card fraud
- computer fraud in the 2nd degree - accessing, altering, or damaging a computer system without authorization.
- taking the identity of another person - name, birth date, Soc. Sec. number with the intent of using the identity for unlawful purposes.
- obstructing a criminal investigation or prosecution.
- influencing a witness.
- a juror receiving a bribe
- rioting
The above seem to be crimes of fraud against other people, or the judicial system.
Does cockfighting belong in this category? Do chickens have more rights than humans? Do you want your tax dollars spent chasing cockfighters or criminals? Vote "NO" on this Initiative.- Prop. 201
Daniel G. Pelzer Mesa
ARGUMENT "AGAINST" PROPOSITION 201
I oppose this Initiative # 201
Cockfighting is not a felonious act.
Twenty-three times in the last 30 years these humaniacs have gone to the legislature and demanded that their animal rights agenda be fulfilled and cockfighting be made a felony.
Twenty-three times the legislature listened to their lies and decided that Arizonans would not fall for them.
Our legislature decided 23 times that personal freedom was the most precious gift our fore fathers gave to us and no special interest group should have the right to take away our personal freedom.
The legislature showed great wisdom and courage 23 times - I ask you, the Arizona voters to show it one more time.
Raylene Maldonado Tolleson
ARGUMENT "AGAINST" PROPOSITION 201
I oppose the "Ban Cockfighting Initiative".
- Prop. 201
Being an Hispanic American revised in southwest Arizona and as a son of a farm labor family known as Campesinos,living in this country has always seemed a privilege.
Being a third generation cockfighter with roots which extend into northeastern Mexico, I have a always enjoyed the right to raise, train, and fight my fowl wherever I like.
If this initiative is approved, I and my family will lose a deep rooted part of my heritage and part of the freedom which my father fought for and believed in,
Slowly this country is being overrun by people or organizations such as the animal rights group.
These people have never been around roosters or a rooster fight, yet they feel they can dictate to us what we can and cannot do - even if it means sending hardworking members of our community and their families to jail.
This initiative will not only destroy part of my heritage but will in fact create a burden on the "Taxpayers" in the state of Arizona.
As we stand, the legislators are asking for more money to increase our jail and prison facilities.
Jailing a cockfighter for helping a game cock do what it likes to do seems to me , ridiculous and barbaric.
"GOD HELP AMERICA" IT NEEDS IT.
Richard Vela Phoenix
ARGUMENT "AGAINST" PROPOSITION 201
In opposition to the initiative to ban cockfighting.
Prop. 201
Do not burden our over worked, under paid law enforcement officers with another unnecessary law.
Let them use their time and our money on apprehending murders, rapist, child molesters etc., the real felons.
Since territorial days there is little or no record of trouble caused by the people participating in the sport of cockfighting.
Cockfighting is just the first domino, next will be rodeos, hunting, fishing, etc.
DON'T HELP TAKE THE WEST OUT OF ARIZONA.
Allene Hodges Phoenix
ARGUMENT "AGAINST" PROPOSITION 201
To the people of Arizona,
The proposed initiative to amend Title 13 Chapter 29 of the Arizona revised statutes will cost Arizona tax payers untold dollars in trying to enforce this proposed change, a change for what? Arizona is a great State lets leave it the way it is.
Law enforcement people tell us intent is the most difficult crime to prove particularly when the use of gamecocks for fighting is often in another nation.
This new law would prohibit raising and exporting gamecocks to Mexico and many other countries if they were to be fought.
Again, do-gooders want another felony on the books when in fact gamecocks will not fight if they don't want to.
Abraham Lincoln, who was a reported referee of cockfighting; thus nicknamed "Honest Abe" said it best when asked to outlaw cockfighting during his term as president of the United States, he said, "When two men can enter a ring and beat each other senseless far be it from me to deny gamecocks the same privilege."
Currently in Arizona there are crimes against people that do not bear the penalty proposed for the intent to allow two gamecocks to fight if they so choose.
Vote no on this proposed amendment.
- Prop 201
Larry T. Mathews Founder, United Gamefowl Breeders Association Salem, Oregon
ARGUMENT "AGAINST" PROPOSITION 201
Arizonians,
The people of Arizona have a great opportunity to stop big money organizations like the Human Society of the United States, and the millions they collect from the uninformed, by voting no on the proposed amendment to Title 13 Chapter 29, which would make outlaws out of many of Arizona's law alluding citizens by making cock fighting a felony.
A felony for allowing two birds to fight?
Whose the victim in this so called crime?
Arizonians would be once again asked to spend literally hundreds of thousands of dollars in policing if this initiative were to pass, our jails are full now!
Lets direct our attention and tax dollars to people issues.
Vote no on the Title 13 Chapter 29 amendment.
- Prop 201
Bob White President / CEO Colombian Fence Co.
Sandy, Oregon
ARGUMENT "AGAINST" PROPOSITION 201
To the Voters of Arizona;
Arizona Citizens need to fight for the rights given them under the Constitution of the United States.
Our Constitution gives us the right to be different, without being penalized.
The animal rights activists want a society where everyone agrees with their opinion.
They want the citizens of Arizona to finance the enforcement of their opinion on others.
That is the purpose of the Amendment to Title 13.
The animal rights activists have publicly stated their opposition to cockfighting, as well as the following: animal research, use of animals in testing cosmetics, dissection; commercial trapping, hunting, fishing, the breeding of companion animals, including pedigreed or purebred dogs and cats; dog racing, rodeos, circuses, the confinement systems of livestock production (and poultry farms) and want a reappraisal of the use of animals in zoos and aquariums.
In other words, they want us all to be vegetarians, and believe no animal should be used for entertainment or consumption purposes, and that animals are equal to, or have a value greater than, human life.
This amendment is only the beginning of the agenda that they have set for the people of Arizona.
By, supporting this amendment, you are giving the animal rights activists their police force.
They will be spending taxpayers money for their own gain and one by one they will make all of the above listed, illegal activities.
If you participate in, or support any of the above activities, or believe in the right to have your opinion, Vote "No" on Initiative # 201.
There are other issues in our state where I would prefer to see my tax dollars spent (i.e.. education, roads, community services).
Do not turn what are currently law abiding individuals into criminals, at the expense of the taxpayers.
Vote "NO" so your tax dollars may be spent more wisely.
Eileen B. Curran Chandler
ARGUMENT "AGAINST" PROPOSITION 201
I oppose this anti-cockfighting Initiative # 201
Cockfighters are the most diverse group of people I have ever been associated with.
We are young, we are old.
We are Black, White, Hispanic, and Oriental.
We are doctors, lawyers, laborers, letter carriers, housewives, teachers, locomotive engineers, and farm workers.
We are Veterans and active military and we are active members of our communities.
We are not felons.
This initiative is nothing more than special interest groups attempting to introduce their animal rights agenda into Arizona law.
Gloria P. Harris Phoenix
ARGUMENT "AGAINST" PROPOSITION 201
I oppose the Initiative # 201
In 1942, I was saved.
In 1945, I was filled with the Holy Ghost and delivered from smoking, swearing, cockfighting, and drinking.
I have pastored four churches, 5 years as Pastor of a skid row mission and evangelized.
I loved the chickens and God said "thou shalt have no other gods before me".
(From the cockpit to the pulpit)
After 53 years, I still admire game chickens.
I do not understand how people who know nothing about cockfighting can bring a initiative to deny this privilege.
They say in the initiative a cockfighter shall be a Class 4 Felon punishable by 2 years in jail, $135,000.00 fine.
A felon cannot vote, serve in the military, own property forever.
If you are a spectator, a woman with a babe in arms, a small child or an old man, no difference you are guilty of a misdemeanor, 6 months in county jail and a 2,500.00 fine.
It shows their ruthless concern for any one who loves game chickens.
Please do yourself a favor vote NO on this initiative.
God Bless you is my prayer.
Rev. James S. Mecham Phoenix
ARGUMENT "AGAINST" PROPOSITION 201
To the citizens and voters of Arizona:
I am concerned that big money persons are taking away the rights and part of a minority heritage cockfighting.
What will be next? Your language in your own home? A dog on a leash? Own a horse?
These are the things the Arizona Humane Society are trying to do at this time.
Cockfighting is only the first of many.
Please don't let persons who have no idea about our sport take it away.
Kathy Brogdon Tolleson
ARGUMENT "AGAINST" PROPOSITION 201
I oppose the Initiative #201
Cockfighting is the most ancient of sports.
All of the great societies of the past 5000 years have had a great influence on our sport.
The Phoenicians and the Greeks were the first to use artificial spurs to equalize the battle.
The greatest leaders our country ever had were cockfighters, etc: Thomas Jefferson, George Washington, Andrew Jackson, and Abraham Lincoln.
These were the men who wrote the Bill of Rights, the Declaration of Independence and Abraham Lincoln wrote the Emancipation Proclamation.
The greatness of these men and their contribution to American is indisputable.
Whether or not you like cockfighting, I ask you to think about our history and the people that have participated in it.
Do you think this is a felonious act or a sport that the Animal Rights zealots are trying to convince you to stop?
David A. Harris Phoenix
ARGUMENT "AGAINST" PROPOSITION 201
ARGUMENT "AGAINST"
This amendment will create a number of problems not only for our state but for the people of Arizona.
The expenditures in cost and time of our law enforcement agencies will be borne by the state taxpayers.
Jails are already overcrowded and this amendment would only make the situation worse.
Law abiding citizens that have not caused any problems, will be made into criminals.
All due to a handful of people that oppose this activity.
Keep in mind that these people are backed by an organization from Washington D.C. whose members do not live in our state.
This is another example of people coming from outside of Arizona and attempting to change our laws and then leave the state.
If you value the right to raise and have animals of your choice then vote "NO" on this amendment.
Warren Glick Tempe
ARGUMENT "AGAINST" PROPOSITION 201
I oppose the initiative to ban cockfighting.
Prop 201
Rape, murder, and child abuse, these are just a few crimes faced by the people of Arizona and the under staffed, under funded law enforcement agencies.
Arizona has the 4th largest jail system in America.
So let's add another crime, cock fighting.
Arizona has enough crime without making new criminals.
Where will the funding to prosecute and try all of the people who raise or fight game fowl come from? Arizona courts are overcrowded.
We cannot police the crime we have, let's make felons out of everyday hardworking law-abiding citizens who not only fight game fowl, but raise them for a hobby.
Cockfighting has been a culture and a tradition for many Arizona families, I'm third generation.
If this law passes, the average person will not be affected, but many families will awake the next morning, felons.
What will happen to all the game fowl if this becomes law? Will we follow California's example? Euthanize (kill) them because they are game fowl.
"Because the birds were not suitable as pets or for any other purpose other than fighting, they were euthanized Tuesday."
(source "Officers seize breeder's 45 fighting cocks" Ling, Michelle.)
There are thousands of game fowl in Arizona.
From a scientific standpoint, with society's goal to keep endangered species alive for genetic reasons, isn't it a mistake to euthanize a whole species?
The Humane Society sent us letters against rodeos, hunting, fishing, dog racing, people letting their pets have babies, the meat industry, zoos, circuses, women who take Premarin, and other biomedical testing.
Who's next, rodeo, hunting, fishing, horse, dog and pigeon racing, pet ownership, zoos, circuses, sick people relying on animal testing for cures and treatments?
Too many people today have their priorities crossed, people should be first!
James F. Phelps Phoenix
ARGUMENT "AGAINST" PROPOSITION 201
Against Initiative
4 years ago, a proposition similar to this initiative was sent to the legislature by the same people who propose this.
The difference was that it was designed to restrain hunting and fishing because some people did not care for those activities.
Somehow boxing, wrestling and football were not included because they only injure humans.
4 years ago the proposition was soundly defeated because legislators heard a big public outcry from Arizona citizens who recognized a threat to the American concept of freedom.
How much regulation and restraints should be placed on the average citizen's individual freedom?
This year, the principle seems to be DIVIDE AND CONQUER.
First come the gamefowl.
Who will be next? We hunters? We fishermen?
G. David Wagner Mesa
BALLOT FORMAT
PROPOSED BY INITIATIVE PETITION
OFFICIAL TITLE
PROPOSING AN AMENDMENT TO TITLE 13, CHAPTER 29 OF THE ARIZONA REVISED STATUTES RELATING TO COCKFIGHTING.
DESCRIPTIVE TITLE
MAKING COCKFIGHTING A CLASS 5 FELONY FOR KNOWINGLY OWNING, POSSESSING, KEEPING OR TRAINING A COCK FOR COCKFIGHTING; CAUSING ANY COCK TO FIGHT OR INJURE ANOTHER COCK FOR AMUSEMENT OR GAIN, OR ALLOWING COCKFIGHTING ON A PERSON'S PROPERTY; MAKING IT A CLASS 1 MISDEMEANOR FOR BEING PRESENT AT A COCKFIGHT.
PROPOSITION 201
PROPOSITION 201
A "yes" vote shall have the effect of making cockfighting a class 5 felony and being present at a cockfight a class 1 misdemeanor.
A "no" vote shall have the effect of retaining cockfighting as a non-criminal activity.
YES
NO
The Ballot Format displayed in HTML reflects only the text of the Ballot Proposition and does not reflect how it will appear on the General Election Ballot.
Spelling, grammar, and punctuation were reproduced exactly as submitted in the "for" and "against" arguments.
Revised 21-JUL-1998 BETSEY BAYLESS
