DHHS logo NC Division of soical Services Family and Children image DSS Home green dot Child Support Enforcement green dot Adult and Family Services green dot Children's Services green dot Economic independence About NC DSS green dot What's New green dot Frequently Asked questions green dot Other DHHS Divisions green dot County Directory green dot County Departments Picture mother and child Research 
These sites are useful resources in finding information ranging anywhere from welfare reform to federal government to the state of North Carolina.
Suggestions for other links? We would be happy to consider them, just e-mail us your thoughts.
Research 
Jordan Institute for Families Faculty and staff associated with the Jordan Institute are engaged in a variety of research, evaluation, and technical assistance projects involving issues affecting families and the communities in which they live.
The Jordan Institute aims to develop more innovative solutions to the challenges facing families and communities, explore and share practices that strengthen families, and encouraged informed debate about diverse approaches for strengthening families and communities.
Management Assistance for the Work First Program Management assistance for the Work First Program is a result of the partnership between the Jordan Institute for Families at The University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill and the Department of Health and Human Services.
This site contains work related to the collection, analysis, and interpretation of Work First county-specific Work First data.
For each county, demographics, caseload characteristics, caseload dynamics, and data on two parent caseloads and child only caseloads are presented.
Center for Budget and Policy Priorities The Center on Budget and Policy Priorities is a nonpartisan research organization and policy institute that conducts research and analysis on a range of government policies and programs, with an emphasis on those affecting low- and moderate-income people.
NC Cooperative Extension A report on a North Carolina study of welfare recipients and fact sheets useful to individuals transitioning from welfare to work.
Welfare Information Network A clearinghouse of national information, policy analysis and technical assistance on welfare reform.
Specifically covers 75-80 subject areas including agency information, childcare, job readiness, rural issues and management information systems.
Numerous links to other welfare web sites.
Welfare Reform Research 
Good for finding welfare reform research.
NC Welfare Resource Exchange (This site is currently under Construction and contains no Information).
The North Carolina Welfare Resource Exchange (WRE) is an Internet Based information clearinghouse focusing on welfare reform issues.
WRE aims to make widely available credible, reliable, and practical information on welfare resources and practices in order to promote informed decision-making, effective programs, and an increased level of public awareness, collaboration, and civic engagement.
Urban Institute Urban Institute is a nonprofit policy research organization in Washington, D.C.
Web site contains research and analysis on social and economic problems confronting the nation including welfare reforms impact on housing assistance, Medicaid, immigrants, and child welfare among others.
Of note is their New Federalism Project on devolution and the impact of federal welfare reform.
The Center for What Works The Center for What Works identifies, evaluates and disseminates information on the world's best welfare-to-work programs.
The objective is to create a fully comprehensive global networking mechanism whereby non-profits, foundations, and policy makers dedicated to solving welfare-related issues can come together and learn from proven successes.
Children's Defense Fund Through this web site you can access reports and other information about the effects of welfare reform on children in the United States.
You can also subscribe to the CDF listserv, which provides free weekly updates.
U.S. Census Bureau - Poverty Data The most recent census poverty statistics (1996) are online at this site with helpful charts and graphs displaying the information.
Prevention Services Substance Abuse Prevention Services Substance Abuse Prevention Services is a private, nonprofit resource referral agency, providing professional training for certification and serving as a community resource for prevention-related talks, services, and programs.
Prevent Child Abuse North Carolina The North Carolina Chapter of Prevent Child Abuse America aims to build a network of individuals and agencies across the state to organize child abuse prevention efforts in their communities.
North Carolina Child Advocacy Institute The North Carolina Child Advocacy Institute is an independent, state-level, nonprofit, nonpartisan, multi-issue organization advocating on behalf of children and youth below the age of eighteen who reside in North Carolina.
The North Carolina Child Advocacy Institute's mission is to improve the well-being of young North Carolinians by influencing the knowledge, attitudes and actions of those individuals and groups who can have a major impact on children's lives.
To accomplish this mission, the Institute fosters strategic alliances among ever-growing state-level and statewide networks of child advocates.
The Institute strives to be a dynamic, groundbreaking organization willing and able to challenge "business as usual"; a respected source of information and assistance, and, a good partner, honest broker and effective catalyst within the world of child advocacy.
Associations 
Web site has information and analysis on the implementation of welfare reform.
North Carolina Institute of Government The Institute of Government at the University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill provides training, research and analysis of state and federal law for local officials.
This web site provides information on IOG local government training, research, statistics, directories of elected officials and government agencies and IOG publications.
Many local government web pages are located here.
NC Association of County Directors' of Social Services Information and resources pertaining to work of all 100 North Carolina county Departments of Social Services.
NC Association of County Commissioners Information about County Commissioners in all 100 North Carolina counties.
The American Public Human Services Association The American Public Human Services Association is a nonprofit, bipartisan organization of individuals and agencies concerned with human services for families and the elderly, including all state and many territorial human service agencies and more than 1,200 local and federal agencies.
Site contains welfare information, articles, state updates, and the 1999/2000 Public Human Services Directory.
Legislative information North Carolina General Assembly The North Carolina General Assembly is the major legislative body in the state of North Carolina.
The web site contains extensive information on both the House and the Senate, legislative commissions, committees, and studios, and information on North Carolina statutes and legislative publications.
The Work First State Plan The Work First State Plan is the official report describing the program including welfare reform legislation, program administration, and eligibility criteria.
The US Legislative Branch This Library of Congress site provides extensive detail on the US legislative branch including links to Congressional Internet Services, Congressional schedules and calendars, and recent legislative information such as bills in conference and bill and amendment summaries and status.
State 
The North Carolina Office of State Planning The mission of the Office of State Planning is to advance sound public policy analysis, planning, and decision-making by developing and disseminating pertinent information.
This mission is achieved through responsive service, leadership, and collaboration.
The Office of State Planning is divided into six major sections: Strategic Planning and Analysis, the State Data Center, State Demographics, The Center for Geographic Information and Analysis, the Community Resource Information System, and the Geodetic Survey.
The North Carolina Department of Commerce The Department of Commerce is an Executive branch agency.
The head of the Department, the Secretary of Commerce, is appointed by and reports directly to the Governor.
The Secretary serves as a member of the Governor's Cabinet.
The Department has a total operating budget of just over $600,000,000 and over 3,300 full-time staff.
The Department has several divisions including a Workforce Outreach Division and a Workforce Development Division.
The Workforce Outreach Division has responsibility for the state's JobReady program.
US Department of Health and Human Services, Administration for Children and Families This is the official web site for the US Department of Health and Human Services.
This site includes federal welfare reform legislation, guidance and state documents, links to state social services pages, tables on caseloads and other public documents.
US Department of Labor This web page for the US Department of Labor provides information on legislation, grants such as the federal Welfare to Work grant, and links to pages on best and promising welfare practices.
US Department of Commerce The Department of Commerce promotes job creation, economic growth, sustainable development and improved living standards for all Americans by working in partnership with business, universities, communities and workers to build for the future and promote U.S. competitiveness in the global marketplace by strengthening and safeguarding the nation's economic infrastructure, keep America competitive with cutting-edge science and technology and an unrivaled information base, and provide effective management and stewardship of the nation's resources and assets to ensure sustainable economic opportunities.
U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development The U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development provides information on assisted housing programs (public housing and Section 8) as they relate to welfare reform as well as information about programs designed to help families on public assistance move toward self-sufficiency.
U.S.
General Accounting Office The General Accounting Office is the investigative arm of Congress.
Charged with examining matters relating to the receipt and disbursement of public funds, GAO performs audits and evaluations of Government programs and activities.
Recent reports and evaluations on the subject welfare are posted online.
Other important sites The Official Web Site of North Carolina This official web site of North Carolina provides North Carolina related public, business, and financial information, information on North Carolina's educational facilities, and links to all North Carolina agencies known to have information available via the Internet.
Back to the Top
blue line DSS Home | Child Support Enforcement | Adult 
