For immediate release Contact: John Bason Date: July 15, 2002 Phone: 919/716-6413 Attorney General Roy Cooper stops envelope stuffing scam, wins refunds for consumers Husband and wife scammers barred from selling work-at-home opportunities Raleigh: More than 80 consumers who fell victim to a work-at-home scam will get their money back, thanks to an agreement worked out by Attorney General Roy Cooper and his consumer protection team.
"These scam artists convinced consumers that stuffing envelopes was a quick and easy way to make money," said Cooper, "but the only ones making money were the scammers themselves."
Tracy and Gerald Tolbert of Vale, North Carolina sold information on stuffing envelopes to 83 North Carolinians, all of whom will receive a full refunds totaling $3,183.45.
The Tolberts have also agreed to shut down their company, Tolbert Enterprises, and are barred from operating or promoting any other work-at-home schemes.
Consumers who come forward after the agreement is signed may also be entitled to refunds.
Tolbert Enterprises began operating in January 2001, and lured its victims via the Internet, claiming earnings of $1,000 per week or more.
Their website promised to help consumers make money through several envelope stuffing programs.
For $29.95, consumers could receive a list of companies that the Tolberts claimed might hire envelope stuffers.
For $65 to $205, consumers could get mailing lists of people to whom they were to mail solicitations on how to make money by stuffing envelopes.
If anyone responded to the pitch and ordered the information from Tolbert Enterprises, the Tolberts promised to send a commission to the original consumer who mailed the solicitation.
North Carolina law prohibits anyone from advertising work-at-home opportunities unless they actually pay a wage or fee to the people doing the work.
It is also illegal to require prospective workers to make any purchases or pay an up-front fee before they can start working.
Reports of work-at-home scams like the Tolberts' are on the rise in North Carolina.
In 2001, the Attorney General's office received a total of 40 work-at-home complaints, 11 more than the previous year.
In just the first half of 2002, 39 consumers have complained about work-at-home scams.
Work-at-home scams target stay-at-home moms, people with limited English-speaking ability, the disabled, and people who have been affected by lay offs.
In addition to the "Earn $5,000 a month, working at home" roadside signs, work-at-home scams advertise on television, in newspapers and magazines, and over the Internet.
"As unemployment rises, more consumers are tempted to fall for work-at-home scams," said Cooper.
"Despite the road signs and the websites that promise big profits, work-at-home schemes will end up costing you money."
###
