3602mainpg2.jpg (28920 bytes) For Release: February 20, 2003 Website: www.vaag.com Contact: Tim Murtaugh or Randy Davis Phone: (804) 786-3518 or (804) 786-4596 E-Mail: tmurtaugh@oag.state.va.us or rdavis@oag.state.va.us Kilgore's Identity Theft Package Clears Assembly -- "ID Theft Passport" Created, Laws Tightened, Social Security Number Usage Limited -- RICHMOND - Attorney General Jerry Kilgore today applauded Members of the General Assembly following the passage of an omnibus bill addressing identity theft, the fastest growing crime in Virginia and the nation.
The legislation creates an "Identity Theft Passport" to protect victims of the crime, strengthens laws against identity theft and limits the usage of Social Security Numbers on government-issued documents.
Leesburg Senator Bill Mims (SB979) and Albemarle Delegate Rob Bell (HB2175) sponsored the legislation in the General Assembly.
The legislation stems from a series of public hearings conducted by the Attorney General's Task Force on Identity Theft.
Rocky Mount Delegate Allen Dudley and Lynchburg Delegate Kathy Byron introduced additional legislation addressing identity theft.
Affecting approximately one in five Americans, identity theft is estimated to cost financial institutions, utilities and merchants more than $5 billion a year.
Victims often relate stories of mistaken arrest, severe credit problems and hundreds of hours of labor in repairing the financial difficulties associated with the crime.
One of the most common forms of identity theft occurs when a driver's license is lost or stolen.
If the license bears the owner's Social Security number, the thief can obtain fraudulent credit cards and wreak considerable financial havoc before the crime is discovered.
"I commend the General Assembly, and particularly Sen. Mims, Del.
Bell, Del.
Dudley and Del.
Byron for their leadership on this important issue," Kilgore said.
"Identity Theft can disrupt credit and ruin lives.
We are sending a message to criminals who would commit these crimes - Virginia will not tolerate it."
"Identity Theft Passport"
The legislation creates an "Identity Theft Passport Program" within the Office of Attorney General.
Victims who have become aware that their identities have been stolen will be able to submit police reports they have filed or court orders they have obtained to the Office of the Attorney General, which will issue an Identity Theft Passport.
The Passport will serve as a shield to protect victims from arrest for crimes committed by someone else under a stolen identity.
Creditors may also recognize the Identity Theft Passports.
"In our Task Force hearings, we heard from victims who could not qualify for a car or home loan because of identity theft," Kilgore said.
"Worse yet, we heard horror stories of people being arrested - in some cases, right in front of their children - after someone had stolen their identities and gone on crime sprees.
The Identity Theft Passport will protect victims from these nightmares."
Identity Theft Laws Tightened
The Attorney General's identity theft legislation strengthens existing Virginia identity theft laws by:
* Prohibiting the impersonation of a law enforcement officer or any other official of the Commonwealth of Virginia in order to carry out identity theft.
* Prohibiting the theft of the identity of a dead person.
* Requiring credit bureaus to note on a credit report that a victim of identity theft has filed a police report.
Current Virginia law provides that identity theft violations are Class 1 Misdemeanors, punishable by up to a year in jail and a fine of $2,500.
Violations involving a financial amount exceeding $200 are considered Class 6 Felonies, punishable by up to five years in jail and a fine of up to $2,500.
"Identity theft is a serious crime that we are seeing more and more as technology advances and theft becomes easier," Kilgore said.
"It is important that we expand the scope of our laws that forbid it."
Social Security Number Usage Limited
The legislation prohibits the usage of Social Security Numbers on certain government-issued documents, such as student or employee identification cards.
Additionally, state agencies are prohibited from displaying Social Security Numbers on the outside of envelopes or mailings, such as state tax documents.
It also requires the Library Board to develop regulations for destroying public documents that contain Social Security Numbers.
Further, the legislation allows clerks of circuit courts to refuse to accept documents for public recordation that include Social Security Numbers.
"Very often, a person's Social Security Number is a gateway to fraudulently obtaining all sorts of documents - driver's licenses, credit cards or car loans," Kilgore said.
"The more difficult we make it for criminals to obtain this information, the safer our citizens will be."
Kilgore introduced the legislation following a series of public hearings before the Attorney General's Task Force on Identity Theft.
Launched in May 2002, the Task Force was composed of law enforcement agencies, legislators, business and technology leaders, consumer and merchant organizations, financial organizations and identity theft victims.
The Task Force discussed options for fighting identity theft and heard from victims in Northern Virginia, Hampton Roads, Danville, Roanoke, Abingdon and Richmond.
To avoid identity theft, consumers are encouraged to limit the availability of their personally identifying information.
The simplest action to take is to remove Social Security Numbers from driver's licenses.
Though the Department of Motor Vehicles now issues licenses with random "T" numbers, older licenses may still bear the driver's Social Security Number.
Additional methods include shredding credit card offers or removing Social Security Numbers from checkbooks.
Consumers engaging in on-line commerce or banking are advised to ensure that web sites employ appropriate security measures.
The Office of Attorney General has issued a guidebook to help people avoid identity theft, and to address problems associated with it after it is detected.
The book is available by calling the Office of Attorney General at (804) 786-2071 or on-line at www.vaag.com under "Hot Topics."
-30-
