News School Health Services Volume 15, Number 2, January 2002 National School Nurse Day-January 23, 2002 The 2002 National School Nurse Day is January 23.
The theme for School Nurse Day is: "Partners with Children."
The purpose of this day is to develop better understanding of the school nurse in the educational setting.
The fourth Wednesday in January has been set aside for over two decades for the recognition of school nurses.
The National Association of School Nurses has a School Nurse Day News Release on the web: http://www.nasn.org/schoolnurserelease2.htm
The Role of the School Nurse in Providing School Health Services
The school nurse role is crucial in providing school health services states the American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP), Pediatrics, November 2001, Volume 108, Number 5, p. 1231-1232.
This position statement describes the school nurse's unique role as a member of the school health team, provider of health services, and collaborator with primary care physicians, specialists, and local public health and social service agencies for effective services for students and their families.
The AAP supports the continued strong partnership among school nurses, school health personnel, and pediatricians to promote the health and education of children and youth through a coordinated school health program, a medical home for each child,^ and integrated health, education, and social services for children at the community level.
Position statement available on the web: http://www.aap.org/policy/re0050.html
Condition of Education Shows Reading Improvement
"After 10 years of decline in elementary reading comprehension scores, the 2001 scores showed slight increases.
Our hope is this is the beginning of an upturn in Iowa students reading comprehension.
We must continue our commitment and investment in instruction to see the improvements," said Ted Stilwill, director of the Department of Education.
The report found public school enrollment declined .9percentage.
The 2000-01 Condition of Education Report is available on the web: http://www.state.ia.us/educate/fis/pre/coer/index.html
New 2002 National Health Information Center Reference Publications
The National Health Information Center (NHIC) annually publishes three very helpful health references: Federal Health Information Centers and Clearinghouses; Toll-Free Numbers for Health Information, and National Health Observances (The Year At A Glance, U.S. Department of Health and Human Services Public Affairs Contacts, and Search By Month on healthfinder).
Publications available online: http://www.health.gov/nhic/pubs/default.htm
CDC Study Shows Status of School Health Programs Nationwide
In the largest and most comprehensive assessment of school health programs ever undertaken, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) found schools are doing better at establishing policies for healthier students.
The School Health Policies and Programs Study 2000 (SHPPS 2000) was conducted in districts and schools in all 50 states.
U.S.
Health and Human Services Secretary Tommy G. Thompson said, "Schools not only teach our children to read and write, but also to take care of their bodies and mind.
Schools are the ideal places to promote good health because most young people are in school five days a week during the school year."
In the United States, 53 million young people attend approximately 117,500 elementary and secondary schools for about six hours of classroom time per day with more than 95 percent of 5-17 year-olds enrolled.
Consequently schools are the only public institutions that can reach nearly all youth and are, therefore, in a unique position to improve both the education and health status of young people throughout the nation.
A SHPPS summary is in the September 2001, Journal of School Health and fact sheets and highlights are on the CDC website: www.cdc.gov/shpps.
U.S. Department of Education-National Center for Education Statistics
The U.S. Department of Education, National Center for Education Statistics reports on efforts by public K-8 schools to involve parents in children's education.
The report answers two major questions: Do children's parents acknowledge the efforts that schools reportedly are making? In addition, do schools report the same level of parent participation in school programs as parents do? This report compares parents' and schools' views of how schools involve parents in their children's education and how parents respond to the opportunities for involvement that schools provide.
The findings can assist policymakers, educators, researchers, and school staff in their efforts to evaluate parents' involvement in their children's education.
Report available at: http://nces.ed.gov/pubsearch/pubsinfo.asp?pubid=2001076
Iowa Department of Public Health Immunization Letter to School District
On April 18, 2000 the Iowa Department of Public Health sent the following letter to a school district regarding the definition of transfer student applied to the Iowa immunization requirements.
This letter is in response to your concerns regarding the definition of "transfer student" being extended to students who are entering Iowa's school system from foreign countries.
The Iowa Department of Public Health, Bureau of Immunization, and the Attorney General's office have interpreted the term "transfer student" to mean students arriving from domestic (U.S.) school systems.
We know that all states in the U.S. have entrance requirements that at a minimum mandate all students show proof of immunization or have a recognized exemption to immunization.
This requirement does not extend beyond the borders of the United States.
Some countries do have similar requirements and immunization histories from other countries should be readily available, however, many countries have no such requirements and vaccine preventable diseases are common in those areas of the world.
Therefore, students arriving from foreign countries do not qualify under the provisional enrollment category that would allow them 120 days or the end of the semester to show proof of immunization.
These out-of-country students should, prior to school entry, show proof of at least one of each of the required vaccines - tetanus-diphtheria (Td), polio (OPV or IPV), and measles-rubella (MMR).
They may then be placed on a provisional enrollment allowing them to complete the minimum required immunizations (2 additional Td and polio and one additional measles-rubella vaccine if first enrolled in school on or after July 3, 1991) by the end of the semester or 120 days.
If we can be of any further assistance, please contact me at 515/281-4938.
Carolyn Jacobson, RN, BS
Bureau Chief
Bureau of Immunization
515/281-4938
Iowa Department of Public Health-Mercury Fact Sheet
The Iowa Department of Public Health, Division of Environmental Health, Hazardous Substances Emergency Events Surveillance (HSEES) program was established to collect and analyze Iowa information about emergency releases of hazardous substances that occur.
The purpose of the mercury fact sheet is to reduce exposures, injuries, and deaths resulting from hazardous substance releases.
Debbi Cooper, Iowa Department of Public Health, Division of Environmental Health, HSEES Program, 515 242-6337.
Liquid Mercury Facts
This fact sheet contains general information regarding liquid mercury and its risks as well as information about how people can protect themselves from exposure and adverse health effects.
The fact sheet has been developed as part of a combined study between the federal Agency for Toxic Substances and Disease Registry and the Iowa Department of Public Health.
The Hazardous Substances Emergency Events Surveillance (HSEES) System collects data on emergency hazardous substance releases.
The system's purpose is to reduce the incidence of injury and death associated with the release of hazardous substances.
A clear understanding of how and why liquid mercury releases occur and how to avoid them can assist in better training.
It can also improve the safety of employees, emergency responders, and the general public.
In Iowa, from January 1991 through June 2001 there were 23 mercury releases reported to the HSEES System.
Seven events occurred in schools, seven were in resident's homes, six occurred in a factory or industry setting, two took place at medical facilities, and one event was the result of illegal dumping at a county park.
An evacuation took place during seven of the events and one individual sought medical care after becoming ill after mercury exposure.
What is Mercury? Although this fact sheet will focus on liquid mercury, there are hazards associated with other types of mercury.
There are three types of mercury:
Inorganic (e.g., Mercuric or mercurous mercury).
This type of mercury is a naturally occurring element released when volcanoes erupt and rocks erode.
The problem with the element arises when sources of this type of mercury, such as coal-burning power plants and mining ore deposits, release additional mercury into the air.
Bacteria and other processes in lakes and rivers can convert inorganic mercury into methylmercury.
Organic (e.g., Methylmercury).
When inorganic mercury is deposited into the water microorganisms, help convert it to methylmercury, which is a more toxic form that accumulates in fish.
Elemental (i.e., Liquid mercury).
Liquid mercury is used in thermometers, fluorescent light bulbs, and medical equipment such as instruments that measure blood pressure.
Some people use liquid mercury in ethnic folk medicine and for religious practices.
More recently, glass pendant necklaces containing liquid mercury have become popular among high school children.
How Can Liquid Mercury Affect My Health? The central nervous system is very sensitive to mercury vapors.
Although liquid mercury is not directly toxic, the vapors from it are.
Short-term or long-term exposures can lead to serious health problems.
Exposure to high levels of liquid mercury vapors can permanently damage the brain, kidneys, and the developing fetus.
Effects on the brain may result in irritability, shyness, tremors, changes in vision or hearing, and memory problems.
Short-term exposure to liquid mercury may result in nausea, vomiting, diarrhea, increase in blood pressure or heart rate, skin and eye irritation, and lung damage.
How Can I Reduce the Risk of Exposure to Liquid Mercury? Avoid using products that contain liquid mercury.
Properly dispose of all products that contain liquid mercury, such as thermometers or fluorescent light bulbs.
Urge your local school system to stop conducting experiments in science classes that involve liquid mercury, to use less hazardous substances to demonstrate scientific principles, and to dispose of unnecessary hazardous chemicals in storage.
If you must use a product containing liquid mercury, store it safely in a leak and shatterproof container and in a locked, secure place.
When liquid mercury spills, it breaks into tiny beads.
Those beads can roll into cracks in floors or walls, or may become trapped in carpet or upholstered furniture.
Liquid mercury vaporizes and can rapidly spread throughout a room.
If spilled near heating ducts, the vapor can spread throughout a home or building quicker.
Without proper cleanup, people may be exposed to hazardous levels of liquid mercury vapors.
What Should I do if a Small Spill Occurs? If you must use a product containing liquid mercury, a mercury spill kit should be kept on hand.
If there is a minor release of mercury, such as from an oral or rectal thermometer, and a mercury spill kit is not available use the following steps:
Wear rubber gloves (to be thrown away)
Keep children and pets out of area during clean up
Use stiff paper or cardboard to gently sweep beads of mercury onto a dustpan or another piece of stiff paper or cardboard.
Use a flashlight to help find any remaining particles.
Duct tape, packing tape, or masking tape may be used to pick up small particles.
Place mercury in wide mouth container, tape lid in place, and dispose of in garbage.
Dispose of all items that may have touched the mercury in a plastic zip lock bag or sealed garbage bag.
For spills greater than the amount contained in a thermometer:
Evacuate and secure the spill area.
Before people leave, be sure shoes, clothing and other articles have not been exposed to mercury.
Close all doors, windows, ducts, and passageways that lead to other rooms.
Ventilate the affected room by opening all windows and doors that open to the outside.
Call your local health department or the Statewide Poison Control Center (1-800-352-2222) for instructions on safe clean up.
DO NOT try to clean up liquid mercury without getting advice from a poison control center or your local health department.
DO NOT sweep a liquid mercury spill with a broom.
DO NOT vacuum a liquid mercury spill.
Vacuuming will rapidly spread liquid mercury vapors into the air, increasing exposure and contaminating the vacuum.
DO NOT pour mercury down a drain.
It may lodge in the plumbing and cause future problems.
DO NOT use household cleaning products to clean up a spill.
These products may contain bleach or ammonia that can react violently with liquid mercury.
The following items are examples of reported incidents involving liquid mercury.
¨ In June 1996, liquid mercury was taken from a middle school and played with by a group of teenagers both inside and outside of the school building.
Approximately 200 children were tested for mercury exposure, one child was hospitalized, and another five underwent outpatient treatment.
Twenty other children had mildly elevated mercury levels but not to levels that are known to affect health.
¨ In May 2000, a student spilled liquid mercury at a high school forcing the closure of the school while workers decontaminated the building.
¨ Approximately 50 students were evacuated from an Iowa college dormitory after someone dumped approximately a half-cup of liquid mercury outside a shower stall.
This allowed vapors to form and the mercury was subsequently spread throughout the dormitory.
¨ A student rolled a ball of liquid mercury down the aisle of a school bus, potentially exposing dozens of students.
The student also shared the liquid mercury with three other students.
The liquid mercury had been stolen from a science room.
The ramifications of this act were thought to have lead to possible contamination of other schools, buses, vehicles, and homes.
More information about mercury in schools may be accessed through the Mercury in Schools website: www.mercury-k12.org.
Mandatory Abuse Reporters-Training Requirement
The 2000-2001 Iowa Legislature amended the Child and Dependent Abuse reporting law (Iowa Code, Chapter 232).
School employees added to mandatory reporters with reporter training required are coaches holding a coaching authorization and certified paraeducators.
The licensing board will require the training as part of licensure.
The training requirement is two hours every 5 years
Mandatory Abuse Training-Iowa Board of Nursing
A new requirement for nursing licensure is a course on identification and reporting of abuse when applicable in your job.
On your next nursing license renewal you will be asked: "In your employment/self employment as a RN or LPN, do you examine, attend, counsel, or treat children or adults on a regular basis?" If you answer yes to the question, you must check one of the following: Within the last five years, I have completed the training program/s related to identification and reporting of child and/or dependent adult abuse; I am exempt from the abuse training requirement because I am serving active duty in the military; I am exempt for the abuse training requirement because I hold a current waiver from the board; or None of the above choices are true.
The required training course does not have to be offered by an IBON approved provider although it may be.
Resources
Abbreviations: http://www.pharma-lexicon.com/ Large database of medical, pharm, biotech, dentistry, agrochem, and healthcare abbreviations (50,000).
Free search box download to your own computer.
Advisory Councils: http://www.idph.state.ia.us/fch/fam_serv/advisory.htm Promoting Healthy Youth, Schools and Communities: A Guide to Community-School Health Advisory Councils is tailored to the planning needs of school district staff charged with forming Community-School Health Advisory Councils.
Anthrax Question: A school nurse asked, "We had a suspicious letter here at school.
Law enforcement was called and they did not feel there was any concern.
The officer said that using an iron to run over the letter would kill any anthrax.
Is this accurate information? Answer: No, ironing is not recommended.
The efficiency in killing spores would be low if nonexistent.
Also, it could an unsafe practice and fire would be a possibility.
For more information, contact Mary Rexroat, IDPH, mrexroat@health.state.ia.us
Anthrax Symptoms Detailed: http://jama.ama-assn.org/issues/v286n20/ffull/joc11802.html Article in the Journal of the American Medical Association describing the anthrax symptoms.
http://jama.ama-assn.org/issues/v286n20/ffull/joc11782.html Article describing two patients who survived inhalation anthrax, their symptoms, and treatment.
Asthma: www.asthmaandschools.org National Education Association's Health Information Network (NEA HIN) new website.
The site features a searchable database of asthma resources for school personnel addressing asthma issues.
Families of children who have asthma can use the site too.
The site also includes general, up-to-date information about asthma.
Asthma Statistics: www.cdc.gov/nchs/products/pubs/pubd/hestats/asthma/asthma.htm The National Center for Health Statistics released new asthma stats from the National Health Interview Survey.
Attention Disorder Drugs-Few Incidents of Diversion or Abuse Identified by Schools: http://www.gao.gov/new.items/d011011.pdf The U.S.
General Accounting Office conducted a review of the diversion and abuse in public schools of the stimulant drugs prescribed to children for attention disorders.
Biological Threats to the Public's Health: http://www.healthinschools.org/sh/envhealth.asp The Center for Health and Health Care in Schools compiled resources that are available to assist school administrators and health professionals concerned about potential health threats to school communities.
These references will be updated, as new materials become available.
Disaster Resources: Resources from a variety of sources to support the further exploration of information available following the September 11, 2001 attack on America.
Afterschool Alliance http://www.afterschoolalliance.org/
American Academy of Child and Adolescent Psychiatry http://www.aacap.org/publications/DisasterResponse/index.htm Helping Children after a Disaster.
American Academy of Pediatrics www.aap.org/advocacy/releases/disastercomm.htm
American-Arab Anti-Discrimination Committee (ADC) http://www.adc.org/action/2001/14september2001.htm Defends the rights of people and promotes their rich cultural heritage.
American College of Physicians http://www.acponline.org/bioterr/ Information on bioterrorism.
American Friends Service Committee http://www.afsc.org and http://www.afsc.org/nero/nevlib.htm Videos and films about nonviolence and crisis.
American Jewish Committee (AJC) http://www.ajc.org/da/ Protects rights and freedoms.
"Hands Across the Campus," a diversity training program for middle and high school students.
American Muslim Council http://www.amconline.org
American Psychological Association (APA) http://helping.apa.org/therapy/traumaticstress.html Managing Traumatic Stress and what happens after a disaster or other traumatic event.
Anti-Defamation League (ADL) http://www.adl.org/main_hate_crimes.asp Dedicated to combating hate crime and promoting intergroup cooperation and understanding.
Association for Supervision and Curriculum Development (ASCD) www.ascd.org Resources and classroom leadership.
Search for terrorism.
Center for Health and Health Care in Schools http://www.healthinschools.org/tragedy.asp Resources developed to assist health professionals help children, their families, and school staff cope with tragedy.
The Center for Mental Health Services http://www.mentalhealth.org/cmhs/emergencyservices/index.htm "Disaster Mental Health.
http://www.mentalhealth.org/schoolviolence/ School Violence Prevention.
http://www.mentalhealth.org Mental Health Services Locator with links to the nearest mental health organizations, addresses, phone numbers, and services.
Centers for Disease Control and Prevention http://www.bt.cdc.gov Bioterrorism preparedness and response information.
Children Now http://www.childrennow.org/television/twk-news.htm
Children's Defense Fund http://www.childrensdefense.org/ Resources for talking with children.
Connect for Kids http://www.connectforkids.org/weekly Search for terrorism.
The Council on American-Islamic Relations http://www.cair-net.org
Education Development Center http://www.edc.org/spotlight/schools/beyondblame.htm Lessons designed to focus on issues of justice, fairness, and mislaid blame.
Educators for Social Responsibility http://www.esrnational.org/ Programs, resources, and training for teachers at every developmental level at: http://www.esrnational.org/wtclessons2001.htm
Facing History and Ourselves: Examining History and Human Behavior http://www.facing.org/facing/fhao2.nsf/main/resources+home Educational and teacher training organization encouraging middle and high school students to examine racism and prejudice.
Gay Lesbian Straight Education Network http://www.glsen.org/templates/resources/index.html Strives to assure that each member of every school community is valued and respected.
Infectious Diseases Society of America http://www.idsociety.org
John Hopkins Center for Civilian Biodefense http://www.hopkins-biodefense.org
KidsHealth http://www.kidshealth.org/index.html Areas for kids, teens, parents, and a section on the aftermath of the terrorist attack.
Search word terrorism.
Kidsnet http://www.kidsnet.org
The Learning Network http://www.familyeducation.com/article/0,1120,1-4412,00.html Helps parents, teachers, and students of all ages take control of their learning and make it part of their everyday lives.
TeacherVision: http://www.teachervision.com/ Teacher site for tools and resources that save time and make learning fun.
Search word terrorism.
Museum of Tolerance http://www.wiesenthal.com/mot/ Focuses on two central themes through unique interactive exhibits: the dynamics of racism and prejudice in America and the history of the Holocaust.
*National Association for the Education of Young Children http://www.naeyc.org/resources/eyly/1998/01.htm
National Association of School Psychologists http://www.naspcenter.org/safe_schools/Tolerance.pdf Strategies and techniques for parents, teachers, mental health professionals, and members of the faith-based.
National Center for PTSD www.ncptsd.org Information about post traumatic stress disorder.
National Child Care Information Center http://nccic.org/helpkids.html Resources to help children cope with violence, terrorism, and grief.
National Coalition Building Institute http://www.ncbi.org/ Leadership training organization, working to eliminate prejudice and intergroup conflict in communities throughout the world.
National Conference for Community and Justice http://www.nccj.org/nccj3.nsf/htmlmedia/programs.htm Trains young leaders from different racial, ethnic, and religious groups to develop leadership skills to address prejudice and intolerance, promote multicultural awareness, and develop strategies for inclusion.
National Education Association www.nea.org/01crisis.html "Helping Families and Children Cope with this National Tragedy."
National Institute of Mental Health http://www.nimh.nih.gov/publicat/violence.cfm
National Parent Teacher Association http://www.pta.org/parentinvolvement/helpchild/respectdiff/resources/ta lking.asp Resource guide, ideas, and practices to educate and support programs on diversity and respect for all differences.
New York University Child Study Center http://www.aboutourkids.org/articles/war.html
The Parent Center www.parentcenter.com/general/34754.html
PrepareRespondRecover http://www.preparerespondrecover.com/index.html Safety planning, disaster response, and recovery support to individuals and small-to-midsize businesses.
Scholastic www.scholastic.com
Sesame Street Workshop http://www.sesameworkshop.org/parents/advice/article/0,4125,49560,00.ht ml Tragic Times, Healing Words on helping children cope with disaster.
Southern Poverty Law Center http://www.splcenter.org/teachingtolerance/tt-index.html "Responding to Hate at School," a resource for schools; other resources http://www.tolerance.org/teach/respond/index.jsp
The Study Circles Resource Center http://www.studycircles.org Discussion guide, "Facing the Future: How Should We Respond to the Attack on Our Nation?" Download at http://www.studycircles.org/
UCLA School Mental Health Project/Center for Mental Health in Schools http://smhp.psych.ucla.edu Responding to crisis with children.
United Nations http://www.unesco.org/tolerance/hometole.htm Political and legal requirement for peaceful co-existence.
U.S. Army Medical Research Institute of Infectious Diseases http://www.usamriid.army.mil/education/bluebook.html
U.S. Department of Education http://www.ed.gov/inits/september11/index.html Information and resources for parents and schools related to the terrorist attacks.
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Substance Abuse and Mental Health Services Administration (SAMHSA) http://www.mentalhealth.org/cmhs/EmergencyServices/
U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) http://www.cdc.gov "Biological and Chemical Terrorism: Strategic Plan for preparedness and response."
U.S. Department of State, Office of International Information Programs http://www.usinfo.state.gov "Fact Sheet: Islam in the United States" and useful references to other sources.
University of Virginia http://curry.edschool.virginia.edu/go/multicultural/ Resources for educators, students, and activists to explore and discuss multicultural education.
Fleas: Fleas are usually cat fleas and 99+% are associated with household pets.
These animals need to be treated with one of the newer "once a month" flea treatments available from practicing veterinarians.
Note that flea collars just are not effective in these situations.
Next, one must work on the home environment.
Basic to this process is a vacuuming that borders on one having a character trait of compulsivity, i.e. vacuum the carpets and floors similar to mowing the yard.
Don't miss an inch.
Also, do the baseboards etc where the floor meets the wall.
Targeted spraying also helps.
Ken Holster, ISU Extension Entomologist recommends retail outlets products sold in Windex-type bottles costing less than $10.
Spray the area where pets hang out and other difficult to clean-vacuum areas.
Re-spray these areas every 2-4 days recognizing the life cycle is 21 days.
Don't expect miracles with these measures.
It probably will take 2-3 weeks to get noticeable relief.
Treatment of children with an occasional flea is not recommended.
Russell W. Currier, DVM, MPH, Environmental Epidemiologist 
FoodReview: http://www.ers.usda.gov/publications/FoodReview/may2001 FoodReview, Vol. 24, No. 2 includes a series of articles on the well-being of America's children, children's diet quality, overweight children in America, foodborne disease, food assistance programs that help children and their families, U.S. consumption of tree nuts, and food availability and affordability.
healthfinder® español: www.healthfinder.gov/espanol HHS Secretary Tommy G. Thompson recently announced the launch of healthfinder® español, a Spanish-language website that helps consumers track down reliable health information quickly and easily on the Internet.
Offers over 300 topics from 70 government agencies and nonprofit organizations.
This easy to switch between Spanish and English versions of the same information helps English-speaking family members or health professionals to search in English for information to share with Spanish-speaking relatives or patients.
IHP packets: The packet contains IHPs submitted by Iowa school nurses (a variety of plans, 190 pages).
The packet is not comprehensive nor is standardized language used in all of the submissions.
It does share what others are doing around the state and would give you ideas about how to write your own individualized plan.
To purchase a packet, please send a check or money order for $14.00 to: Nancy Lathrop, BA, Program Associate, Parent Child Family Area of Study, The University of Iowa College of Nursing, Iowa City, IA 52242-1121, (319) 335-7075, (319) 353-5326 FAX, nancy-lathrop@uiowa.edu
Influenza: For information on influenza in Iowa http://www.idph.state.ia.us/pa/ic/ic.htm or http://www.uhl.uiowa.edu/HealthIssues/Respiratory/index.html Influenza nationally, CDC's website http://www.cdc.gov/ncidod/diseases/flu/weekly.htm.
Iowa WIC 2000 Survey Executive Summary: http://www.idph.state.ia.us/fch/n-wic.htm The purposes of the survey were to determine extent of food security among WIC participants, how participants learn about WIC, and participant satisfaction of WIC services including nutrition education.
Lead Testing Referral Form: Card available from Rita Gergely at rgergely@idph.state.ia.us For more information, contact the Lead Poisoning Prevention Program at 1-800-972-2026.
Making Health Academic Project: The new website www.edc.org/makinghealthacademic/ is targeted to a variety of audiences, including those that are new to the field.
It provides concrete action to implement Coordinated School Health Programs (CSHPs).
The website contains; Concept to action, CSHP at a glance, resources, links, newsletter, and unifies around a common focus on coordination, leadership, and partnerships.
Parenting Tool Kit: http://www.cdc.gov/tobacco This multi-media tool kit, targeted to parents of preteens (ages 9 to 12), assists parents and kids in talking about tobacco use initiation and cessation The kit, published by CDC's Office on Smoking on Health contains print ads, radio spots, a poster, a PowerPoint presentation for meetings, a program implementation guide, and copies of a brochure for parents.
The kit can also be ordered from 1.800.CDC.1311.
School Breakfast Program-New Report: www.frac.org The Food Research and Action Center (FRAC) released a report on the School Breakfast Program.
Participation in the School Breakfast Program set records in the 2000-200l school year, with more than 6.5 million low-income children nationwide served daily by the program.
The number of low-income children served daily rose from the prior school year, and is almost double the 3.4 million in 1990.
Three of four (75.9 percent) of the 96,213 schools that offered school lunch also offered school breakfast, another record.
"Millions of children suffer from hunger because of low family incomes and millions more are hungry when school starts or by mid-morning because of today's complicated work and commuting schedules," said FRAC President Jim Weill.
"The School Breakfast Program is doing an important, and increasingly effective job to make sure children get the nutrition they need every day to be healthy and prepared to learn and it needs to grow more rapidly and adapt to make an even greater difference."
School Emergency Response Plans and School Safety: A new section on CHHCS includes guidance for schools in developing school wide safety plans.
http://www.healthinschools.org/sh/schoolresponse.asp
School Health Guidelines to Prevent Unintentional Injuries and Violence: http://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/preview/mmwrhtml/rr5022a1.htm Other links: Appendix A, Selected Healthy People 2010 Objectives Related to Child and Adolescent Unintentional Injury, Violence, and Suicide Prevention http://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/preview/mmwrhtml/rr5022a2.htm Appendix B, Child and Adolescent Unintentional Injury, Violence, and Suicide-Prevention Resources http://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/preview/mmwrhtml/rr5022a3.htm Appendix C, Sources of Model and Promising Strategies and Programs http://www.cdc.gov/mmwr/preview/mmwrhtml/rr5022a4.htm
School Health Leadership Training Kit: Resource from the American Academy of Pediatrics: http://www.schoolhealth.org/trnthtrn/trainmn.html The Kit, developed by the American Academy of Pediatrics (AAP), is available free online through the AAP Section on School Health.
The Kit is targeted for pediatricians interested in taking a leadership role in local school health programs, includes presentation handouts, and slides for other school health professionals to use.
Student's risk of dying violently in school is less than one in a million, according to information from the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC) and the U.S. Departments of Education and Justice in the Journal of the American Medical Association (JAMA), December 5, "School-Associated Violent Deaths in the United States, 1994-1999" http://jama.ama-assn.org/issues/v286n21/abs/joc11149.html Other resources include: The Best Practices to Prevent Violence by Children and Adolescents: A Sourcebook for Community Action: http://www.cdc.gov/ncipc/dvp/bestpractices.htm The Surgeon General's Report on Youth Violence Public health offers an approach with a focus on prevention of youth violence http://www.surgeongeneral.gov/library/youthviolence/ National Youth Violence Prevention Resource Center (NYVPRC) http://www.safeyouth.org/home.htm or call center 1-866-SAFEYOUTH (723-3968) for programs on school violence prevention and access to Federal information on youth violence prevention and suicide.
Texas Guide to School Health Programs: http://www.tdh.state.tx.us/schoolhealth/program_guide.htm The guide is a work in progress and with recommendations from our stakeholders will improve in the future.
US Department of Education Redesigned Website: www.ed.gov The U.S. Secretary of Education Rod Paige announced the Department of Education website has been redesigned to improve its organization and function.
The website includes grants and contracts, financial aid for students, education resources, research, statistics, and policies.
Youth Tobacco Surveillance: http://www.cdc.gov/tobacco/research_data/youth/ss50.04.intro.htm The Youth tobacco surveillance report with tables and charts is on the web in the MMWR Surveillance Summaries (November 2, 2001/Vol.
50/No.
SS--4).
Tobacco use is the single leading preventable cause of death in the United States.
Approximately 80% of tobacco users initiate use before age 18 years.
If the trend in early initiation of cigarette smoking continues, approximately 5 million children aged 
The economic costs associated with tobacco use ranges from $53 billion to $73 billion per year in medical expenses and $47 billion in lost productivity.
Because of these health and economic consequences, CDC has recommended comprehensive tobacco-control programs to reduce tobacco use among youth.
Calendar
January 2002
23 National School Nurse Day-Partners with Children
24-25 Equity Conference, Des Moines
29 Special Education Nurse conference call
March 2002
17-23 National Inhalants 
April 2002
5-6 ISNO Conference, Council Bluffs
9 AEA 2 School Nurse Meeting
23 Risky Business, Ames, www.yss.ames.ia.us
June 2002
30-3 National Association of School Nurses Conference, Lake Buena Vista, FL
September 2002
26-27 University of Iowa, 27th Annual School Nurse Conference, Cedar Rapids, 319-335-4141
30-1 Special Education Law Conference
October 2002
2-6 American School Health Association Conference, Charlotte, NC
Iowa School Nurse Listserv
The Iowa School Nurse (iowasn) Listserv allows you to send e-mail messages to a large group of Iowa school nurses.
You can use the listserv to request information or advice and share news and initiatives with others on the listserv.
School nurses joining the iowasn listserv will add their e-mail address to the online school nurse mailing list and can send messages to all members at any time.
When you post messages, copies are sent automatically to everyone on the list.
Replies to a message also are sent to everyone on the list, not just the original sender.
Joining the Iowa School Nurse Listserv.
To join the listserv, send an e-mail to: majordomo@listserver.iowaccess.org with the words: subscribe iowasn in the body of the message.
You receive a verification notice after subscribing.
You can cancel your membership the same way, except, in the body of the message, type the words: unsubscribe iowasn
Sending Messages.
To send a message to other school nurses, type your title in subject, your message in the body, and send to: iowasn@listserver.iowaccess.org No other special commands are necessary and joining is free.
NEWS: School Health Services Newsletter
The NEWS: School Health Services newsletter is on the DE web site at: http://www.state.ia.us/educate/programs/ecese/cfcs/health_promotion/ind ex.html The newsletter is available January 1, May 1, and September 1.
Please access the web site for newsletters.
Another way to access: Go to http://www.state.ia.us/educate; click on programs and services; click on Early Childhood, Elementary, and Secondary Education (ECESE); click on Bureau of Children, Family and Community Services; click on Iowa Communities and Schools Health Promotion Initiative; and scroll to the bottom and click on the newsletter.
Interpretative Statement: Iowa School Nurses and Delegation
The interpretative statement, prepared by the School Nurse Delegation Workgroup: Ellen Johnson, AEA 4; Susie Poulton, AEA 10, Kathy Deibert, AEA 6, and Charlotte Burt, DE and reviewed by Lois Churchill, Iowa Board of Nursing is proposed for comments and suggestions.
Please send comments to Charlotte Burt by February 1,2002.
Purpose: Today, increasing numbers of students need special health services to participate in their educational program.
Providing services requires interdisciplinary coordination between education, health, and human services.
These coordinated services include nursing delegation of school health services designed to protect student health, safety, and welfare.
The purpose of this interpretative statement is to provide a resource for school nurses and school personnel regarding the school nurse delegation decision-making process.
Background: The registered nurse (RN) delegates nursing tasks while retaining accountability.
There is no substitute for the professional registered nursing delegation judgment.
The basis of all delegation decisions is student safety and welfare.
Other workers have a place and are equipped to assist, but not replace, the registered nurse in nursing care.
RNs are accountable to provide safe, effective nursing care.
This requires employers, peers, and coworkers to support the RN and share responsibility in providing safe, quality health services.
The Iowa School Nurse is a registered nurse licensed to practice by a state board of nursing.
The School Nurse has the legal, professional, and ethical autonomy to make decisions about delegation in accordance with the:
· Iowa Code (Iowa Code § 152) Practice of Nursing, Iowa Administrative Code Nursing Practice for RNs (655 IAC 6), Iowa Administrative Code Discipline (655 IAC 4), and Advanced Registered Nurse Practitioner (655 IAC 7)
· Standards of Professional School Nursing Practice (National Association of School Nurses and American Nurses Association, 2001)
· School Nursing Code of Ethics (National Association of School Nurses, 1999)
To practice within the scope of delegation authority, the School Nurse is accountable and responsible for:
· maintaining documentation of personal competence and education
· knowledge, skills, experience, instruction, and supervision
· determining if the student specific service(s) may be delegated;
§ appropriate circumstances, setting, and resources
§ delegation to the right person for the right reason(s)
§ service direction and description including clear and concise objectives, limits, and expectations
§ supervision including monitoring, evaluation, intervention, and feedback (NCSBN Adopted by the Iowa Board of Nursing March 1996)
· action or failure to act of self or others performing health services included in the individual health plan and emergency plan
By applying the legal, professional, and ethical delegation obligations, the School Nurse begins the delegation decision-making process of assessment, diagnosis, outcome identification, planning, implementation, and evaluation (Appendix A Example).
The student's health file contains the detailed delegation decision-making process documentation (Appendix B Example).
Gathering Assessment Information: The School Nurse identifies:
· information sources including and not limited to health providers, student, family, and education team
· individual student health service needs
· resource needs
· student and or personnel supervision needs
Nursing Diagnoses and Outcome Identification: Once the assessment is completed, the resulting nursing diagnoses and outcomes direct services and determine action priorities in delegation decision-making.
The nursing diagnoses describe the student's current health status.
The outcomes are statements describing the desired health goals.
They are meaningful, measurable, observable, and useful in making decisions.
The School Nurse also considers their value to the student and family and the impact of their achievement on the student's school performance.
Applying the information obtained through assessment, diagnosis, and outcome identification, the School Nurse proceeds to the planning step of the delegation decision-making process.
Planning Individual Health Service(s) and Emergency Health Service(s): The School Nurse analyzes the assessment in consultation with the student, family, staff, and education team and determines whether to delegate considering:
· high outcome predictability (stability)
· minimal service complexity (competence)
· low harm potential for the student and others (harm)
· student level for self-care (self-care)
· minimal problem solving required (decision-making)
If the school nurse determines the student's safety and welfare requires the RN to provide the service, the nurse communicates with the education team on the delegation decision-making process.
The School Nurse develops the individual health plan (IHP) and emergency plan (EP) which includes a back-up plan(s) in case the service provider is not available.
After completing the planning step, the School Nurse proceeds to the implementation step of the delegation decision-making process.
Implementation: When the School Nurse determines the service may be safely delegated to another person, hereafter referred to as the assistive personnel, the School Nurse develops the assistive personnel implementation plan including:
· designating the assistive personnel to perform the service(s)
· instruction content and updates
· demonstrated competency level
· frequency and level of supervision (in same area, on site, or on call)
· provision of ongoing support
The assistive personnel providing the service(s):
· understands responsibility and accountability to provide the service(s) as instructed
· understands and follows lines of communication in the plan
· demonstrates service knowledge and skill(s) competency
· agrees to the level and frequency of supervision
· agrees to perform the service(s) as instructed (Iowa Code §§ 280.23)
· agrees to ask questions, communicate concerns promptly, and document service provision
· signs an agreement of understanding (Appendix C Example)
The School Nurse provides the ongoing continuous evaluation step of the delegation decision-making process following implementation.
Evaluation: The School Nurse will:
· review the delegated process and outcomes
· maintain ongoing communication and observation with assistive personnel
· determine follow-up measures to continue to meet student needs
· adjust the plan as needed to meet new and changing needs
· document the evaluation findings
The School Nurse's accountability and responsibility for student advocacy requires immediate reporting, documentation, and resolution of a situation when safety is in question.
"RNs are accountable to provide safe, effective nursing care.
This necessitates that employers, payers, peers, and coworkers support the RN and share the responsibility to provide safe, quality student health services" (Minnesota Nurses Association, 1997).
Summary
Iowa Registered School Nurses ensure safe provision of special health services through the delegation decision-making process.
This process allows students to receive and benefit from their educational program through the safe, competent provision of needed special health services.
Qualified health personnel determine service(s) to be delegated to assistive personnel with the utmost regard for student safety and protection.
Definitions
Accountability: The RN, according to their nursing license, is responsible and answerable for delegating special health services and self-action or inaction of self.
When assistive personnel accept delegation, they agree to be responsible for self-action or inaction in providing the service(s) as instructed.
Assistive personnel: An individual, without health licensure, including various titles (unlicensed assistive personnel, qualified designated personnel, classroom assistant, paraeducator, paraprofessional, secretary, teacher, and others) functioning in an assistive role delegated by the RN.
The assistive personnel is instructed, competent, and supervised in providing the health service(s) described in the individual health plan (281 IAC 41.96(1)).
Decision-making: The School Nurse uses the nursing process when determining health service delegation and documents the process.
Delegation: The School Nurse, in collaboration with the education team, assigns the performance of the health service(s) in a selected situation, not requiring the registered nurse knowledge and skill level, to a competent assistive personnel determined by the delegation decision-making process (Iowa Code § 152.1(2)(c)).
The recommendation of the licensed health personnel receives primary consideration.
When the delegation decision of the team members differ, a dissenting opinion may be filed (281 IAC 41.51).
The RN instructs and supervises the assistive personnel performing health service(s).
Additional references: Iowa Code 152.1(2)(c) and 655 IAC 6.2(5).
Documentation: Maintaining a written or electronic record of the decision-making assessment, diagnosis, outcome identification, planning, implementation (instruction, return demonstration, competency, assistive personnel agreements, communication), evaluation, and revision(s) of the health service(s) in the IHP, EP, and IEP.
Additional delegation documentation includes but is not limited to the student name, health service, prescriber, date, time, name and title of the person providing the service, detailed notes on service provision, and unusual circumstances.
Evaluation: Analysis of the student's response(s) to the delegation process and progress toward identified outcomes.
The data collected during the systematic ongoing evaluation is documented and used to make decisions about modifications, additions, or deletions.
The school nurse reviews the IHP, EP, and back-up plan in collaboration with the student, family, school team, and assistive personnel whenever the student's health status changes, or at least annually.
Health assessment: The process to determine the student's health status through the health information relating to the IHP and EP (281 IAC 41.96(1)).
Sources of information include, but are not limited to interviews with the student and family, review of the student health record and medical records, health history, physical assessments and measurements, developmental and or family assessments, school professional's observations, and the education team.
The school nurse interprets the information using professional knowledge and expertise to indicate how the health status affects educational performance and to determine delegation.
Health service instruction: Education by the school nurse or other qualified health personnel to prepare assistive personnel to deliver and perform special health services contained in the IHP and EP. Documentation of the education and updates is on file (281 IAC 41.96(1)).
Individual health plan (IHP): A written confidential document detailing the provision of the special health service(s) in the education program and desired outcomes.
The IHP, EP, and back-up (reserve or substitute) plans document the nursing process.
The school nurse and other qualified health personnel develop this document with the health provider, family, student, and education team.
The specific health services and provider(s) are included in the Individualized Educational Program (IEP), selected items integrated into the IEP, the plan(s) location noted in the IEP, and updated as needed and at least annually (281 IAC 41.96(1)).
Special health service: Includes, but is not limited to, service(s) for individuals whose health status, stable or unstable, requires interpretation or intervention, administration of health procedures and health care, or use of a health device to compensate for the reduction or loss of a body function (281 IAC 41.96(1)).
Supervision: The School Nurse provides oversight including and not limited to observation, guidance, direction, instruction, evaluation, and follow-up of the assistive personnel providing the delegated special health service(s) (NCSBN, 1995).
"Levels of supervision include situations in which licensed health personnel are physically present, licensed health personnel are available at the same site, and licensed health personnel are available on call" (281 IAC 41.96(1)).
Various levels of school health expertise
Registered nurse (RN): Licensed to practice nursing by a board of nursing to formulate nursing diagnoses, conduct nursing treatment, carry out physician instructions, supervise and teach other personnel in the performance of nursing care activities, perform additional services requiring education and training, and apply scientific principles (Iowa Code § 152 and 655 IAC 6).
· School Nurse: The School Nurse is a registered nurse, licensed to practice in accordance with the laws, rules, Standards of Professional School Nursing Practice (National Association of School Nurses and American Nurses Association, 2001) and the Code of Ethics for the School Nurse (National Association of School Nurses, 1999).
"School Nursing is a specialized practice of professional nursing that advances the well being, academic success, and life-long achievement of students.
To that end, school nurses facilitate positive student responses to normal development; promote health and safety; intervene with actual and potential health problems; provide case management services; and actively collaborate with others to build student and family capacity for adaptation, self management, self advocacy, and learning" (National Association of School Nurses, 1999).
· Nurse: Each board that employs a nurse shall require a current license to be on file (281 IAC 12.4(12)).
Statement of Professional Recognition (SPR), Board of Educational Examiners: Not required for employment.
Required to qualify for Phase funding.
SPR guideline requires Bachelor of Science in Nursing; current registered nurse license, employer letter requesting SPR, under contract (Iowa Code § 279.13), and items on file and in force by the third Friday in September.
· Special Education Nurse: Professional RN who assesses, identifies, and evaluates health needs of eligible individuals; interprets for the family and educational personnel how health needs relate to the individuals' education; implements activities within the practice of professional nursing; and integrates health into the educational program.
Special Education Nurse SPR (282 IAC 15.3(14)).
· Advanced Registered Nurse Practitioner (ARNP): Advanced RN practitioner educated in nursing with advanced nursing knowledge, physical and psychosocial assessment, interventions, health care management, and national professional nursing association certification approved by the board of nursing (655 IAC 7).
· Public health nurse: A registered nurse who has a baccalaureate degree in nursing or related field and has knowledge of prevention, health promotion, community health nursing, and public health concepts (641 IAC 79.2 (135)).
Physician: The qualified licensed physician provides consultation with school health professionals and the school administration; is familiar with federal, state and local laws, policies, and programs, and links with the medical community; consults on individuals and groups, procedures, curriculum, program and policy, and evaluation; reports on consultation activities; and participates in on site services (American Academy of Pediatrics, 1993).
Allied health personnel:
· Licensed Practical Nurse (LPN): Performs supportive or restorative care under the supervision of the RN (655 IAC 6.3(1)).
When the nursing care is provided by the LPN in a non-acute setting requiring the knowledge and skill level currently ascribed to the RN, the RN or physician must be present in the same building (655 IAC 6.3(6)).
In addition, the LPN may provide supportive and restorative care to a specific student in the school setting in accordance with the student's IHP and EP when under the supervision of and as delegated by the RN employed by the school district.
The RN determines the level of supervision (655 IAC 6.6(2)).
· Assistive personnel: An individual, without health licensure, employed and educated to function in an assistive role to the registered nurse in providing nursing care as delegated by the registered nurse.
Various assistive personnel titles include unlicensed assistive personnel (UAP), qualified designated personnel, classroom assistant, paraeducator (282 IAC 22), paraprofessional, secretary, teacher, and others.
The assistive personnel is instructed, competent, and supervised in providing the health service(s) described in the individual health plan (281 IAC 41.96(1)).
Community School Health Advisory Council: Members include a broad cross-section of parents, business and community members, and school staff to facilitate communication and problem solving about health-related issues of children and youth.
Each Council develops its own agenda, reflecting its community's concerns, values, and resources (Iowa Department of Public Health, 1999).
Resources
Hill, J.L. (1999).
Meeting the needs of students with special physical and health care needs.
Upper Saddle River, NJ: Prentice-Hall.
(Chapter 24)
Iowa Board of Nursing.
(2001).
Delegation position statement.
Des Moines, IA. IBN.
[On-line].
Available: http://www.state.ia.us/nursing/, http://www.state.ia.us/nursing/, Nursing Practice: http://www.state.ia.us/nursing/nursing_practice.html, Guidelines: http://www.state.ia.us/nursing/guidelines.html
Minnesota Nurses Association.
(1997).
Position paper: Delegation and supervision of nursing activities.
St. Paul, MN: Minnesota Nurses Association.
National Association of School Nurses and American Nurses Association.
(2001).
Scope and standards of professional school nursing practice.
Washington, DC: American Nurses Publishing.
National Association of School Nurses.
(1999).
The role of the school nurse (brochure).
Scarborough, ME: National Association of School Nurses, Inc.
National Council of State Boards of Nursing (NCSBN).
Delegation: Concepts and decision-making process.
[On-line].
Available: http://www.ncsbn.org and http://www.state.ia.us/nursing.guidelines.html.
Adopted by the Iowa Board of Nursing, March 1996.
National Council of State Boards of Nursing (NCSBN).
(1997).
Delegation decision-making grid.
[On-line].
Available: http://www.ncsbn.org and http://www.state.ia.us/nursing.guidelines.html.
Porter, S., Haynie, M., Bierle, T., Caldwell, T., 
Children and youth assisted by medical technology in educational settings: Guidelines for care (2^nd Ed.).
Baltimore, MD: Brookes.
State of Iowa.
(2001).
Iowa Code and Iowa Administrative Code.
Des Moines, IA: State of Iowa.
[On-line].
Available: http://www.legis.state.ia.us/.
Iowa Code § 22.7
Iowa Code Chapter 135; 641 I.A.C. 79.2
Iowa Code § 143.1
Iowa Code Chapter 152, .1(2)(c); 655 I.A.C. 4, 4.6(c); 6, 6.2(5), 6.3(1), 6.3(6), 6.6(1), 6.6(2), 7
Iowa Code Chapter 256, .7(24); 281 I.A.C. 12.3(4), (11); 12.4(12); 12.8
Iowa Code Chapter 256B; 281 I.A.C. 41.12(11), 41.51, 41.96(1), .25(3), .51, .96
Iowa Code Chapter 272; 282 I.A.C. 15.3(14), 22
Iowa Code § 279.13
Iowa Code § 280.23
Appendix A: Example Iowa School Nurse Delegation Decision-Making Tree
Does the RN have competencies,
knowledge, and skills to delegate?
|
Yes
|
^à^
No^ ^àDo not delegate
Obtain and document,
then proceed
Is the assessment completed including:
service needs, resources, supervision?
|
Yes
|
^à^
No^ ^à Do not delegate
Assess, then proceed
Are the diagnoses completed?
|
Yes
|
^à^
No^ ^à Do not delegate
Develop diagnoses,
then proceed
Is the outcome identification completed?
|
Yes
|
^à^
No^ ^à Do not delegate
Identify outcomes,
then proceed
Is the planning completed including:
stability, competence, harm,
self-care, and decision-making?
|
Yes
|
^à^
No^ ^àDo not delegate
Plan, then proceed
Is the implementation completed including:
competent and accepting assistive personnel
|
Yes
|
^à^
No^ ^àDo not delegate
Implement,
then proceed
Is the evaluation completed including:
review, feedback, follow-up,
plan adjustment, and documentation?
|
Yes
|
^à^
No^ ^àDo not delegate
Evaluate, then proceed
Is the student receiving their educational program and safe special health services?
^à^
Continue the ongoing Nursing Process delegation decision-making cycle
Adapted from the Delegation Decision Tree developed by the Ohio Board of Nursing and National Council of State Boards of Nursing, Inc/1997
Appendix B: Example Delegation Decision-Making Documentation
Name: __________________________ Birthdate: ________ _ School: _____ _____________
Assessment, Diagnosis, and Outcome summary:
Planning summary:
Implementation summary:
Evaluation summary:
Documentation: Consider the following in the decision-making process: Delegation decision rationale: (i.e., The student's health status is stable and the student has received this service for two years without any problems.
The service is a step-by-step procedure.)
Documentation when changes occur and at least annually
Planning
q high outcome predictability (stability)
q minimal service complexity (competence)
q low potential for harm (harm)
q student level for self-care (self-care)
q minimal problem solving required (decision-making)
Assistive personnel
q designate assistive personnel to perform the service(s)
q instruction content and updates
q demonstrated competency level
q frequency/level of supervision (same area, on site, on call)
q specify ongoing support
Implementation
q understands responsibility/accountability to provide the service(s) as instructed
q understands and follows lines of communication
q demonstrates service knowledge and skill(s) competency
q agrees to the level and frequency of supervision
q agrees to perform the service(s) as instructed
q agrees to ask questions, communicate concerns, and document service provision
q signs an agreement of understanding
Evaluation
q review the delegated process and outcomes
q document ongoing communication and observation
q determine follow-up to continue to meet student needs
q adjust the plan as needed to meet new and changing needs
q document the evaluation findings
<
