Historical Biography of the Month Osceola 1804-1838 "Where was Osceola kept?" is one of the most common questions asked by visitors at the Castillo de San Marcos National Monument in St. Augustine, Florida, referring to the imprisonment of this Seminole leader during the Second Seminole War in 1837.
Painting of Osceola by George Catlin Indeed, Osceola has captured the interest and imagination of generations of people.
He was not a chief.
His life was not long.
He probably was not a full-blooded Indian.
Yet, perhaps his life epitomizes the story of Indians everywhere as they tried to live their peaceful lives in the face of white power and aggression.
Little is known for sure about Osceolas childhood.
He was likely born around 1804 in the Upper Creek town of Tallassee, near present-day Tuskegee in eastern Alabama.
His great-grandfather, Scottish hunter James McQueen, had settled with the Tallassee Indians nearly a century before and had adopted their way of life.
His granddaughter Polly then married William Powell, an Englishman, and became the mother of a boy they called Billy.
Painting of Osceola by George Catlin
There was no Indian tribe known as Seminoles at this time.
Instead, there were remnants of once powerful peoples known as the Yamassees and Apalachees and a large mix of tribes known as Creeks by the whites because they lived along rivers and creeks in what is now Alabama, Georgia, and South Carolina.
As whites began to move into these lands, the native peoples were forced out.
Throughout the 18^th-century, more and more Indians were finding safe haven in Spanish Florida where the British (and later American) army could not pursue them.
They were joined by another group of runaways, black slaves, who also found safety in Florida.
Many of these blacks came to live with the Indians and adopt their ways.
This mixed group became known as "Seminoles" from the Spanish "Cimerones" for "wild" or "runaways".
The Creeks of Alabama were getting tired of the whites stealing their land.
In 1814, spurred by the rhetoric of Tecumseh, a Shawnee warrior from the north, these Indians known as "Red Sticks" decided to rebel.
Their first battle at Fort Mims north of Mobile was a victory.
Then the US army under Andrew Jackson retaliated.
They penetrated deep into Creek territory and won a decisive victory at Horseshoe Bend.
(See Horseshoe Bend National Monument at www.nps.gov/hobe)
The Creek Confederacy was broken.
Homeless and humiliated, about 1000 Red Sticks wandered south into Florida.
Among them were Billy and his mother who finally settled among the Micosuki Seminoles south of present-day Tallahassee.
Only ten years old, Billy had already seen war and death and had been forced from his home.
For a time, the Seminoles were able to plant crops and raise cattle, and live in peace.
But peace was not to last.
Groups of Seminoles were raiding cattle along the Florida, Alabama, and Georgia borders.
The whites retaliated and made raids against Indian towns.
But even more outrageous to the whites than Indian raids was the fact that so many black slaves were running away to Florida and joining the Indians.
The blacks had even occupied a small fort near the mouth of the Apalachicola River which had been abandoned by the British in the War of 1812.
In 1816 under orders from Andrew Jackson, General Edmund Pendleton Gaines attacked this fort and blew it to bits, killing 270 of the 300 defenders.
This infuriated both the Seminoles and the Spanish who considered the blacks their allies.
Neamathla, a leading Seminole Chief, issued a warning to Gaines to never enter Seminole territory again.
Gaines promptly sent 250 soldiers into Florida.
Thus began the First Seminole War.
Back and forth.
Back and forth.
One outrage after another.
An Indian attack was followed by an even larger white attack.
In 1821 Spain ceded Florida to the United States.
What little protection the Seminoles once had was gone.
Again Billy and his mother were forced to flee.
They went south with his uncle Peter McQueen to a village on Pease Creek (Peace River) in southwest Florida.
Again, they were safe for a time.
It was a custom among the Creeks that the men would drink large quantities of a strong tea brewed from the roasted leaves of yaupon holly.
Then they would vomit, purging themselves of evil spirits.
This "Black Drink", as it was called, was brought out in a large shell accompanied by singing.
When it was time for Billy Powell to take an adult name, he was given the name Asi Yaholo or "Black Drink Singer".
And so Asi Yaholo, in the wake of war, captivity, and retreat, officially passed into manhood at the Green Corn Dance that year.
Whites would come to pronounce his name "Osceola".
In 1823 Governor Du Val arranged for a meeting between representatives of the government and all the Florida Indians to be held near St. Augustine.
After two weeks of negotiations, this meeting resulted in the Treaty of Moultrie Creek.
The Seminoles would have to live on a million-acre reservation stretching from Charlotte Harbor to Tampa.
The government would provide them with an annuity and farming implements.
No white could enter the land without permission.
For their part, the Indians would have to stop harboring runaway slaves.
Micanopy, who had taken an active part in the negotiations, urged his people to move to the reservation.
Most, however, saw no reason why they should give up land they considered theirs by right.
Some did move to the reservation, but even they continued to assist the runaway blacks.
Meanwhile, severe droughts in 1825 and 1826 ruined many of the existing farms and brought many of the Indians to the brink of starvation.
Throughout Florida, Seminoles, white settlers, and government troops continued to clash over land, slaves, and food supplies.
Something would have to break.
In 1828 Andrew Jackson became president of the United States.
In 1832 Congress passed the Jackson-backed Indian Removal Bill which required that all Seminoles must be moved west of the Mississippi River.
Again government officials met with Seminole leaders in Florida, signing the Treaty of Fort Gibson.
As the chiefs understood it, they were to look over land in the west, and if they liked it, they could move their people there.
This, of course, was not what the government had in mind.
When the chiefs, used to warm, lush Florida, said they did not like the sparse, cold land of eastern Oklahoma, especially since some of their tribal enemies already lived there, the government officials said they would have to go anyway.
By this time, a few Seminole bands thought they had suffered enough.
They would move west.
Most, however, felt they had been betrayedby the US government and by their own chiefs.
Osceola, although now married with children, felt it was time to speak out.
He urged the Seminole leaders to resist this forced treaty.
He spoke against the lies and twisted words of the whites.
When he went to talk to Indian agent Wiley Thompson at Fort King (now Ocala), he was imprisoned for his boldness.
If the whites could lie, so would he.
After two days of refusing food, Osceola said he had changed his mind.
He would support the removal of his people.
Two other Seminole leaders Charley Emathla and Coa Hadjo vouched for him.
Thompson let Osceola go and gave him a fine rifle.
In December 1835 Osceola and 60 other Indians ambushed Thompson and his lieutenant and shot them dead.
A few days later Major Francis Dade and 108 soldiers were ambushed and killed as they marched with reinforcements towards Fort King.
Very likely Osceola had been there, as well.
A week later, the US army met Osceola, the Seminoles, and their black allies at the Battle of the Withlacoochee.
While not a rout, the army was forced to retreat.
Osceola was wounded, but this battle showed that the Seminoles could fight in an organized manner and that their removal from Florida was not going to be easy.
For the next year the Seminoles went on to mount a series of attacks against plantations in north Florida and along the St. Johns River close to St. Augustine.
General Winfield Scott was brought in to lead the war against the Seminoles.
There was an occasional skirmish with the army, but nothing decisive.
In 1837 General Thomas Jesup took over the Florida command.
He tried a different tactic.
He divided the Seminole lands into two zones.
His army would move through the territory like beaters in a pheasant shoot, moving the Indians ahead of them.
This plan bore fruit.
Slowly the bands of Seminoles were rounded up.
In October, 1837 Osceola and chief Coa Hadjo sent word that they would parlay.
General Jesup sent word to General Hernandez that the Seminoles could not be trusted and that he should capture them instead.
When the two sides met south of St. Augustine, the Seminoles were carrying a white flag of truce.
However, the army surrounded them, seized the leaders and their 81 followers and dragged them off to Fort Marion (as the Castillo de San Marcos was then known).
The news of Osceolas capture spread like wildfire.
The entire population of St. Augustine turned out to watch the illustrious leader paraded through the town.
A physician among the crowd stated that in spite of his haughty appearance, Osceola seemed unwell.
In fact, Osceola had been suffering from Malaria since the previous winter.
During their imprisonment in Fort Marion, twenty of the Indians managed to escape, perhaps through one of the high windows on the western wall.
Osceola was not among those, however, and after the escape, he was sent to Fort Moultrie in Charleston, South Carolina.
(Fort Moultrie is now part of Fort Sumter National Monument.
www.nps.gov/fosu) His family was allowed to join him there, but he died on January 30, 1838.
The artist George Catlin, who had painted his portrait at Fort Moultrie, was deeply impressed by Osceola, calling him "an extraordinary character" who seemed to be "grieving with a broken spirit, and ready to die, cursing the white man, no doubt, to the end of his breath."
In the Battle Of Lockahatchee in January, 1838 the Seminoles suffered another defeat.
Some of the Seminoles continued to fight off and on.
Others took their families deep into the swamps of South Florida, but most surrendered or were rounded up and sent on the long journey to the Oklahoma reservation.
Sources: Bland, Celia.
Osceola, Seminole Rebel.
New York: Chelsea House Publishers, 1994
