TESTIMONY PRESENTED BY COMMISSIONER SUSAN HAIGH RAMSEY COUNTY, MINNESOTA TO THE IMMIGRATION AND CLAIMS SUBCOMMITTEE OF THE HOUSE JUDICIARY COMMITTEE CONGRESS OF THE UNITED STATES June 26, 1997 Mr. Chairman, members of the Committee, my name is Sue Haigh and I am Chairperson of the Ramsey County Board of Commissioners.
I was elected to the Board in 1994 and, before assuming public office, I worked in the Ramsey County Attorneys Office, serving as chief legal counsel to the County Board, chief deputy prosecutor, and managing attorney.
Just a short walk from my office in downtown St. Paul is a two mile stretch of University Avenue that, 10 years ago, featured boarded up windows and a general aura of economic decay.
Today, that two-mile stretch is one of the more vibrant and thriving areas of the city, thanks -- in large part -- to the Hmong and other Southeast Asian entrepreneurs.
I am very pleased to be here today to testify on behalf of the Hmong Veterans Naturalization Act of 1997.
Ramsey County is home to over 25,000 Hmong, and we have been enriched both economically and culturally by their presence.
Every year, we are setting new records for the number of new Hmong high school and college graduates, new Hmong businesses opened, new Hmong homeowners, new Hmong lawyers, doctors, teachers, and social workers.
In 1994, three of the seven high school valedictorians in St. Paul were Hmong.
We have a Hmong school board member and Hmong police officers and Hmong judges.
Like other immigrant groups who came before them, the Hmong are seizing the opportunity provided them in America, and their efforts are a significant reason why we have so much optimism for the future of our County.
The impressive successes of the Hmong in Ramsey County is only one reason I am grateful for the opportunity to testify before you today.
I urge you to pass the Hmong Veterans Naturalization Act, not because of the contributions that the Hmong are currently making to the United States, but because of the deep and lasting contribution they and other Lao people made to our country and our servicemen when we needed them most.
In order to stem the expansion of Vietnamese Communist influence to Laos and to disrupt the Ho Chi Minh Trail supply route from North to South Vietnam, we recruited the Hmong to fight in our stead.
The Hmong responded to our request with valor and bravery.
They fought heroically and, because of their willingness to do so, uncountable numbers of U.S. soldiers did not have to fight and die in defense of Laos.
The Hmong paid a very heavy price for their efforts.
By some estimates, nearly 1/10 of the Hmong population was killed in the war between 1960 and 1975.
Many more were grievously wounded.
When it was all over, the Hmong were a hated enemy in their own country and well over 150,000 were forced to flee to refugee camps in Thailand, and eventually to the safety of other countries, most notably the United States.
The Hmong lived a rural, agrarian lifestyle in Laos that changed very little over the past 250 years.
A written Hmong language was only developed by Western missionaries in the 1950's, so the vast majority of the Hmong generation that grew up fighting in the war never became literate in their own language.
This has created a very difficult barrier for many in learning English and makes the achievements of the younger Hmong generations, raised in the refugee camps and in the United States, all the more impressive.
Add to that older Hmong veteran generation, the oppressive weight of 15 years or more of unremitting war, injury, suffering and loss, the tragedy of patriots forced to leave their homeland forever, the death or disappearance of countless friends and family, and it becomes easier to understand the high incidence of post-traumatic stress disorder and major depression that haunts so many Hmong veterans and so greatly affects their ability to learn and retain the necessary English and U.S. history to pass the citizenship test.
The sense of frustration felt by many of our Hmong veterans over the inability to make substantive progress toward U.S. citizenship has led to increasing talk of giving up or even suicide.
Their inability to become citizens represents to them their failure to continue to be able to contribute to their families.
Concern over the deteriorating emotional state of many Hmong veterans and widows has led Ramsey County to establish a Hmong Crisis Line to counsel, in the Hmong language, those who feel increasingly desperate and isolated.
I would like to tell you about Kao Yang who was recruited to fight on behalf of the U.S. when he was 13 years old.
At age 14, a rifle blew up in his face blinding him in one eye and leaving only very limited sight in the other.
Kao also suffers from shrapnel wounds in his neck and terrible nightmares almost nightly about the war.
Kao is now in his mid-thirties, is married and has six children.
Severe memory problems make it unlikely that he can retain enough English to become an American citizen.
I would like to tell you about Phia Thao, a widow of a Hmong soldier.
Phia, in flight from Laos after the war, saw her 5-year-old child shot in the back as he ran for the protection of her arms.
She has never recovered from this trauma.
She does not speak and does not respond to people around her.
There is no indication that Phia will ever qualify to become a citizen under current processing requirements, as her ability to learn English is significantly impaired.
I would like to tell you of many other Hmong in Ramsey County whose circumstances may preclude them from becoming a U.S. citizen even though they have served our country with distinction and honor for many years.
However, here is yet another factor that has been even more painful for me to observe which compels me to view the passage of the Hmong Veterans Naturalization Act of 1997 as a matter of justice.
When I talk to the Hmong in Ramsey County, even those who are highly educated and sophisticated about life in the United States, there is a deep sense of pain that the incredible sacrifices paid by the Hmong in service to this country have seemingly gone unnoticed and unappreciated.
Even in Ramsey County, where the Hmong have been such a strong presence for the past seventeen years, most of our native-born population do not know the great debt we owe to the Hmong and the countless American lives they saved through their own sacrifice.
Passage of the Hmong Veterans Naturalization Act will stand as a clear statement by the government and people of the United States that we recognize the debt we owe to the Hmong veterans, that we acknowledge them as true American patriots, and that we are honored, as well we should be, to count them among our fellow citizens.
[justice.gif] Judiciary Homepage
