[newbanner.jpg] STATE CONTINUES COMMITMENT TO ENFORCING LABOR LAWS BY RECOVERING WAGES FOR EMPLOYEES OF PHILADELPHIA-BASED FIRM TRENTON, March 4, 2003 - Maintaining its commitment to protecting the rights of workers, the state Department of Labor recently recovered $43,485.76 in recovered wages for New Jersey employees of a Philadelphia-based firm.
An investigation conducted by a special department task force resulted in a conviction for violations of the New Jersey Wage and Hour Law and the New Jersey Wage payment law.
Coast to Coast Labor Incorporated, a temporary employment agency, was charged with failing to maintain an accurate record of employment for 55 employees and failing pay the minimum hourly rate of $5.15 per hour, resulting in a total of $43,320.76 in lost wages.
The company also failed to pay $165.00 in overtime wages.
The company was required to pay $2,400.00 in penalties and court costs.
"This department is working hard to protect the rights of all workers in New Jersey and to see that their employers do not exploit them," said Labor Commissioner Albert G. Kroll.
"We're sending a clear message that New Jersey is committed to its workforce, both in finding jobs and protecting their interests in the workplace."
Kroll also noted that the enforcement efforts provide a level playing field for employers who routinely pay their employees properly for the time they have worked.
"We want to make sure that law-abiding employers don't find themselves competing against firms that cut costs at the expense of their workers," Kroll said.
Deputy Attorney General Candy Cure presented the state's complaints on behalf of the department.
Judge John Kasper of the Vineland City Municipal Court convicted the firm on February 10, 2003 and assessed the firm $500 fines on each of four counts, as well as $100 court costs on each count.
Recent enforcement efforts also led to the collection of nearly $10,000 in back wages for workers employed by a Cologne landscaping firm Guaranteeing that workers receive a full day's day for an honest day's work is part of the department's commitment to protecting its workforce.
Whether it's enforcing child labor, wage and hour, apparel registration, or other workplace rules, the department is devoting unprecedented attention to workers' rights.
"We will continue to enforce these laws steadfastly," Kroll said.
It's our legal, and moral, duty."
Kroll said that workers could file complaints about their wages or hours by calling the Department at (609) 292-7860.
Information about department programs can be found on line at www.nj.gov/labor.
