Press Banner LABOR COMMISSIONER ANNOUNCES INITIATIVE TO GET STUDENTS INTERESTED IN CONSTRUCTION CAREERS NEWARK, March 10, 2003 - Citing the unawareness by many students of the advantages of jobs in the construction trades, Department of Labor Commissioner Albert G. Kroll joined representatives from the Building Contractors Association of New Jersey (BCANJ) in unveiling a new initiative to heighten awareness of these career options.
A new school counselor resource guide, called "Construction: It's A Great Fit" is being distributed to counselors across the state.
It was developed with all students in mind but will focus on attracting women and minorities to the professions.
The guide will also be directly marketed to all schools in the Abbott districts.
The guide- an eye-catching packet with brochures and detailed descriptions of the professions- was developed by BCANJ and funded by a grant from the New Jersey Department of Labor.
" If you walk into any guidance office in any high school in America, you are bombarded by college brochures and information about careers in the military in bright eye-attracting color," Kroll said during a news conference at Newark Vocational High School.
"These are great options for many students.
But for other students who pass through those doors, the options presented aren't always the best option available.
Many students don't give a career in a construction profession as much thought as they should."
Kroll said students who are bright, physically fit, and have an eye for detail should consider options in careers as a carpenter, an operating engineer, a bricklayer, an ironwoker, or a construction craft laborer.
Kroll noted that there are many advantages to getting involved in a construction trade, including free education and training, great benefits, and good wages.
The average median wage for a job here in New Jersey is $31,660, while the average median wage for a job in the construction trades is $43,655.
Some union trade professionals make upwards of $100,000 a year.
"The construction trades have always been a vital part of New Jersey's economy," Kroll said.
"And they continue to be an important part to this day.
There are many large-scale projects currently underway and in the works that will maintain the strength of the industry here."
Transportation, sports and entertainment, and school construction projects will bring billions of dollars in economic activity and thousands of construction jobs to the state.
The Edison-based Building Contractors Association of New Jersey is made up of some 200 active and associate members who are engaged in commercial, institutional, and industrial construction.
BCANJ works to unify the construction industry in terms of labor relations, improved business methods, high safety standards, and overall project efficiency.
" The Building Contractors Association of New Jersey is extremely pleased that we are able to provide guidance and career counselors with this informational resource that will assist them in promoting the construction industry as an attractive option for bright students," said Jack Kocsis, executive director of BCANJ.
Providing funding for the construction careers kit is part of the department's ongoing commitment to building a strong workforce for the future.
Whether it's pre-employment training, apprenticeship programs, or the consolidation of workforce development and job training programs, the department will continue to take the lead in preparing workers and employers to compete in the new global economy
-30-
Previous Page
