[newbanner.jpg] STATE RECOVERS MORE THAN $950,000 IN BACK WAGES FOR OVER A HUNDRED WORKERS TRENTON, June 10, 2003 - Maintaining its commitment to protecting the rights of workers, the state Department of Labor recently recovered more than $950,000 in back wages owed to workers at two New Jersey companies.
As a result of efforts by the Department of Labor's Division of Wage and Hour Compliance, First Wave Intelligent Optical Networks paid 57 former employees a total of $866,501 and Career Works, Inc. paid 52 employees back wages totaling $85,069.48
Since taking office, the McGreevey administration has now collected more than $24.5 million in wages due to New Jersey workers.
"Not only is this income that rightly belonged to hard-working New Jerseyans, it is money in the hands of people that are most likely to reinvest it in the state's economy," said Labor Commissioner Albert G. Kroll.
Career Works, Inc, located at 601 Broad Street in Newark, operates an employment agency and vocational training school.
The division conducted the compliance action in response to complaints from 11 employees of the firm alleging they had not been paid wages for up to three weeks.
First Wave Intelligent Optical Networks, Inc., located at 960 Holmdel Road in Toms River, is a computer system development business.
The division conducted the compliance action after former employees of the firm complained they had not been paid their full wages in 2002.
"This department is working hard to protect the rights of all workers in New Jersey and to see that their employers do not exploit them," Kroll said.
"We're sending a clear message that New Jersey is committed to its workforce, both in finding jobs and protecting their interests in the workplace."
Kroll also noted that the enforcement efforts provide a level playing field for employers who routinely pay their employees properly for the time they have worked.
"We want to make sure that law-abiding employers don't find themselves competing against firms that cut costs at the expense of their workers," Kroll said.
In regard to public works construction, the Division of Wage and Hour Compliance now has 25 full-time professional staff dedicated solely to enforcement of the New Jersey Prevailing Wage Act and the related Public Works Contractor Registration Act.
The department listed as ineligible for public works projects 40 contractors and subcontractors and 48 individuals (of those firms) in 2001.
In 2002, the department listed 91 contractors and 119 individuals (of those firms).
In accordance with the statutory provision under the Prevailing Wage Act, all debarments are for a three-year period.
In 2003 to date, the department has debarred 54 contractors and subcontractors and 74 individuals (of those firms).
Guaranteeing that workers receive a full day's day for an honest day's work is part of the department's commitment to protecting its workforce.
Whether it's enforcing child labor, wage and hour, apparel registration, or other workplace rules, the department is devoting unprecedented attention to workers' rights.
Kroll said that workers could file complaints about their wages or hours by calling the Department at (609) 292-7860.
Information about department programs can be found on line at, http://www.nj.gov/labor
