navigation bar Sammy (Mascot) U.S. Government
Introduction | The Constitution | The Executive Branch The Legislative Branch | The Judicial Branch | State Government | Local Government Political Parties | Elections | The Nation's Capital | The Flag | The National Anthem The Great Seal | The Pledge of Allegiance
print version
U.S. Government 
donkey
E-Texts Outline of U.S. Government: Political Parties Political Parties in the U.S. (from U. S. Elections 2000)
Today, there are two major political parties in the United States, the Democratic and the Republican.
The Democratic Party evolved from the party of Thomas Jefferson, formed before 1800.
The Republican Party was established in the 1850s by Abraham Lincoln and others who opposed the expansion of slavery.
The Democratic Party is considered to be the more liberal party, and the Republican, the more conservative.
Democrats generally believe that government has an obligation to provide social and economic programs for those who need them.
Republicans are not necessarily opposed to such programs but believe they are too costly to taxpayers.
Republicans put more emphasis on encouraging private enterprise in the belief that a strong private sector makes citizens less dependent on government.
Both major parties have supporters among a wide variety of Americans and embrace a wide range of political views.
Americans do not have to join a political party to vote or to be a candidate for public office, but running for office without the money and campaign workers a party can provide is difficult.
After the 1998 elections, there was one lone representative in Congress who was elected as an independent, while only 20 (0.003 percent) of the more than 7,300 state legislators elected were neither Republicans nor Democrats.
It is the two major parties that organize the government at both the national and state levels.
See also: About the USA 
Abridged from U.S. State Department IIP publications and other U.S. government materials.
Background · A Brief History of American "Major Parties" and the "Two Party Systems" in the United States (The Green Papers) · Democratic Party · Political Parties (Grolier Online) · Political Parties in the United States (Encarta.
MSN Learning and Research Page) · Republican Party For High School Students · Party System (American Memory.
Library of Congress) · What Do Parties Stay For? (Scholastic) Teacher Resources · In Praise of Political Parties (Schools of California Online Resources for Education) · Third-Party Politics (U.S.News Classroom) Link Lists · Contacting National Political Parties (National Political Index) · Directory of Political Parties (Politics1.com) · Political Parties (University of Michigan Library) · Yahoo! U.S. Political Parties
Adobe PDF Document Download FREE Adobe Acrobat© Reader to view PDF files on this site.
Adobe PDF Conversion by Simple Form
DISCLAIMER Any reference obtained from this server to a specific commercial product, process, or service does not constitute or imply an endorsement by the United States Government of the product, process, or service, or its producer or provider.
The views and opinions expressed in any referenced document do not necessarily state or reflect those of the United States Government.
U.S. Diplomatic Mission to Germany /Public Affairs/ Information Resource Centers Updated: September 2003
