Salmon Surf Smelt Sand Lance Kelp Eelgrass Native Plants Madrone Maple Bald Eagle Scoter Shorebird Heron Guillemot Geoduck Harbor Seal [USEMAP:shore_logo_beach23.jpg] [nav_bar_white-01-01.gif]
Often seen on high bluffs, sculpted by winds.
Offers good erosion control.
Tough, highly adaptable tree; grows in dunes, bogs, and rocky bluff soils.
Tolerates salt spray.
Thrives in full sun.
May grow with a crooked trunk over 30 feet tall.
Can live over 200 years.
Provides food for butterfly larvae and more than 13 bird species.
Songbirds roost and nest in the cavities of mature trees.
Bushtits, kinglets, chickadees, and woodpeckers feed on insects found on the branches and cones.
Pacific Yew Native evergreen conifer.
Creates deep, wide roots and offers excellent erosion control.
Common shrubby understory tree in moist forests.
Can grow over 60 feet tall and live over 250 years.
Yellow flowers appear on male trees in the spring, creating pollen for green female flowers which become red berries in the fall.
Although the berries are poisonous to humans, they are highly attractive to birds which eat them and spread the seeds.
Western red cedar
Western red cedar Large evergreen conifer with graceful limbs, lacy foliage, and reddish-gray bark.
Offers good erosion control.
Thrives in shady and wet sites.
Generally holds up well in wind and rarely drops limbs.
Can grow over 200 feet tall.
Excellent for planting in buffers with existing trees and shrubs.
Cedar foliage provides important shelter and nesting spots for birds such as juncos, jays, and warblers.
Winged seeds are eaten by grosbeaks, sparrows, waxwings, nuthatches, and siskins.
Serviceberry
Serviceberry Native deciduous tree or shrub.
Offers excellent erosion control.
Thrives in full to partial sun in open woodlands, sunny banks, and shrub borders.
Grows to twelve feet or more.
Provides food for 21 species of birds.
Attractive flowers of pure white clusters in the spring.
Red-black seedy berries are relished by birds in August.
Fall foliage turns to brilliant reds and yellows, adding color to the landscape.
Prized by many English gardeners for foliage, flower, and fruit.
Also called Saskatoon berry, June berry and shadbush.
Madrone Native broad-leaved evergreen tree.
Offers outstanding erosion control.
Thrives in poor, dry soil on bluffs.
White spring flowers attract spring azure butterflies, bees, and hummingbirds.
Madrones also provide larval food for the brown elfin butterfly and the ceonothus silk moth.
Orange-red berries furnish food for many birds including: quail, band-tailed pigeons, flickers, varied thrushes, waxwings, evening grosbeaks, mourning doves, and robins.
Madrones do best when they are left alone; do not disturb the roots, injure the bark, or irrigate.
More about madrone... vine maple
Vine maple Native deciduous tree or multi-stemmed shrub.
Grows 15 to 30 feet.
Offers good erosion control and is tolerant of shade and moist conditions.
Vine maple seeds are eaten by grosbeaks, woodpeckers, nuthatches, finches, quail, and grouse.
Vine maples also provide nectar for bees and food for butterfly larvae.
Big leaf maple
Big leaf maple Native deciduous tree.
Deep, wide root system.
Offers excellent erosion control.
A fast-growing tree that needs plenty of room.
Grows up to 70 feet.
Can live over 200 years.
Tolerates gravelly slopes.
Provides food for 9 bird species.
More about big leaf maple...
Sitka Spruce Native, fast-growing evergreen conifer with stiff, prickly needles.
Offers good erosion control.
Often found in coastal wetlands.
Grows over 100 feet.
May live over 300 years.
Tolerates wet sites in full sun or partial shade.
Many birds eat the seeds, including: nuthatches, finches, grosbeaks, siskins, crossbills, goldfinches, and sparrows.
Provides shelter for birds and mammals, particularly in the winter.
Raptors such as bald eagles may nest in large, mature spruce trees.
back
Home - Tour - Beaches - Bluffs 
Comments? E-mail: Tim Schlender
