RSC Information About RSC Conservative Activity Issues Library Legislative Bulletins (analysis of legislation pending before the House) Weekly Message Policy Briefs Press Releases Values Action Team Home E-Mail RSC: RSC@mail.house.gov Neil.Bradley@mail.house.gov Pro-Life Conservative Activity (107th Congress) ABORTION, ABSTINENCE EDUCATION, CLONING 
Released by Rep. Joe Pitts
ysquare.jpg (424 bytes) "The Partial-Birth Abortion Ban Act of 2002" (H.R. 4965): The bill would prohibit the performance of a partial-birth abortion with the only exception being if this abortion method is necessary to save the life of a mother.
To read some key facts about partial-birth abortion, click here.
Introduced by Rep. Steve Chabot
ysquare.jpg (424 bytes) Akin Title X Parental Notification Requirement for Distribution of Contraceptives to Minors: legislation that would require written notice be provided to parents at least five business days before contraceptive drugs and devices are distributed to their minor child.
To be introduced by Rep. Todd Akin
ysquare.jpg (424 bytes) Press Release: to denounce the Senate's possible consideration of a two-year moratorium on human cloning.
"A moratorium implies that cloning is immoral today, but perhaps two years from now it will be moral," Rep. Weldon said.
Released by Rep. Dave Weldon
ysquare.jpg (424 bytes) Joint Press Release: calling for a Massachusetts cloning firm to return all of its government grant funds and for a prohibition on future funding of this firm because it cannot prove that it did not use taxpayer money to clone human embryos.
Released by Rep. Joe Pitts and Rep. Dave Weldon
ysquare.jpg (424 bytes) "The Women's Health and Safety Protection Act" (H.R. 482): a "Dear Colleague" letter in response to recent deaths of mothers from the abortion-inducing drug "RU-486", and a related Washington Post article.
Sent by Rep. David Vitter
ysquare.jpg (424 bytes) Letter to Associated Press' Washington Bureau Chief: objecting to the AP's consistent description in a recent news story of a completely born baby as a "fetus."
To read the AP story in which a completely born baby is described as a "fetus, click here.
Sent by 17 House Republicans, mostly RSC Members
ysquare.jpg (424 bytes) "Adoption Information Act" (H.R. 3006): Summary of a bill to require that all family planning clinics that accept Title 10 funds provide a detailed pamphlet of adoption information to all people inquiring about family planning services.
Introduced by Rep. Jo Ann Davis
ysquare.jpg (424 bytes) Press Release: to call for an end to federal funds going to firms experimenting on human cloning.
25 Members of Congress wrote to Commerce Secretary Donald Evans complaining that a $1.89 million federal grant was awarded in October to Advanced Cell Technology, a firm that says it has cloned human cells.
Sent by Rep. Joe Pitts
ysquare.jpg (424 bytes) "Cloning Ban": a "Dear Colleague" letter encouraging House members to urge the Senate to consider and pass the cloning-ban legislation (H.R. 2505) passed by the House on July 31, 2001.
Sent by Rep. Dave Weldon
ysquare.jpg (424 bytes) "Supporting Crisis Pregnancy Centers": a resolution honoring the more than 2500 crisis pregnancy centers in America.
To read a "Dear Colleague" letter explaining the resolution, click here.
Introduced by Rep. Bob Schaffer
ysquare.jpg (424 bytes) Cloning Fact Sheet: a detailed fact sheet on human cloning.
H.R. 2505 would truly stop human cloning in the United States, passed the House 265-162 on July 31, and a companion bill, S. 790, is awaiting action in the Senate.
Released by Rep. Joe Pitts
ysquare.jpg (424 bytes) "Adoption Information Act" (H.R. 3006): to ensure that eligible federally funded family planning clinics provide adoption information and lists of adoption agencies to every individual who requests family planning services.
Introduced by Rep. Jo Ann Davis
ysquare.jpg (424 bytes) Press Release: a statement marking the one-year anniversary of the FDA's approval of the abortion drug, RU-486.
Released by Rep. David Vitter
ysquare.jpg (424 bytes) Press Release touting the Judiciary Committee's passage of his "Born-Alive Infants Protection Act": The bill would firmly establish that an infant who is completely expelled or extracted from his or her mother, and who is alive, is considered a person for purposes of federal law.
Released by Rep. Steve Chabot
ysquare.jpg (424 bytes) "Post-Abortion Depression Research and Care Act" (H.R. 2805): to provide $15 million to the National Institutes of Health to research the emotional impact of abortion on women and to create a $1.5 million grant program to fund the development of treatment programs for women who suffer from post-abortion depression.
To read a summary of the legislation, click here.
Introduced by Rep. Joe Pitts
ysquare.jpg (424 bytes) Announcement about "The Human Cloning Prohibition Act" (H.R. 2505): the bill to ban all human cloning has been reported favorably by the House Judiciary Committee and is likely to come to the House floor shortly.
By Rep. Dave Weldon
ysquare.jpg (424 bytes) Commentary: A commentary was released entitled, "Killing Human Embryos Is Wrong."
By Rep. Joseph Pitts
ysquare.jpg (424 bytes) Letter to Secretary of Health and Human Services, Tommy Thompson: encouraging him to consider an alternative to embryo-destroying stem cell research.
Sent by Rep. Ron Lewis and Rep. Robert Aderholt
ysquare.jpg (424 bytes) "Born-Alive Infant Protection Act" (H.R. 2175): a "Dear Colleague" letter seeking co-sponsors for his "Born-Alive Infant Protection Act", which would establish that a live infant who has been completely expelled or extracted from the mother's womb would be considered a person for the purposes of federal law.
Introduced by Rep. Steve Chabot
ysquare.jpg (424 bytes) "Human Cloning Prohibition Act of 2001" (H.R. 1644): a resolution to prohibit human cloning.
To read a fact sheet on human cloning, click here.
Introduced by Rep. Dave Weldon
To Read PDF files: Download Adobe Acrobat Reader acrobat.gif (1692 bytes)
