WHAT'S NEW Creative Ways to Help Here are several creative things you can do to show your support to the men and women working to keep us safe or to remember those lives lost.
Not only will it feel good to use your imagination and creativity, but you will be doing it all for a good cause.
Safety Pin Flags
What you will need: 10 regular sized safety pins One larger safety pin 25 blue beads 30 white beads 35 red beads
Directions:
1.
Place a red bead on a regular sized safety pin.
Place a white bead on after that.
Alternate between the red and white until the safety pin is full.
You should end up with five red beads and four white beads on the safety pin.
2.
Repeat step one so that you have five completed safety pins.
You should have five regular sized safety pins left.
3.
Take one of the empty safety pins and put five blue beads on it.
4.
Take the same safety pin and alternate between white and red beads.
You should end up with five blues, two whites, and two reds on the safety pin.
5.
Repeat steps three and four until you have used all the regular safety pins.
6.
Take the larger safety pin and string the regular safety pins on it.
Put the five pins with blue on first and then the five red and white only safety pins.
7.
Your pin should look like an America flag now! Wear it with pride!
Paint a Mural
A mural is a great way to express how you feel and help the community, too.
You can use paint for a permanent mural or sidewalk chalk for a temporary mural.
Use your imagination and see what you come up with.
What you need: Paint or chalk Paint brushes A building, sidewalk, or paper to paint on Permission (to paint on someone else's property)
Directions: 1.
Talk to your friends, teachers, and principal about making a mural at your school.
2.
Pick a date and time to create your mural.
3.
Spread the word at school.
4.
Get to work! Paint American flags, handprints, or words that express how you feel.
5.
Take pictures of your mural.
For more information or tips on how to paint a mural, visit http://www.dosomething.org/newspub/story.cfm?id=1002
Beaded Bracelet
Show your support by making a red, white, and blue bracelet.
Follow the instructions we gave you on this page, www.girlpower.gov/girlarea/gamespuz/beadedjewelry.htm, but just use red, white, and blue beads.
Dress Up as Someone You Admire for Halloween
For Halloween this year, how about dressing up as a firefighter, police officer, nurse, or doctor? By doing this, you can show your support for someone that you admire.
Is there anyone else you can think of that is a hero to you? Halloween isn't far away.
You can start planning your costume now.
Links for More Ideas
http://www.nick.com/all_nick/specials/bighelp/america/helpamerica.jhtml
Send This Page to a Friend envelope
squiggly bar
Body FX | You're Not Alone | Science 
Please e-mail all comments, questions, or suggestions to gpower@health.org.
Se Habla Español
Accessibility, Privacy Policy, and Disclaimer
squiggly bar
