US National Archives and Records Administration ...ready access to essential evidence...
Calendar of Events Attention users of screen reader software.
There are 4 possible starting points on this page, please select where you want to start using this page from the following choices: Start at the NARA Website Quick-links Skip the NARA Website Quick-links and start from the main navigation choices Skip the Quick-links and the Main Navigation choices and go to the Section-Specific Navigation choices Skip all navigation choices on this page and go directly to the content.
The NARA Website quick-links below provide a way to immediately navigate to frequently accessed areas of NARA's Website.
Where is Hot Topics / What's New Where is The Constitution Where is The Declaration of Independence Where is The Bill of Rights Where is Genealogy Where is Veterans' Service Records Where is Archival Research Catalog (ARC) Where is Access to Archival Databases (AAD) Where is eVetRecs Where is Electronic Records Archives (ERA) Where is Archives Library Info.
Center (ALIC) Where is Calendar of Events Where is FAQs Where is FOIA Reading Room Where is Information Security Oversight Office Where is Interagency Working Group (IWG) Where is Locations and Hours (Facilities) Where is Media Desk Where is Organization Chart Where is Preservation Where is Prologue Magazine Where is Publications How do I Use this Site How do I Order Copies How do I Contact NARA How do I Visit NARA How do I Apply for a Job How do I Volunteer at NARA How do I Research Online How do I Find a Public Law How do I Apply for a Grant How do I Find Records Management Training Attention users of screen reader software.
The NARA Website quick-links above are repeated verbatim in a HTML form below.
The form below is designed for traditional web browsers.
Select this link to skip past the form.
[ Where Is...? / How Do I...?..........]
GO! December 26, 2003
Welcome About Us Research Room Records Management Records Center Program Federal Register NHPRC and Other Grants Exhibit Hall Digital Classroom Records of Congress Presidential Libraries Search Site Index The National Archives Experience Our Documents - A National Initiative on American history, civics, and service Support the National Archives FirstGov: Your First Click to the U.S. Government Print-Friendly Version [clear_pixel.gif] Sections skip section navigation menu 1 skip to content Main Section Calendar of Events Main Page Main Section January 2004 Main Section December 2003 Main Section What to Know Before You Visit Main Section Things to Do When You Visit Resources skip to content Main Section Mailing List Main Section Locations 
Restoring the Historic Murals in the National Archives Building
Richard Blondo Archives Specialist National Archives Building Renovation Team Mural, before conservation Mural, after conservation
This detail of Barry Faulkner's Declaration of Independence mural depicts Founding Fathers Joseph Hewes and Edward Rutledge.
The photograph at left shows some of the buckling where the mural had lost connection to the wall.
The photograph at right shows what that section looks like after it was restored and rehung in the Rotunda.
When the Rotunda of the National Archives Building reopens in September, visitors will once again be able to view the original Charters of Freedom.
As they enter the hall, they will see, as visitors have for 65 years, the two large-scale murals that depict fictional scenes of the presentation of the Declaration of Independence and the Constitution.
But the paintings will have a new look--no longer tired and dingy, they have been painstakingly cleaned and conserved.
In the decades after Barry Faulkner created these murals in 1936, they had noticeably deteriorated.
The plaster behind the canvases had crumbled in places, causing buckles and bulges.
Some paint layers had separated.
Dust and detritus that accumulated over the decades had caused the images to become dingy.
Even though some surface cleaning had taken place in 1970, they needed full conservation treatment.
As part of the overall renovation of the National Archives Building, the Rotunda was closed July 5, 2001, until September 17, 2003, thus allowing time for the murals to be removed, conserved, and reinstalled in a thorough, deliberate manner.
Several donors have made the murals project possible.
The effort was supported in part by a grant from Save America's Treasures through a partnership between the National Endowment for the Arts and the National Park Service, Department of the Interior.
Gifts also came from the John S. and James L. Knight Foundation and the Bay Foundation.
The conservation of the Rotunda murals was designated an official Save America's Treasures project in 1999.
Atlantic Company of America, Inc., was general contractor for Olin Conservation, Inc., which planned and performed the heroic task of removing the massive murals, transporting them to a specially constructed conservation lab, restoring the artwork, and reinstalling them.
Under the direction of senior conservator David Olin, the conservation team began its work in November 2000.
UBS, Inc. (a scaffolding contractor), erected a special curved scaffold in the Rotunda.
The mural surfaces underwent preliminary cleaning to remove dust and grime.
Tissue paper was adhered to the painted surface to protect the paint in preparation for removing the murals off the curved walls.
Because the murals had been affixed to the walls with a lead adhesive, the removal process had to follow stringent lead-abatement procedures.
After softening the adhesive layers, the murals could be painstakingly separated from the wall.
Only moderate amounts of plaster and excess lead adhesive remained affixed to the back of the canvas.
The paintings were gradually rolled onto enormous aluminum spools as they came off the walls, then transferred from the metal spools to very large and sturdy cardboard tubes.
In December 2001, a team of movers carried the rolled murals out the back door of the Rotunda, down the marble staircase to the Pennsylvania Avenue lobby, and out the door to a waiting truck that whisked them to the conservation laboratory where they remained until November 2002, when the studio conservation work was complete.
While in the lab, remnants of plaster and adhesive were removed, and the murals were flattened.
The paintings were infused with a synthetic wax resin to stabilize the aged canvas and the underlying paint.
Then the tissue paper on the painted surface, the paste from the tissue paper, the layers of grime, and varnish were removed with meticulous care.
Next, the murals were expertly cleaned to remove discolored varnish and coatings.
In December 2002, the murals were reinstalled onto aluminum panels newly affixed to the Rotunda walls.
The panels cannot be seen, but they will make it easier to remove the murals again whenever they require conservation.
After final varnishing, in-painting was done in small areas where paint had flaked off.
A temporary barrier was placed over the murals in January 2003 to protect them as the Rotunda renovation proceeded.
When the Rotunda reopens in September, the murals will be seen in all their glory in the light of a new fiber-optic system designed and installed by BAND, Inc. (a lighting contractor).
Barry Faulkner would be pleased.
_________________________________________________________________
May 
Top of Page
Privacy and Use Accessibility Frequently Asked Questions Contact Us NARA Home Page NARA Address: 700 Pennsylvania Avenue NW, Washington, DC, 20408, Telephone: 1-86-NARA-NARA or 1-866-272-6272
[nojavascript
