DWIGHT D. EISENHOWER LIBRARY ABILENE, KANSAS LEE, ROBERT E.: PAPERS, 1947-1993 Accession: A98-10 Processed by: HP Date Completed: October 2000 The papers of Robert E. Lee, Commissio ner, Federal Co mmunicat ions Co mmissio n, were deposited in the Eisenhower Library in 1998 by his widow, Mrs. Rose Lee.
Linear feet shelf space occupied: Approximate number of pages: Approximate number of items: 6.3 6,500 2,000 In October 2000 Mrs. Lee executed an instrument of gift for these papers.
By agreement with the donor the fo llowing classes of documents will be withheld from research use: 1.
Papers and other historical materials the disclosure of which would constitute a clearly unwarranted invasio n of personal privacy of a living person.
Papers and other historical materials that are specifically authorized under criteria established by statute or execut ive order to be kept secret in the interest of nat ional defense or foreign policy, and are in fact properly classified pursuant to such statute or executive order.
2.
SCOPE AND CONTENT NOTE The Robert E. Lee Papers span the period of 1947 to 1993 with the bulk concentrated between 1953 and 1981 while he served as commissio ner on the Federal Co mmunicat ions Co mmissio n.
The papers contain a small quantit y of correspondence, plus considerable speeches, articles, and subject files.
The papers are divided into three series: a correspondence series, a subject series, and a speech series.
Folder tit les wit hin the first two series are in alphabet ical order and the speech files in the third series are in chrono logical order.
The actual documents within all o f the fo lders are in reverse chrono logical order.
The small Correspondence Series includes correspondence several U.S. Presidents, and a variet y of other individuals.
such subjects as his no mination to the FCC, FCC rules, the broadcast licenses, and responsibilit y of broadcasters to act with numerous members of Congress, His personal correspondence covers "fairness doctrine," renewal o f in the public interest.
The Subject File includes articles by Lee as well as articles and clippings relat ing to Lee's career and FCC issues, hearings, rules, decisio ns, and polic ies.
The Communicat ions Act of 1934, FCC cases, Lee's work on the Investigative Staff of the House Appropriat ions Co mmittee, the development of COMSAT, Senator Joseph McCarthy, UHF TV, the Sunshine Act, Radio MartiCuba, Lee's reappoint ments to the FCC in 1960, 1967, and 1974, Lee's retirement in 1981, staff memos on FCC matters, legislat ive oversight of the FCC, FCC rulings re televisio n stations owned by Mrs. Johnson, and the USIA are all topics covered in this series.
The Speech Series contains copies of his speeches fro m 1954 to 1992 as well as background notes, drafts, statements, correspondence, and articles relat ing to his speech topics.
Some of the topics reviewed in his speeches include funct ions and problems of the FCC, subscript ion televisio n, equal t ime principle in po lit ical broadcasts, TV programming, educational televis io n, FM radio, VHF and UHF TV, role of communicat ions in civil defense, allo cat ion of televis io n channels, quiz shows, advertising, all-channel televis io n, "fairness doctrine," satellites, and data communicat ions.
International conferences on teleco mmunicat ions, amateur radio, spectrum allocat ions, the ratings system, legislat ion affect ing the FCC, federal regulation o f the broadcast industry, and Lee's experiences on the FCC are addit ional subjects covered in Lee's speeches and statements.
The last box of this co llect ion contains Lee's official certificates signed by Presidents Eisenhower, Johnson, and Nixo n as well as certificates.
Forty-four photographs have been transferred to the seven plaques have been transferred to the museum.
No materia donor's deed of gift, and there are no securit y classified items in of appo intment to the FCC so me addit ional awards and audiovisual depart ment and ls have been closed under the this co llect ion.
The Robert E. Lee Papers contain some valuable insights into the work of the Federal Communicat ions Commissio n during an important era when televis io n was rapidly developing and satellites and co mputers were first beginning to have an impact on teleco mmunicat ions and the broadcast industry.
The documentation on the FCC in this co llect ion is unique to our ho ldings and provides an excellent resource for anyo ne studying the FCC and teleco mmunicat ions policies in the 1950's, 60's, and 70's.
Commissio ner Lee played an act ive role in developing modern teleco mmunicat ion policy during his twenty-eight year tenure on the FCC.
He vigorously pro moted the concept of all-channel televisio n receivers and earned the tit le of "the father of UHF TV."
Further details on his life and career are available in his autobiography, In the Public Interest: The Life of Robert Emmet Lee From the FBI to the FCC by Robert Emmet Lee with John Shosky (a copy is in our Book Collect ion).
BIOGRAPHICAL NOTES March 31, 1912 1920's 1931-35 1932-33 1933-34 1935 1935-38 Born in Chicago, Illino is Attended St. Vincent's Grammar School Attended DePaul Universit y, Co llege of Co mmerce and Law Night clerk and night auditor at the Congress Hotel, Chicago Assistant auditor at Great Northern Hotel, Chicago Auditor, Roosevelt Hotel, St. Louis, Missouri Auditor, American Bond and Mortgage Company Bo ndho lders Protective Committee Married Wilma "Rex" Rector Special Agent, Federal Bureau of Invest igat ion, performed invest igat ive work in Washington, D.C., Newark, N.J., New York Cit y, and Chicago Chief Clerk, FBI and Administrative Assistant to J. Edgar Hoover, Washington, D.C.
Director of Surveys and Invest igations, House Appropriations Co mmittee Commissio ner, Federal Co mmunicat ions Commissio n Vice-chairman of U.S. delegat ion, Space Conference, Geneva First wife died Chairman of U.S. delegation to Telephone and Telegraph Conference, Geneva Chairman of U.S. delegation to World Administrative Radio Conference for Marit ime, Geneva Married Mrs. Rose Anne Bente Chairman of U.S. delegation to World Administrative Radio Conference for Broadcast Satellites, Geneva Delegate, International Conference on Satellite Communication, Dublin, Ireland July 1936 1938-41 1941-46 1946-53 1953-81 1971 1972 1973 1974 Sept. 27, 1974 1977 Oct. 1979 March 1980 Chairman of U.S. delegation, Inter-American Teleco mmunicat ion Conference, Buenos Aires Delegate to Geneva World Administrative Conference on Broadcast Satellites Consultant on teleco mmunicat ions for law firm, Fletcher, Heald, and Hildreth Died, Arlington, Va. 1983 1980's April 15, 1993 CONTAINER LIST Box No. 1 Contents Items Transferred to the Museum Photographs Transferred to Audiovisual SERIES I. CORRESPONDENCE, 1953-1993 Congressio nal Correspondence-Congressmen, 1953-54 (1)(2) [congratulat ions on his no minat ion and confirmat ion; Melvin Laird and Gerald Ford; left staff of House Appropriat ions Comm. in October 1953; televisio n monopoly in St. Louis area; letters to members of House Appropriations Co mm. ; press react ion to Lee's friendship with McCarthy]
President ial Correspondence, l953-l993 [Ronald Reagan-thank you for past service; Gerald Ford; Dwight Eisenhower-thank you for contribut ion to 1952 campaign] Box No. 1 (cont.)
Contents SERIES II.
SUBJECT FILE, 1947-1993 Art icles and Clippings, 1938-1958 [radio important to U.S. defense; speech by Lee, "Gifts of God;" Lee was named after an Irish patriot; subscript ion or pay TV; object ionable advert ising; so me press opposit ion to Lee's appoint ment to FCC due to his friendship with McCarthy; Sen. McCarthy marries; opposit ion of Democrats to Lee appoint ment; work with House Appropriat ions Co mm. and FBI] Art icles and Clippings, 1959-1962 [death of McCarthy; hearings in Chicago on TV programming; FCC docket cases; UHF TV; Newton Minow proposed "children's hour" for TV; FCC and TV quiz shows]
Contents Art icle, Look, 1956 [article by Lee favoring subscription or paid TV] Art icle, "Ode to the FCC," 1984 [humorous verses by Lee re FCC past and future]
Art icle re FCC, INTV Journal, 1988 [broadcast indecency] Art icle re Moishe Kessler, 1974 [account by Lee of case he worked while in the FBI, early 1940's]
Art icle, "The Federal Co mmunicat ions Co mmission," by Kenneth Cox, 1970 [90page article focuses primarily on broadcast regulation during the decade of the sixt ies] Art icle, TV Digest, c 1980's [free and cable televisio n]
Contents Chief Co mmissio ner, 1975 [Lee becomes the longest serving U.S. commissio ner] China Trip, 1980 (1)-(6) [background information and material on China, U.S.China exchanges, Chinese teleco mmunicat ions, and Chinese televisio n; it inerary in China; teleco mmunicat ions market assessment; teleco mmunicat ions network; book list]
Interview, COMSAT History Project, 1985 [transcript of interview wit h Lee; origins and development of COMSAT; T.A.M Craven; Joseph Charyk; satellite vs. cable; Nicho las Johnson; AT
Contents Letter to Washington Post, 1978 [newspaper-televis io n link; FCC decisio n upheld in Supreme Court] Longest Serving FCC Co mmissio ner, 1977 McCarthy, Sen. Joseph, Remarks re, 1957 [remarks on death of McCarthy; Sen. George Malone; Fulton Lewis, Jr. broadcast; Sen. Wiley; Sen. Knowland; Sen. Johnson; Sen. Saltonstall; Sen. Smit h; Sen. Mundt; Sen. Young; articles re McCarthy reprinted in Congressio nal Record from various newspapers; Sen. Thurmond; Sen. Curtis; Sen. Martin; Sen. Byrd; Sen. McClellan; Sen. Jenner; Sen. Eastland; Sen. Revercomb; Sen. Martin; Sen. Dirksen; Sen. Anderson; Sen. Cotton; Sen. Pastore; Sen. Hickenlooper; Sen. Purtell; Sen. Goldwater; Sen. Bricker; Sen. Hruska;Sen. Potter; Sen. Kuchel]
Johnson, "Glo bal Co mmunicat ions System," 1967 [message to Congress with reco mmendat ions on world co mmunications; INTELSAT; domest ic satellite systems; task force on communications policy] National Asso. of Broadcasters, 1991 [program for 43rd annual BMI-NAB dinner]
Reagan designates Lee as Chairman of FCC; booklet, chronology of events of Communicat ions Satellite Corp.(COMSAT), 1962-1985; letter of resignat ion; applicat ion for retirement] Staff Memo s, 1974 [ITU Marit ime Conference; conversat ion with Chairman Wiley re reappoint ment; memo for record by Lee re his views and act ions affect ing interests of three TV-radio networks on subjects such as prime t ime access, TV programming in Chicago, UHF development, territorial exclusivit y, subscript ion TV, other restrict ions on networks, and sex, vio lence, and drug usage]
On Legislat ive Oversight; list of contacts between FCC and CBS and list of fraternizing incidents; RCA supplies FCC personnel wit h color televisio n sets; service contracts paid for by NBC; contacts between FCC personnel and NBC; hearings scheduled by Legislat ive Oversight Subco mm. ; exchange o f social amenit ies with people in co mmunicat ions field; list of Lee's trips, 1954-1957; applicants for TV station in Petersburg, Va.; letter re Lee's travel expenses, gifts, and personal finances; memo for record re FCC's problems, protest cases, possible extortion, mult iple ownership, and personnel appo int ments; FCC granted Channel 13 in Indianapo lis-details o f case; request by Subco mm.
On Box No. 5 (cont.)
Contents Legislat ive Oversight for informat ion on gifts, loans, honorariums, lunches, and travel expenses paid for by persons or organizat ions with an interest in matters subject to jurisdict ion of FCC; summary of Lee's participat ion in Miami Channel 10 case; participat ion in Boston Channel 5 case; handling of petit ions for reconsiderat ion; personal notes re legis lative oversight, fees at FCC, televis io n networking, Fresno case, Boston case; memo re rule making and adjudicat ion; memo to personnel re keeping regular hours; memo to staff re charges o f polit ical or other influence being exerted on FCC commissio ners; memo to staff re leaking of advance informat ion] State Department, Investigation o f, 1949 [excerpts of House hearings re cases of emplo yees invo lving personal securit y and emplo yees separated for dislo yalt y; number of securit y cases and backlog]
SPEECHES, 1948-1992 List of Speec International systems, and 1954 to June hes 
Public Interest;" all-channel televisio n; "fairness doctrine" re controversial issues] 7 Speeches, March 1969-January 1973 (1)-(5) [list of speeches in first fo lder; organized in reverse chronological order; "Interconnect ion;" ratings system; domest ic satellites; data communicat ions; prime t ime access rule; "Social Responsibilit ies of Advert ising;" TV and children; report on International Teleco mmunicat ion Unio n World Administrative Radio Conference; licensee responsibilit y re lyrics and programming; CATV policy; House Concurrent Resolut ion 9 orders end to motion pictures and radio and televis io n broadcasts which demean, degrade, or defame ethnic, racial, or religious groups; views of the FCC on S. 1466, act to amend sect ions of the Communicat ions Act of 1934; privacy and computer communications; FM radio; public interest; statement on S. 2004, bill to amend Co mmunicat ions Act of 1934 re applicat ions for renewal o f broadcast licenses; sex and vio lence in programming; allo cat ion of the radio spectrum; "Self-Regulation or Censorship;" the work of the FCC]
Contents requirement for polit ical broadcasts; Amateur Radio and the American Radio Relay League; women in radio and TV; TV ratings; interconnect ion--data communicat ions; public interest; public broadcast ing; license renewal; direct broadcast satellites] Speeches, April 1980-May 1981 (1) [list of speeches; organized in reverse chron order; testimo ny re S. 821, a bill to provide appropriations for the FCC; statement on H.R. 3239, FCC Authorizat ion Act of 1981; statement on FCC's FY 1982 budget estimates]
On the FCC"] Speeches, 1983-1992 (1)(2) ["Lobbying the FCC;" "Po llut ion of the Airways;" religious broadcast ing; radio astronomy; po licing or regulat ing the broadcast industry; remarks at National Asso. of Broadcasters Convent ion; "Pornography and the Media;" broadcast deregulat ion]
Johnson; ten commandments for broadcasters; remarks on advert ising and commercials; outline re subject, "The New Media and Public Po licy;" speech by Lee re educational televisio n and UHF; FCC report and statement of policy on network broadcasting; speech on "Hi-Fi" and FM radio broadcasts; speech re "equal time" provisions; report, "Emplo yment of Homosexuals and Other Sex Perverts in Government," by Subco mm, on Investigat ions, Senate Committee] Box No. 8 (cont.)
Contents Miscellaneous Speech Materials, undated [remarks at Washington Hilton and introduction o f FCC Chairman Al Sikes; TV interference; propagation curves; freedo m of informat ion and privacy; notes re work of FCC; FCC spectrum allocat ion policy; notes on history of FCC; assignment of TV channels; UHF developments; allchannel televisio n sets; Lee's experiences on the FCC; endorsement of Lee by Senator Styles Bridges; Co mmissio ners Bob Bartley, George Sterling, T. A. M. Craven, and Freida Hennock; anecdotes by Lee re prohibit io n, crooked polit ics, and Depressio n] 9 (Full-suit box, Oversized items) Awards and Cert ificates, 1956-1979 Awards and Cert ificates, 1979-1983 Certificates, 1954-1974 (1)(2) [certificates of appo intment to FCC in 1953, 1954, 1960, 1967, and 1974 signed by Presidents Eisenhower, Johnson and Nixo n, two are glued to a backing]
