Library of Congress LIVE and the American Folklife Center present: Chuna McIntyre Yup'ik - The Real People November 12, 2003 Learning Guide This handout is designed to help you and your students enjoy, prepare for, and discuss the performance by Chuna McIntyre.
Included inside are background information, vocabulary of key words, an introduction to our cosponsors, and student activities.
Contents ' ' ' ' ' ' About our Co-Sponsors Chuna McIntyre Program Goals Additional Resources Student Activity Image Credits
About Our Co-Sponsors: The Library of Congress is the largest library in the world, with more than 120 million items in more than 400 languages.
Founded in 1800, and the oldest federal cultural institution in the nation, it is the research arm of the United States Congress and is recognized as the national library of the United States.
Library of Congress LIVE presents educational outreach programs throughout the school year.
Learn more at: www.loc.gov/kidslc The American Folklife Center was created in 1976 by the U.S. Congress to "preserve and present" the great heritage of American folklife through programs of research, documentation, archival preservation, reference service, live performance, exhibition, publications, and training.
The American Folklife Center includes the Archive of Folk Culture, established at the Library of Congress in 1928, and now one of the largest collections of ethnographic material from the United States and around the world.
Visit online at: www.loc.gov/folklife
Standard 4 - Places and Regions: The physical and human characteristics of places.
Standard 10 - Human Systems: The characteristics, distributions, and complexity of Earth's cultural mosaics.
SOCIAL STUDIES (National Council of Social Studies) Strand I - Culture: Experiences that provide for the study of culture and cultural diversity.
Strand III - People, Places and Environments: Analyzing human behavior in relation to its physical and cultural environment.
MUSIC (Consortium of National Arts Education Associations) Standard 9 - Understand music in relation to history and culture.
Program Goals: Students will experience a variety of traditional Yup'ik song, story, and dance performance by Chuna McIntyre.
Students will learn about traditional folk practices and efforts to preserve and celebrate Yup'ik culture.
Education Standards: LANGUAGE ARTS (National Council of Teachers of English) Use listening and observation skills to gain an understanding.
Standard 9 - Develop an understanding of and respect for diversity in language use, patterns, and dialects across cultures, ethnic groups, geographic regions, and social roles.
GEOGRAPHY (National Geographic)
Chuna McIntyre is a Yup'ik artist who lives in the village of Eek, in Southwest Alaska, on the coast of the Behring Sea.
He was raised there by his grandmother, from whom he learned the dances, songs, and stories of his ancestors.
He founded and directs Nunamfca ("of our land") Yup'ik Eskimo Dancers to allow Natives and non-Natives to experience Yup'ik culture.
Additional Resources: WEB RESOURCES The National Museum of the American Indian website NMAI Conexus includes a slide show of a performance by Chuna McIntyre under "Visiting Artists Online."
www.conexus.si.edu/mcintyre_c/index.htm You can listen to and see Yup'ik songs and dances performed by Mt. Edgecumbe High School Yup'ik Dance Troop at: www.mehs.educ.state.ak.us/organizations/yupik/ yupikframe.html
the American Masters series, Edward Curtis: Dialogue at: www.thirteen.org/americanmasters/curtis/
2.
American Indians of the Pacific Northwest, a collection of over 2,300 photographs and 7,700 pages of text.
From collections at the University of Washington Libraries, Northwest Museum of Arts 
Both collections are presented on American Memory by the Library of Congress as part of the record of the past.
These images reflect the attitudes, perspectives, and beliefs of different times.
The Library of Congress and the institutions from whose collections these materials are drawn do not endorse the views expressed in these collections, which may contain materials offensive to some.
FILM 
VBF 2178 Depicts the relationship between the Yup'ik people and their environment, and shows how they work to maintain a balance between the life of the elders and the modern world of the Yup'ik teenagers.
Uksuum Cauyai ­ The Drums of Winter, Sarah Elder and Leonard Kameriling, 1988.
FDA 9371-9372 Religion and culture of the Yup'ik, focusing on the social institution of the potlatch, in the Yup'ik language with English subtitles.
The Yup'ik mask exhibit Agayuliyararput: Our Way of Making Prayer: The Living Tradition of Yup'ik Masks can be viewed online at: www.si.umich.edu/CHICO/yupik/yupik.html
Two major Native American digital collections are available online at the Library of Congress' American Memory site: 1.
Edward S. Curtis's The North American Indian, Photographic Images.
Between 1900 and 1930, Edward Curtis traveled throughout the American west, Alaska, and Mexico documenting more than 80 American Indian groups, including the Yu'pik.
His invaluable survey is controversial because, in his enthusiasm to document customs, dress and ceremonies that were falling into disuse, he manipulated his subjects and their surroundings to produce a romanticized view of Indian life.
Over 2,000 of his photographs can be viewed online at American Memory (type Edward Curtis into the search engine): memory.loc.gov For a discussion on Curtis's photographs, see
BOOKS For Teachers Colin Chisholm, Through Yup'ik Eyes: An Adopted Son Explores the Landscape of Family.
Portland: Alaska Northwest Books, 2000.
An adopted son explores his Yup'ik family's history and heritage.
Kira Van Deusen, Raven and the Rock: Storytelling in Chukotka.
Seattle: University of Washington Press, 1999.
Anthology of 25 Chukkchi and Yupik folk legends.
Ann Fienup-Riordan, The living tradition of Yup'ik masks : agayuliyararput = our way of making prayer.
Seattle: University of Washington Press, 1996 ____, Boundaries and Passages: Rules and Ritual in Yup'ik Eskimo Oral Tradition.
Norman: University of Oklahoma Press, 1994.
Description of traditional cultural practices, incorporating testimony of elders.
Alice Fredson, ed., Kipnirmiut Tiganrita Igmirtitlrit = Qipnermiut tegganrita egmirtellrit = The Legacy of the Kipnuk Elders.
Fairbanks: Alaska Native Language Center, University of Alaska Fairbanks, 1998.
Yupik mythology recounted by Kipnuk elders.
Hans Himmelheber, Where the Echo Began: And other Oral Traditions from Southwestern Alaska.
Fairbanks: University of Alaska Press, 2000.
Description of Yup'ik life and folklore.
Tom Imgalrea, Jacob Nash, Thomas Moses, Cev'Armiut Qanemciit Qulirait-Llu: Eskimo Narratives and Tales from Chevak, Alaska.
Fairbanks: Alaska Native Language Center, University of Alaska, 1984.
A. Oscar Kawagley, A Yupiak Worldview: A Pathway to Ecology and Spirit.
Waveland Press, 1995.
Memoir of a man's
effort to unite his Yupik and western heritage.
Carolyn Kremers, Place of the Pretend People: Gifts from a Yup'ik Eskimo Village.
Anchorage: Alaska Northwest Books, 1996.
LANAREA Publishing, Alaska, the First Alaskans: A Guide to the Geography of the Native Languages, Cultures, their Communities and Populations: Aleut, Inupiat, Eskimo, Yupik Eskimo, Athabascan Indian, Haidan Indian, Tsimshian Indian, Tlingit Indian.
Guilford, Conn.: National Languages Associates, 1995.
Phyllis Morrow and William Schneider, eds., When Our Words Return: Writing, Hearing, and Remembering Oral Traditions of Alaska and the Yukon.
Logan, Utah: Utah State University, 1995.
Eliza Cingarkaq Orr and Ben Orr (eds.), Qanemcikarluni Tekitnarqelartuq = One Must Arrive With a Story to Tell: Traditional Narratives by the Elders of Tununak, Alaska.
Lower Kuskokwim School District, Alaska Native Language Center, 1995. _____, Ellengellemni ­ When I Became Aware.
Fairbanks: Lower Kuskokwin School District: Alaska Native Language Center, 1997.
Seattle Art Museum, Native Journeys: Yupik Eskimo Masks and Northwest Coast Art .
Seattle: Seattle Art Museum, 1999.
Lynn Ager Wallen, The Face of Dance: Yup'ik Eskimo Masks from Alaska.
Calgary: Glenbow Museum, 1990.
BOOKS For Students Non-Fiction
Mir Tamim Ansary, Arctic Peoples.
(Native Americans) Des Plaines, Ill.: Heinemann Library, 2000.
Grades 2-4.
Broad overview of North American aboriginal peoples.
Andrew Haslam, Arctic Peoples.
(Make it Work! History) New York: Thomson Learning, 1995.
Grades 4-8.
Maps, photographs, description and hands-on projects provide a comprehensive look at life in the Arctic.
Betty Huffmon and Terry Sloat, Ananak's Berries.
New York: Lothrop, Lee 
K-3rd grade.
Retelling of a Yupik tale.
Aylette Jenness and Alice Rivers, In Two Worlds: A Yup'ik Eskimo Family.
Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1989.
Grades 5-8.
Photographs and text document the changes a Yup'ik family experienced over 50 years.
Bobbie Kalman and Rebecca Sjonger, Life in the Far North.
(Native Nations of North America, vol. 12) New York: Crabtree Publishing Co., 2004.
Grades 4-6.
Description of Inuit, Yupik, and Inupiat peoples.
Alice Osinski, The Eskimo: The Inuit and Yupik People.
(A New True Book) Chicago: Children's Press, 1985.
Grades 48.
Describes the natural environment and way of life, contrasting traditional culture with modern lifestyle.
Terry Sloat, The Eye of the Needle.
New York: Dutton Children's Books, 1990.
K3rd grade.
Re-telling of a Yupik tale. _____, The Hungry Giant of the Tundra.
New York: Dutton Children's Books, 2001.
K-3rd grade.
Re-telling of a Yupik tale.
Gail Stewart, Life in an Eskimo Village.
(The Way People Live) San Diego: Lucent Books, 1995.
Grades 7-10.
Overview of life of indigenous peoples in Canada and Alaska.
Fiction Kirkpatrick Hill, Minuk: Ashes in the Pathway.
(Girls of Many Lands series).
Middleton, Wisc.: Pleasant Co.
Publications, 2002.
Grades 5-9.
A Yupik girl's encounter with late 19thcentury missionaries.
Megan McDonald, Tundra Mouse: A Storyknife Tale.
New York: Orchard Books, 1997.
K-3rd grade.
Story of a Yupik household and traditional craft.
Carolyn Meyer, In a Different Light: Growing Up in a Yup'ik Eskimo Village in Alaska.
New York: McElderry Books, 1996.
Grades 6-9.
Description of contemporary Yup'ik life.
Margaret Nicolai, Kitaq Goes Ice Fishing.
Seattle: Alaska Northwest Books, 1998.
K-2nd grade.
Story of a boy's first ice fishing trip with his father.
Barbara Winslow, Dance on a Sealskin.
Anchorage: Alaska Northwest Books, 1995.
Grades 2-6.
Based on Yupik story; a girl dances at her first potlach.
MUSIC Chuna McIntyre, Drums Across the Tundra: Music of the Yup'ik Eskimo.
San Francisco: Wild Sanctuary Communications, 1992.
Chuna McIntyre and Various Artists, Tradition.
Inukshuk Productions, Inc., 2001.
Search for additional materials at the library under the following subject headings: Yupik Yupik Yupik Yupik Yupik Yupik art dance Eskimo(s) Language(s) Mask Mythology
Focus activities: 1.
Yup'ik masks - Students describe the masks they saw in the Chuna McIntyre performance, in the Yup'ik mask online exhibit, or from other sources.
What forms do these masks take? What is the purpose of masks in storytelling? In dance? 2.
Select a story that can be performed with masks.
You might read one of the Yup'ik stories listed in the book list, or have students write a story.
Student Activity: Description:
Exploring Masks
Students learn about various cultural uses of masks.
(See performance by Chuna McIntyre, the Yup'ik mask exhibit Agayuliyararput: Our Way of Making Prayer: The Living Tradition of Yup'ik Masks at:www.si.umich.edu/chico/yupik,
or other materials on masks).
They will design and make a mask that depicts a character in a story they read or write themselves.
Purpose: To explore the use of masks.
3.
Students design and make a papier mache mask.
Have students first sketch and color a design for their mask.
Have them cut out the openings and model their mask before working in papier mache.
Mix three parts water with one part flour until smooth.
Dip torn or cut strips of paper into the water/flour mixture and place onto a form (bowl, balloon, face form, plastic jug).
Leave openings for eyes.
Once the mask is dry, students can paint the remaining features and decorations.
4.
Have students perform the selected story for the class.
Image credits: On the cover - Yup'ik Loon Mask, early 20th century, wood, feather, and baleen.
Presented online by Raven Werkes: www.ravenwerkes.com/Collectible/mask.html Photo of Yup'k Mask for mask activity is a Kuskokwin animal mask, 1920s collection of Thomas Burke Memorial Washington State Museum, University of Washington, Seattle.
1.2E634.
Published in The Living Tradition of Yup'ik Masks.
www.tribalarts.com/feature/riordan/yupik_img2.html Photo of Chuna McIntyre from National Museum of the American Indian website: www.conexus.si.edu/mcintyre_c
