Minnesota House Image Map Navigation Banner Stadium Task Force D R A F T Statement of Findings and Recommendations Minnesota Stadiums Task Force January 25, 2002 St. Paul, Minnesota
The Task Force and Its Mission
01 The Stadium Task Force was created by the Governor and the Legislature t o study and
02 make recommendations regarding the asserted needs of the Minnesota Twins , the
03 Minnesota Vikings and the University of Minnesota football team for new stadiums.
04 Although the issue of a new baseball stadium previously had been studied a number of
05 times by the Legislature, the Metropolitan Sports Facilities Commission ("MSFC") and
06 private groups, the needs of baseball and football had not been consider ed together.
In
07 addition, despite the fact that the Vikings began raising the issue of a new stadium for
08 football several years ago, there had not been a sustained legislative d iscussion of what to
09 do, if anything, for professional football.
10 The Task Force had eighteen members: six appointed by the Governor, six by the House
11 and six by the Senate.
Our membership included elected and appointed pu blic officials
12 and individuals from the private sector.
Some of us had extensive exper ience with
13 previous stadium discussions and some were newcomers.
14 During our hearings, we listened to representatives of the sports teams, the MSFC, local
15 governments, architects, contractors, financiers, present and former pla yers, other
16 Minnesotans who wanted their voices heard and from fans who have always shown their
- 1 -
01 loyalties to teams and athletes with the word "Minnesota" on their unifo rms.
We had the
02 opportunity to learn from and build on the work of many others, such as the MSFC, New
03 Ballpark, Inc. and Minnesotans for Major League Baseball.
04 Though our recommendations are not unanimous, we worked toward a consens us on the
05 disputed issues and avoided relying on narrow majorities of task force m embers to reach
06 conclusions.
Recommendations and Rationale
07 1.
We recommend that the Governor and the Legislature should take acti on
08 during the 2002 legislative session on proposals for a new stadiu m for
09 professional baseball and a stadium to be shared by the Minnesota Vikings
10 and the University of Minnesota Gophers football team.
11 Action in 2002 is important for the Twins and the future of professional baseball in
12 Minnesota because there is a real possibility that the Twins could be el iminated
13 through the contraction of the number of major league baseball teams.
W e note that
14 the lease for the Minnesota Twins has expired and is currently on a one year extension
15 for the 2002 season.
Like Minnesotans generally, none of the Task Force members
16 were pleased with the pressure tactics and crisis atmosphere caused by M ajor League
17 Baseball.
Regretfully, we have had to conclude realistically that the 2 002 baseball
18 season could be the last one for the Minnesota Twins unless Minnesota ac ts to
19 facilitate the construction of a new stadium this year.
- 2 -
01 The situation for the Vikings and the Gophers is just as important, thou gh to some it
02 may appear less urgent.
Some witnesses noted that the Vikings' lease at the
03 Metrodome extends until 2011.
Nonetheless, the Task Force recommends th at
04 Minnesota act this year on football too.
The National Football League has a program
05 for assisting in the financing of new stadiums and the program is schedu led to end this
06 year.
The Task Force sees a significant funding opportunity that may no t be available
07 in the future.
The Vikings also assert that without a new stadium, they will need new
08 revenue streams to remain competitive in Minnesota.
We also learned abo ut the
09 revenue shortfalls being incurred by the Gopher athletic programs.
A fa cility shared
10 by the Gophers and the Vikings would produce revenue increases for both
11 organizations.
Metrodome Renovation or A New Football Stadium
12 The MSFC has suggested that renovating the Metrodome would be more cost effective
13 than building a new stadium.
This approach has advantages.
The MSFC de scribed a
14 plan for such a renovation which they estimated would cost substantially less than
15 building a new stadium.
In addition there is already an infrastructure supporting
16 Metrodome operations.
17 On balance, the Task Force concluded that a new football stadium was a s uperior
18 solution.
There was doubt that a renovation could be completed without disrupting at
19 least one football season.
We do not have an alternative venue for foot ball if
20 renovation did conflict with a season.
The Vikings also raised reasonab le concerns
- 3 -
01 that cost estimates for renovation were too low.
A renovated Metrodome would still
02 lack many of the fan amenities characteristic of newer stadiums.
Perhap s most
03 important to the Task Force was the fact that the Vikings are strongly o pposed to
04 renovating the Metrodome as an alternative to a new stadium.
The MSFC c ould not
05 finance its major renovation plan without substantial Vikings participat ion and a new,
06 longer term lease.
The Vikings made it clear they would not contribute to a renovation
07 and would not extend their lease at the Metrodome.
For these reasons, t he Task Force
08 concluded that renovation of the Metrodome was not feasible and that a n ew stadium
09 shared by the Vikings and the Gophers football team was a superior solut ion.
10 2.
The Governor and the Legislature should adopt legislation providing fo r state
11 participation in financing, but not funding, new stadiums only if fi nancing
12 from other sources such as private investors and local governments i s
13 inadequate.
14 As we discuss below, the Task Force prefers that financing for new stadi ums come
15 from team owners or other private investors or from local governments if private
16 investment is insufficient.
If these other sources of financing are ina dequate, only then
17 should the state participate in the financing, provided that there is a substantial
18 contribution made by the team owners.
We recognize that full private fi nancing of
19 stadiums is rare.
In Minnesota, local governments have been essential p articipants in
20 previous stadium financing arrangements.
Only after an appropriate fi nancial
21 commitment from the team owners and other private sources, and from the local
- 4 -
01 unit(s) of government should there be any expectation of a possible fina ncial
02 commitment from the state.
Furthermore, any participation by the state should be
03 financed through user fees, taxes imposed on professional sports related activities
04 and/or items, or through other sources that demonstrate a relationship b etween the
05 source of state funding and those that economically benefit from, or par ticipate in the
06 operations of professional sports teams in the state.
07 In recognition of how controversial the issue of government, particularl y state
08 government, involvement in stadium funding has been, we have these obser vations to
09 support our recommendation:
10 1.
Some of the economic benefits claimed for sports stadiums are hard to justify.
We
11 were persuaded that the income taxes the state receives from visitin g players was
12 one economic benefit that could be quantified.
As player salaries h ave increased,
13 the direct benefit to the state of having our own professional teams has increased.
In
14 addition, the revenue spent in Minnesota by teams who benefit from r evenue sharing
15 is derived in part from economic activity in other states such as me dia payments
16 and, therefore, is likely a net economic benefit to Minnesota.
The Task Force was
17 impressed, too, by the benefits many of the teams' communities recei ved from the
18 charitable giving of the teams and the players.
19 2.
The facilities run by the Amateur Sports Facilities Commission and fi nanced with
20 public funds have provided opportunities for Minnesota athletes to e xcel, and
21 brought outstanding athletes here from all over the world.
- 5 -
01 3.
The Mighty Ducks and Mighty Kicks programs have provided state funds to help
02 build hockey rinks and soccer fields throughout Minnesota.
03 4.
Over the years, Minnesotans have spent millions of dollars to provide facilities for
04 collegiate athletics on the campuses of the University of Minnesota system and the
05 Minnesota State Colleges and Universities (MnSCU) system.
06 5.
Public financing helped build Metropolitan Stadium, the Met Sports Ce nter and the
07 Metrodome for professional and amateur football, baseball, basketbal l, soccer,
08 hockey and other events and activities.
09 6.
Public financing from state and local sources was crucial to the cont inued viability
10 of Target Center and the construction of the Xcel Energy Center.
P ortions of the
11 public financing were premised on the use of the facilities by amate ur sports teams.
12 Finally, there are intangible benefits to having professional teams in M innesota that
13 cannot be overlooked.
The Task Force has found that professional and co llege sports
14 are part of the identity of many Minnesotans.
In addition, the Task For ce has found
15 that these teams add something that is impossible to accurately measure , but that is
16 important to countless Minnesotans.
The Task Force has found that, to a considerable
17 degree, pro and college sports play a part in the cultural vitality of M innesota for
18 many, not only in the Twin Cities but across the state and throughout t he region.
19 The Task Force has determined that in teams such as the Minnesota Twins and
20 Minnesota Vikings, and in the generations of Minnesotans to whom a love of and a
21 loyalty to the home team has been handed down, the state has something w orth saving.
- 6 -
01 3.
We recommend that state participation in financing stadiums be drawn from
02 limited revenue sources, not from the general fund.
03 The Task Force spent considerable time discussing revenue streams that m ay meet the
04 parameters mentioned above, which could be widely considered as paid by those most
05 directly benefitting from the use of the facility.
The Task Force belie ves that the
06 following revenue streams deserve closer examination by state policymake rs and are
07 potential revenue sources to finance state participation.
08 1.
Sports Memorabilia.
Imposing a statewide sports memorabilia tax appl ied
09 to all professional sports, including clothing.
This memorabilia tax would be in
10 addition to the existing sales tax on memorabilia and would include a new
11 statewide tax on clothing items with sports insignia.
12 2.
Player Income Tax.
Estimate the ongoing revenues from income taxes p aid by the
13 visiting players of professional sports teams that use the facility a nd use those
14 revenues to support the state's investment in the construction of a n ew facility or
15 facilities.
16 3.
Media Access Charge.
Businesses and individuals who use the sports f acilities to
17 broadcast or report on games and events that take place within the fa cility should
18 be charged for access to the facility or facilities.
19 4.
Sales Tax on Facility Food and Beverages.
Impose an additional tax on the sale
20 of food and beverages at the sports facility, this would be in additi on to the state
21 sales tax of 6.5% and any local option sales tax that may be in place .
- 7 -
01 5.
Ticket Tax.
Impose an admission tax on the tickets sold to attendees at all events
02 at the facility, both game and non-game events, this is in addition t o the state sales
03 tax of 6.5% and any local option sales tax that may be in place.
04 6.
Naming Rights.
The Task Force believes that the value associated wit h naming
05 rights of the facility should be considered as a potential public par ticipation, but
06 that the state may want to reserve the right to contract with the tea m to negotiate
07 with interested parties on the state's behalf, recognizing that the v alue of the
08 naming rights may be greater if negotiated as part of a more comprehe nsive
09 sponsorship package.
The state and the team would agree on what shou ld be 10 considered as the revenue attributable to the naming rights, and thos e revenues 11 should be transmitted to the state
.
12 7.
Personal Seat Licensing.
The sale of personal seat licenses (PSLs) h ave been used
13 as a financing source in other facilities and result from the sale of the right to buy
14 a season ticket.
15 8.
State Loans to Local Units of Government.
The Task Force recommends
16 consideration of low- or zero-interest loans to local units of govern ment.
17 9.
Gaming Revenues.
The Task Force urges the Legislature and the Governo r to
18 consider gaming related revenue streams as an option to support publi c financing
19 of new professional sports facility.
The Task Force considered certa in specific
20 proposals including a sports-themed lottery game and a non-electronic game
- 8 -
01 based on sports betting, but decided to recommend gaming-related reve nue
02 generally.
03 10.
Metrodome Assets.
Should the Metrodome be left with no principal ten ants, it is
04 expected that the facility would be sold or demolished and the land r edeveloped.
05 The revenue from the sale of the Metrodome land and other assets of t he
06 Metropolitan Sports Facility Commission could be considered for a sta te
07 contribution to the costs of a new facility.
08 11.
Sales Tax Exemption.
The Task Force also recommends consideration of a sales
09 tax exemption on any materials used in the construction of the new fa cility or
10 facilities.
While these proceeds would otherwise be deposited in the general fund,
11 they are receipts that would not be available to the state but for th e project.
To the
12 extent that public funds are used to finance some portion of the cons truction,
13 imposing a sales tax could lead to the state paying more interest to finance the
14 sales tax.
15 12.
Airport Car Rental Charge.
The Task Force recommends that the state impose a
16 charge on car rentals at the airport.
We recognize this charge does not fit neatly
17 into the user or beneficiary category.
Nonetheless, it has been used to finance
18 stadiums in others states and is a reasonable option.
- 9 -
01 4.
Our recommendations include several other financial considerations that
02 should be addressed by the legislature and the Governor.
(Proposed for discussion)
03 The state should consider granting a local unit(s) of government the autho rity to
04 establish a local options sales tax to finance the local government contri bution.
To the
05 extent a community already has a local option sales tax, the State should consider
06 expanding the existing authority to allow proceeds to be used for facility financing.
(Proposed for discussion)
07 The Task Force also recognizes there is a state interest in using these sp orts facilities
08 for either collegiate or amateur athletics.
The Task Force recommends con sideration
09 of some state funding should the lease for any facility include provisions for collegiate
10 or amateur athletic use.
11 The Task Force also recommends that any state financing be done in the lea st costly
12 way possible, without sacrificing the goal limiting the impact to the dire ct
13 beneficiaries of the facilities.
For example, if the state intends to iss ue debt to finance
14 its share of the project cost, the state should explore strategies to ensu re that as much
15 of the state participation as possible can be done through the issuance of tax-exempt
16 bonds.
- 10 -
(Proposed for discussion)
01 However, the Task Force also recognizes that several of the revenue stream s identified
02 will be problematic as the primary source of revenues for debt service pay ments,
03 primarily because there will not be a history of collections prior to issu ing the debt.
04 This may result in a reduced amount of debt that can be issued using these revenue
05 sources as the payment for the debt service, given the requirement to have sufficient
06 coverage on the debt, or a "cushion" of having expected revenues exceed de bt service
07 payments by some margin.
The Task Force recommends that these limitations not be
08 "fixed" by issuing general obligation bonds that could pose risk to the ge neral
09 taxpayers of the state.
(Proposed for discussion)
10 The Task Force also recognizes the efforts of the state on the Streamlined Sales Tax
11 Project, which is aimed at addressing sellers' concerns about the multipli city of tax
12 laws and the burden created in trying to comply with tax laws across state s that are not
13 uniform.
Recognizing that increasing uniformity may ultimately allow the state to
14 capture tax revenues lost on Internet sales, currently estimated at hundre ds of millions
15 of dollars annually, the Task Force urges careful consideration of the rec ommendation
16 put forward in this report.
It may be advisable to impose a gross receipt s tax on the
17 facility revenues, for example, rather than relying on specific extensions of the sales
18 tax.
The Task Force recommends that the Minnesota Department of Revenue b e asked
19 to comment more specifically on the revenue options identified in this rep ort and
- 11 -
01 recommend strategies for implementation to minimize any adverse impact on the
02 Streamlined Sales Tax Project.
(Equity language proposed for discussion)
03 The Task Force also supports the further consideration of public ownership of either or
04 both of the teams through the issuance of equity stock.
While accomplishi ng a slightly
05 different goal, the Task Force also believes the sense of public support a ccomplished
06 through the issuance of commemorative stock, not defined as ownership unde r the
07 Securities and Exchange Commission Rules, would justify some consideration for a
08 limited portion of the financing.
09 The Task Force also expressed concern that the state not be considered as a party
10 responsible for financing any cost overruns in the project budget.
While t here is
11 preference to having the franchise owners bear responsibility for ensuring completion
12 of the project within the funds available, the Task Force also understands that the
13 owners may then want the responsibility and control over construction.
Th e Task
14 Force recommends that the responsibility for cost overruns and constructio n
15 management be clearly delineated in the lease between the franchise and th e facility
16 landlord, but under no circumstances should the state be considered as a f inancing
17 source for cost overruns.
- 12 -
01 5.
The Task Force does not recommend a particular site for either a baseb all or
02 football stadium.
03 The Task Force recommendations are site neutral.
The Task Force anticipat es that the
04 state will identify parameters for determining state participation and the location of the
05 facility or facilities will be determined through a negotiated agreement b etween the
06 franchise (tenant) and the local unit(s) of government (landlord).
While the Task
07 Force believe the operations can be most successful in a site centrally lo cated within
08 the metropolitan area, the only significant site factor is that any propos ed football
09 stadium be on or near the University of Minnesota campus to allow for the use by the
10 University of Minnesota Gophers football team.
11 6.
The Task Force recommends that any state financing not be released unt il the
12 team has negotiated a lease with a landlord, which may be a local un it of
13 government.
State financing, if any, would be released only if the lease
14 between the team and the landlord includes:
15 a. a listing of all revenue streams generated from use of the build ing with a
16 specification of what revenues are available to cover team oper ations, which accrue
17 to the building landlord and which are available to the state ( such as naming rights),
18 b. clarification of the operations and management responsibilities between the team
19 and the landlord,
20 c. delineation of the responsibility for repair and replacement in the facility, including
- 13 -
01 an annual inspection by the landlord and a representative of th e state,
02 d. provisions within the lease that some portion of the tickets for professional sports
03 games are accessible and affordable,
04 e. protection of the public interest in the event of a default by t he team or a disruption
05 in the season due to a player strike,
06 f. a lease term that is at least as long as the term of any public f inancing that may be
07 in place at the state or local level, not to exceed 30 years,0
08 g. terms specifying responsibilities for construction management an d cost overruns
09 between the landlord and the team,
10 h. statement of public ownership of the facility, and clarification of ownership of the
11 furnishing and equipment within the facility,
12 i. terms that outline the access and affordability requirement for some portion of
13 the tickets to the professional sports games,
14 j. terms which outline the security offered by the team on the lea se,
15 k. binding commitments of financing sufficient, when taken in conju nction with the
16 state financing, to ensure that the project is fully funded pri or to the release of the
17 state funds, and
18 l. documentation on the final design and construction specification s.
- 14 -
(Proposed for discussion)
01 The state shall finance X% up to $X for a baseball facility.
Any ad ditional project
02 costs beyond a total project budget of $XX shall be the responsibili ty of the team
03 owners, other private interests, and other units of government.
04 The state shall finance X% up to $X for a football facility.
An add itional $X shall be
05 made available if there are provisions in the lease to allow the use of the facility for the
06 University of Minnesota Gophers football team.
Any additional proje ct costs beyond a
07 total project budget of $XX shall be the responsibility of the team owners, other
08 private interests, the University of Minnesota, and other units of g overnment.
(Proposed for discussion)
09 7.
We recommend that the Governor and Legislature make state partic ipation in
10 the financing of a baseball stadium contingent in some way on t he reform of
11 Major League Baseball's business structure.
12 Many studies have shown that Major League Baseball teams in markets with relatively
13 little revenue from local media will continue to struggle financiall y.
The Twins will
14 continue to have few resources for building a competitive team even with a new
15 stadium unless Major League Baseball implements significant reforms.
The major
16 necessary reforms are more equal revenue sharing, particularly from local media
17 revenue, and a salary cap.
The National Football League's salary ca p and revenue
- 15 -
01 sharing have helped to create teams whose success does not depend on the size of the
02 local media market or the owner's bankroll.
Legislation authorizing public
03 participation in financing a baseball stadium should include provisi ons requiring that
04 Major League Baseball implement reform before public dollars are rel eased.
05 8.
We recommend that public participation in financing facilities f or professional
06 sports be designed to ensure that professional sports events ar e accessible to
07 and beneficial for a broad community of Minnesotans.
08 Any professional sports facilities with public financing should incl ude specific
09 provisions for maintaining the accessibility and affordability of s ome portion of
10 tickets to professional sports events held in the facilities.
The p otential for use of the
11 facilities by high school and other amateur sports teams should also be protected.
In
12 addition, facilities that benefit from public financing participatio n should be designed
13 to be integrated into the host city and its neighborhood.
An archit ecturally significant
14 design could become an attraction in itself, as well as enhancing th e physical
15 environment of a community.
- 16 -
Minnesota State Legislature World Wide Web Information Service Legislation 
&
Please direct all comments concerning issues or legislation to your State Legislator.
If you are not sure who represents you click here.
Comments regarding this site: webmaster@house.leg.state.mn.us | Updated on
