Bob Taft, Governor Lt. Governor Maureen O'Connor, Director Maureen O'Connor Director 1970 West Broad Street P.O. Box 182081 Columbus, Ohio 43218-2081 (614) 466-2550 www.state.oh.us/odps
! ! ! ! ! !
Administration Bureau of Motor Vehicles Emergency Management Agency Emergency Medical Services Investigative Unit Ohio State Highway Patrol
October 19, 2001
The Honorable Bob Taft Governor Statehouse Columbus, OH 43215 Dear Governor Taft: In response to the September 11, 2001 terrorist attacks in New York City and Washington, DC, you requested that the State Building Security Review Committee reconvene and appointed me as chair.
The Committee was charged with making recommendations for changes or additions to security plans for protecting state employees and the public while allowing for adequate public access to state buildings.
Attached is the Report and Recommendations from the 2001 State Building Security Review Committee.
As charged, the Committee met over a period of thirty days, collected data, identified areas of concern and recommended corrective measures to ensure the continuous enhancement of security in state-owned and/or occupied buildings.
As the recommendations will show, the purpose of this Committee is to make security not only a key element of our buildings, but also an integral part of our management system.
Sincerely, Lt. Governor Maureen O'Connor Director, Ohio Department of Public Safety MOC/rai
Mission Statement "to save lives, reduce injuries and economic loss, to administer Ohio's motor vehicle laws and to preserve the safety and well being of all citizens with the most cost-effective and service-oriented methods available."
Ohio Department of Public Safety Page 2
TABLE OF CONTENTS
Letter to Governor I. II.
History and Summary, 2001 Meeting Schedule and Process a.
III.
IV.
V. VI. Committee Members
Status of 1997 Recommendations Committee Overview 2001 Committee Recommendations Conclusion
Attachments A. Threat Level Assessment ­ Developed by Highway Patrol B. Building Security Audit ­ Sample Form C. 1995 Report Recommendations D. 1997 Report Recommendations
Ohio Department of Public Safety Page 3
I. HISTORY AND SUMMARY, 2001 As a result of the September 11, 2001 terrorist attacks on the World Trade Center in New York City and the Pentagon in Washington, D.C., Governor Taft directed Lt. Governor Maureen O'Connor to reconvene the State Building Security Review Committee and serve as its chair.
The committee members represented various state agencies, law enforcement, building management and union officials.
Their charge was to review, evaluate and report on the state's security measures to ensure the continuous enhancement of protection of state employees and the general public in state owned and/or occupied facilities.
The final report would be due to the Governor by October 19, 2001 outlining their analysis and recommendations.
The State Building Security Task Force was originally formed in 1995 in the wake of the Oklahoma City government offices bombing.
The purpose of the 1995 task force was to review the security in high visibility state buildings and to make recommendations for possible security improvements.
The majority of the recommendations were technical in nature involving equipment and infrastructure and many were successfully implemented.
In 1997, this task force was re-instituted to review state building security measures in response to the hostage incident at the William Greene Building.
Recommendations implemented as a direct result of this committee were: expansion of the current photo ID system, state building security audits and the creation of the State Building Security Coordinator position.
The current committee focuses on both the technical and managerial aspects of the two previous committees.
Recommendations range from enhancement of current surveillance equipment with state-of-the-art equipment to initiating training programs to urge state employees to take a proactive approach to security for the buildings and themselves.
The committee felt strongly that state employees themselves are essential in the detection and prevention of security risks.
Education, training and communication are critical factors that must be addressed.
Finally, this committee feels that it is imperative that the committee not lapse.
It must remain a constant and meet regularly to oversee state building security.
The following pages outline the discussions of the current committee, their analysis of previous reports and recommendations for further improving the condition of security in state government.
Ohio Department of Public Safety Page 4
II.
MEETING SCHEDULE AND PROCESS The Committee met to discuss the process for and contents of future meetings.
A schedule was implemented to meet once a week for four consecutive weeks.
At the end of those 30 days, the Committee would present a report to the Governor and the General Assembly outlining their analysis of the problem and recommendations for possible solutions.
At the onset of the meetings, the committee was aware that the time allotted to produce a report was considerably less than the two previous committees.
Therefore, it was necessary to limit the scope of the committee and direct its attention to high-priority areas of concern.
Knowing this, the importance of information gathering became apparent.
What security plans are already in place? Can they be expanded on or standardized to function for other agencies? What is working and what is not? What had not been addressed in the past and needs attention now? With this in mind, the Committee agreed to focus on "Risk Assessment".
At the first meeting the Committee identified an agenda for future meetings and began discussions of risk factors associated with identification formats (for employees and non-employees), standards for guard/security staff, public access to facilities, parking issues and unique needs of individual buildings.
Discussions continued in the second meeting with a focus on guidelines for the State Building Security Coordinator, building security audits, and the constancy of the State Building Security Task Force.
The third meeting was directed towards a review of the recommendations from the original committee in 1995.
The majority of them have been implemented.
The remaining will continue to be addressed.
Additionally, a consensus was reached on the recommendations to be generated by this Committee.
The fourth, and final meeting focused on additional recommendations and the compilation of the report to the Governor.
The Committee also agreed that, for successful implementation, it is essential for the Governor to mandate action on the Committee's recommendations and assign it the authority to oversee building security issues.
It was agreed that the Director of the Department of Public Safety would produce and distribute meeting notes, coordinate future meetings, and prepare the final report.
Ohio Department of Public Safety Page 5
COMMITTEE MEMBERS Lt. Governor Maureen O'Connor (chair) Director, Department of Public Safety Ron Alexander President, OCSEA Nick DiMarco President - Ohio Fraternal Order of Police Paul Goggin Executive Director, Ohio Building Authority Scott Johnson Director, Ohio Department of Administrative Services Ronald Keller Executive Director, Capitol Square Review and Advisory Board Jim Mermis Assistant Administrator, Ohio Bureau of Worker's Compensation Colonel Ken Morckel Superintendent, Ohio State Highway Patrol Dale Shipley Director, Emergency Management Agency Tom Wersell Director, Special Investigations, Bureau of Workers' Compensation
Ohio Department of Public Safety Page 6
III.
STATUS OF 1997 RECOMMENDATIONS RECOMMENDATION To the Governor: 1.
Overall responsibility of security to Director ODPS . . . .
2.
Institution of an Advisory Committee . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3.
Appointment of senior member responsible for security needs . . .
.....................................
4.
Grant ODPS Director authority to prepare comprehensive security plan: " Standard method for periodic security assessments . . . . .
" Employee training program . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
" Joint plan for coordinated response . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
" Joint plan regarding enforcement of security issues . . . .
" Uniform system for reporting building specific incidents " Ongoing review of other states' practices for incorporation .
" Method to test adequacy of building security measures . .
" Plan to continuously update security and employee training " Security component to all building design contracts . . . .
" Establish communication with each state agency coordinator . . . .
.............................................
" Recommend legislation when appropriate . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
STATUS Partially complete 2001 report re-formats this to a standing committee that is actively meeting.
Needs to be done.
Building Partially Needs to Needs to Needs to Needs to Partially Needs to Needs to
security audit.
complete.
be done.
be done.
be done.
be done.
complete.
be done.
be done.
Needs to be done.
Needs to be done.
NOTE: All of the items in #4 above will continue to be recommended through the enhancements to the responsibilities of the Department of Public Safety.
All of these were attempted, but did not meet with the necessary cooperation.
To the Director of Public Safety: 5.
Expand 
6.
Emergency procedures 
7.
Expand the presence of the State Highway Patrol . . . . . .
8.
Continue to implement 1995 recommendations . . . . . . . .
Exploration of the following actions: 9.
Visitor ID badges . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10.
Restrict access to non-employees . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11.
Restrict building access . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12.
Group tenants to eliminate exposure to public access . . .
13.
Restrict public from certain parking areas . . . . . . . . . . . .
Partially complete.
Complete.
Complete.
Complete.
Partially complete.
Partially complete.
Partially complete.
-Partially complete ­ implemented at Rhodes, Riffe and the State Building but needs to be revisited.
Ohio Department of Public Safety Page 7
IV.
COMMITTEE OVERVIEW FIRST MEETING ­ September 26, 2001 Lt. Governor O'Connor opened the meeting by distributing an agenda that was fashioned around the parameters of two prior Security Committee reports; one from 1995 and one from 1997.
The agenda was intended as a guide for the duration of the task force meetings.
The committee members were given a copy of the two reports and directed to review carefully for discussion at the next meeting in order to design the scope of additional concerns for this task force.
After initial discussions and considering the short time frame before a final report was due, the committee decided to center their attention on Risk Assessment.
In the 1997 report, the Department of Public Safety was charged with the responsibility of assessing the risks in the state buildings.
In response to that, the position of State Building Security Coordinator was established.
DISCUSSIONS: The first discussion referenced the manner in which the committee was going to assess the risks and needs of these buildings.
The topic of a "Building Security Audits" was discussed.
The current State Building Security Coordinator, Jake Fredendall, employed with the Department of Public Safety, is the only individual currently performing state building audits.
The current form (see attachment B) is for all types of security building analysis.
A list of primary state facilities with a "threat level" ranking was provided (see attachment A).
The levels from "1" through "5" reflect characteristics of each building that are taken into consideration when assessing a threat level.
The Committee raised several other areas of concern.
Setting a standard for all buildings regardless of size or threat levels.
Security for state employees working in private buildings.
Minimum standards for all guard/security staff.
Unique needs of individual buildings.
Guidelines for the State Building Security Coordinator.
Public access to state buildings.
I.D. systems.
· Non-employee ID process.
Security Plans: Each building will develop a security plan, and employee security training to be reviewed and approved by the Department of Public Safety, who will then review the plan periodically to ensure compliance.
Parking issues in relation to proximity to building, non-state employees At the conclusion of this meeting, the Committee agreed to recommend enhancing the utilization of the State Building Security Coordinator to conduct comprehensive audits of state controlled and occupied facilities.
Additionally, the members felt that it was important for this Committee to remain constant and meet regularly to oversee state building security issues.
Finally, it was recommended that the Department of Public Safety and the State Building Security Review Coordinator take the lead on these issues.
Ohio Department of Public Safety Page 8
SECOND MEETING ­ October 3, 2001 The second meeting focused on three areas: standardization of an identification (ID) system, parking issues, and enhancing communication between departments, agencies, and commissions and the State Building Coordinator.
Consensus was that a standard identification format would be the best place to start.
Although most agencies have an ID format in place, there is no "minimum standard" at this time.
The Committee identified the following criteria to consider when developing a standard: " " " " " " " " Employees and visitor ID's.
Minimum standards with consideration of the unique challenges of some agencies.
State employees working in non-state buildings.
Coordinating with guard/security personnel providing them with consistent performance directives Responsibility for hiring security personnel.
Requirement of ID's for Senate and House members and staff Would agency Directors be responsible for determining their security requirements, with the committee's assistance, and provide the ID's? Expand the duties of the Security Coordinator to work on this issue.
Parking of vehicles near state buildings presented issues for discussion.
" " " " " Implement a "key card" access.
Limit state parking facilities to state employees.
Restrict the proximity of vehicles to the buildings.
Loading dock access and monitoring City perspective on elimination of metered on street parking
Communications between departments, agencies and commissions, the State Building Security Coordinator and this Committee would be developed through the following methods: " Each department will be asked to review their existing security plan.
The focus should be on public and employee access and parking.
The plan would be submitted to the Security Coordinator and ultimately to the Department of Public Safety.
Those who do not have a plan will present a starting point for the committee.
Each department will be required to assess their current situation with regard to building employee security, determine where they must develop a building security plan, draft such a plan and submit that to the Security Coordinator.
Each department will be required to develop a minimum standard of ID wearing.
If an agency feels that is not sensible for them, they can review with the Security Coordinator and come to a decision.
There will be a record that this agency does not require ID's and a reason why.
"
"
Ohio Department of Public Safety Page 9
THIRD MEETING ­ October 10, 2001 The Committee focused on recommendations from the 1995 task force.
It determined that all had been implemented to some degree.
However some areas required additional attention.
After examining this information, the Committee agreed that additional attention should be given to employee training, centralizing special deliveries, upgrading x-ray equipment, telephone ID systems and upgrading security cameras and monitoring capabilities with state-ofthe-art equipment.
These are universal concerns applicable to all buildings.
The Committee then directed their attention to the recommendations in the 1997 report (see attachment D).
After reviewing this information it was decided that the current committee should re-visit all of these recommendations to determine their status.
It was observed that merely making the recommendations was insufficient and that continuity and follow up are essential to the success of the task force.
To that end, it is imperative that the State Building Review Committee remain in existence And in fact be expanded to include a member of both the House and the Senate and legal counsel from the Attorney General.
The position of State Security Coordinator should be vested with additional assistance and authority to affect change.
Finally, and, most importantly, the Committee will solicit a mandate from the Governor to implement recommendations that he deems appropriate.
FOURTH MEETING ­ October 17, 2001 This meeting was directed to the final report due to the Governor and the General Assembly on October 19, 2001.
The "draft" report was reviewed and the recommendations were analyzed for content and feasibility.
The Committee came to a consensus on the previous recommendations and elected to expand the list to strongly recommend maintaining the presence of the State Patrol at state facilities, agency internal security committees, a Governor's mandate assigning decision authority to the Director of the Department of Public Safety on security issues, and a re-examination of evacuation procedures on a building-by-building basis.
Ohio Department of Public Safety Page 10
V. 2001 COMMITTEE RECOMMENDATIONS 1.
Continue the State Building Security Review Committee to remain constant and meet on a regular basis to address building security issues.
The Director of Public Safety shall chair this committee and be responsible for sharing information with the State of Ohio Security Task Force.
2.
Expand membership to include a representative from the Senate and the House, to be designated by the President of the Senate and the Speaker of the House.
3.
Implement a standardized identification (ID) badge format for all state employees.
The Committee further recommends that this be coordinated through the Department of Public Safety.
4.
Implement a standardized "visitor" badge and control access by all visitors by means of said badge and a " check in process" at a reception point for all buildings.
5.
Limit access to buildings by securing some doorways from outside access.
Install metal and organic detectors at all remaining entrances as practical.
6.
Require, via a Governor's directive, that agencies, departments, commissions and offices compile their current security plan with regard to public access, employee access, parking, and other areas specific to each.
7.
These reports will be reviewed by the State Building Security Coordinator (SBSC) and ultimately the Director of the Department of Public Safety, who will have final authority over said security plans.
" " A final draft will be produced recommending the best-suited plan for that particular entity.
In the event that a unique security problem is identified, the State Building Security Committee shall decide the merit of hiring a risk consultant through the Department of Public Safety.
8.
That each State Agency appoint an individual who will be responsible for security issues/concerns for the agency and work directly with the State Security Coordinator and the State Building Security Review Committee.
9.
Maintain the presence of the Ohio State Highway Patrol at all state buildings.
10.
Enhance employee training and awareness by developing programs designed to: " " " " " Train employees to recognize a critical incident as opposed to a non-critical incident.
Familiarize employees with security personnel and protocol.
Enhance employees awareness of what constitutes an "outside" threat Develop a campaign to assist employees to become proactive when dealing with their own security.
Distribute one phone number for incident reporting (i.e., stickers for telephones).
Ohio Department of Public Safety Page 11
11.
Update "caller ID" system on all phones in state offices and for all employees.
This would allow everyone to participate in the potential identification of threatening phone calls.
12.
Institute, where appropriate, heightened security measures in all state lab facilities.
13.
Recommendations specific to mail: " " " " Mandate that all x-ray equipment be upgraded to include organic and metallic capabilities.
Centralize deliveries and ensure that all go through the x-ray machines, both organic and metallic.
Instruct employees and offices not to accept deliveries that have not been marked as "xrayed".
Insure that all employees are trained using the guidelines established by the Dept. of Health and approved by the State of Ohio Security Task Force.
14.
Equipment Recommendations: " " " " Install cameras at all entrances, lobbies and elevator banks at the Rhodes Tower.
Replace current equipment with state-of-the-art camera equipment.
Establish remote monitoring off-site as a backup to current in-house security systems.
Upgrade current VHS systems to digital.
15.
The committee recommends the expansion of the role, authority and resources of the State Security Building Coordinator.
16.
Establish an "Internal Building Security Committee" for each department, agency, commission and office.
This Committee will consist of employees who will convey suggestions to the Building Review Committee and also be a conduit for information developed through the State Building Security Review Committee.
17.
Direct that the Director of Public Safety be responsible for the implementation of building security measures and report on an annual basis to the Governor and General Assembly the status of building security for the State of Ohio.
18.
The Committee re-examine evacuation procedures on a building-by-building basis.
19.
The Governor mandate the cooperation and participation of all departments, agencies, and commissions in the assessment, planning and implementation of security measures deemed appropriate by the Department of Public Safety.
Ohio Department of Public Safety Page 12
VI. CONCLUSION When the Committee was given this task, it was necessary to develop a scope of work and define an action plan.
It became apparent that previous security recommendations had not been completely implemented.
This was due, in large part, to a lack of cooperation, no set directives for action, and no definitive measurement requirement.
The Committee determined that any future security initiatives must be mandated by the Governor.
Also, that he require the participation and cooperation of cabinet members, agencies and commissions with the Department of Public Safety as the lead agency.
In light of recent terrorist events the Committee felt it prudent to review current security plans and practices and recommend changes that would result in safer surroundings.
The Committee focused on major state owned or operated facilities (see Attachment A).
The report addresses those buildings, however, there is a second tier of buildings, the institutional buildings (DYS, DRC, MRDD, etc.), that bear further consideration and will be the subject of additional meetings.
A variety of security measures have been recommended.
They are geared towards the safety and security of state employees, buildings and visitors.
With recommendations comes a responsibility to guarantee implementation.
As beneficial as the initiatives have been in the past, results have not been adequate.
It is the intent of this Committee to set an implementation plan and structure in place to achieve the desired results.
In closing, with the complete cooperation of all entities of state government adequate and effective building, employee, and visitor security can be achieved.
Ohio Department of Public Safety Page 13
Attachment "A" Risk Assessment of Primary State Office Buildings Name of Facility State Capitol Broad and High Streets Columbus, Ohio Manager: Ron Keller 614/752-9777 State of Ohio Computer Center 1320 Arthur E. Adams Dr. Columbus, Ohio Manager: Cathy McConnell 614/752-8388 Vern Riffe Center 77 South High Street Columbus, Ohio Manager: Jim Daymut 216/787-3840 James A. Rhodes Tower 30 East Broad Street Columbus, Ohio Manager: Jim Daymut 216/787-3840 Frank J. Lausche Building 615 West Superior Avenue Cleveland, Ohio Manager: Jim Daymut 216/787-3840 Michael V. Disalle Government Center Ohio Government Center Toledo, Ohio Manager: Mike Sullivan 419/245-3080 4 1,270 505,000 23 4 1,100 441,883 13 5 3,000 1,246,838 42 5 1,600 `,135,216 32 Governor 
ID's required.
Attorney General's Office, Ohio Supreme Court, Administrative Services and various other state agencies.
ID's required.
Governor's Office, Attorney General, state agencies, daycare center, located adjacent to federal offices.
ID's required.
Assorted state, county and city offices.
ID's required (Recently enacted).
5 700 369-804 4 Risk Level Employees Square Ft. 400,000 Flrs.
Qualification Ceremonial Governor's Office, Senate and House chambers, Legislative Service Commission, Underground parking facility.
ID's required after hours.
Statewide computer operations, MARCS and LEADS systems.
ID's required.
5
250-300
4
Ohio Department of Public Safety Page 14
Risk Assessment of Primary State Office Buildings Name of Facility Oliver R. Ocasek Government Center 161 South High Street Akron, Ohio Manager: Jim Daymut 216/787-3840 William Green Building 30 West Spring Street Columbus, Ohio Manager: Jim Gilden 614/752-9022 Charles Shipley Building/ODPS 1970 West Broad Street Columbus, Ohio Manger: Dan Davies 614/995-3713 ODOT 1980 West Broad Street Columbus, Ohio Manager: Tom Nelson 614/466-7170 Ohio Department of Health 246 North High Street Columbus, Ohio Manager; Dean Lent 614/995-1477 Ohio Jobs and Family Services 145 South Front Street Columbus, Ohio Manager: Mike Thomas 614/466-6380 3 400 235,000 8 Underground parking facility.
ID's required.
3 1,500 334,592 12 Located adjacent to federal offices.
ID's required.
3 726 360,000 6 Connected to ODPS, OSHP.
ID's not required.
3 1,300 360,000 6 Lt. Governor's/Director's office, OSHP, BMV, connected to ODOT, adjacent daycare.
ID's required.
4 1,700 996,000 33 BWC, Industrial Commission.
ID's required.
Risk Level Employees Square Ft. 235,000 Flrs.
Qualification Assorted state, county and city offices.
ID's not required.
4
500
5
Ohio Department of Public Safety Page 15
Risk Assessment of Primary State Office Buildings Name of Facility Capitol Square Office Building 65 East State Street Columbus, Ohio Manager: Noah Gens 614/464-2677 Ohio Department of Education 25 South Front Street Columbus, Ohio Manager: Harold Rausch 614/387-0300 2 580 234,592 8 Risk Level Employees Square Ft. 495,000 Flrs.
Qualification Ohio Court of Claims, SERB, Attorney General's Office, private sector offices.
Privately owned building.
ID's required.
Underground parking facility.
ID's required.
3
1,100
26
Ohio Department of Public Safety Page 16
Attachment "B"
BASIC SECURITY SURVEY GEOGRAPHY / CONFIGURATION Name of Location Contact Person Activity performed on site Number of Buildings 1 Constructed of Other Number of Floors 1 Street Address Phone #
Building population 1-100 Number of Shifts Days of Operation Exterior lighting Does the facility have a disaster recovery plan and have drills been conducted? Yes No Other Mon -Fri Hours of operation Other
Are there established emergency procedures and have they been provided to the employee population? Yes No
A. Parking Garage Is parking restricted to employees? Are employee vehicles identified with a parking sticker? Is there a CCTV system in the garage? Is the garage attended at all hours? Lighting Restrooms Emergency Phones/buttons How is cash controlled in pay garages? Okay Yes Yes No No Yes Yes No No
Improvement needed Easy Access # per floor
Ohio Department of Public Safety Page 17
B. Internal Activity What is the main activity in the building (s) and what assets are in use that would be targets for loss? (cash, documents, employees, state property/equipment, etc.)
C. Physical Controls D. Access Control Fence Yes No Type of Const.
Yes No # of entrances
Is there a designated employee entrance?
Is there an ID program in place?
Yes
No
Describe the main components of the system and card type.
Are there different levels of access for employees and what criteria must the employee meet to gain higher level access? Yes No Man doors High Risk Areas Who administers the card access system? (enters/deletes cards) When was the last card access audit performed? Is there an access report generated by the card access system? Who reviews the report? How often is it reviewed? Are un-issued cards secured? Yes No How? Yes No Yes No Parking Dock Yes Yes No No
Ohio Department of Public Safety Page 18
Is there a visitor sign in log?
Yes
No
How are visitor badges controlled?
Do visitor badges expire?
Yes
No
N/A
What other means of entry are there and are they secured? (dock, roof, basement)
Are Guards, Police or Troopers in place?
Guards
Police
Troopers
Are the guards contract or proprietary? Contract What is the name of the company and who is the contact? Phone # Guard supervisor How does the guard company select personnel?
Is there a policy manual or post orders? What are the Guards duties?
Policy Manual
Post orders
Have the guards received in service training? (Use of force, Search and Seizure, First Aid, Interpersonal, Patrol, CPO, etc.)
E. Alarm Protection Are intrusion alarms in use? Alarm Company Contact Person Monitoring center location/phone Yes No Alarm company phone #
Alarm call/response list: (Name of responder and phone #) 1st Phone #
Ohio Department of Public Safety Page 19
2 3
nd rd
Phone # Phone #
Date alarm responder list was last updated/audited: What hours of operation does the alarm company have on file?
Does the alarm company provide opening and closing reports? Who reviews these reports for unauthorized access?
Yes
No
Have employees with access to the alarm system left the organization? Was their alarm access code revoked by the alarm company? Were their keys and/or card access card returned? If not when were the locks changed? Is there a lock change program? Is there a fire alarm system? Last test Yes Yes No Is there a schedule of protection on file with the building manager? No Type of drill Yes No Yes Yes No
Yes No
No
Yes
No
Is there a disaster recovery plan for the building/agency? Who administers the plan? Is the alarm system functioning properly? When was the alarm system last tested? Does the alarm system have a cellular or land line back up? Does the alarm system have a back up energy supply? Type of energy supply Is there an alarm system permit on file with the city? Yes Yes No
Yes No No
No
Monitored off site Yes
F. Closed Circuit Television Cameras Is there a CCTV system in use? Are the cameras color or B/W? Yes Color No How many are there? B/W
Are the cameras stationary or pan/tilt/zoom? Where are the cameras located and what do they view?
Ohio Department of Public Safety Page 20
Are all the cameras working?
Yes No Yes No
Are all of the cameras being recorded? How many VCR's are in use?
Maintenance schedule for VCR's Tape Rotation Date the system was installed? Who monitors/tests the system?
G. Incident History Please give a description of the past security related incidents that have occurred at the site.
Attach a separate sheet if needed Does the building or agency have a Safety Committee, how often do they meet and what was the last topic of discussion?
Who chairs the committee? Phone # How is property, such as computers and other supplies, controlled?
Is there a property pass system is place?
Ohio Department of Public Safety Page 21
Who administers the program?
Is there an accurate floor plan of the building on file? Comments
Yes
No
Ohio Department of Public Safety Page 22
Attachment "C"
1995 RECOMMENDATIONS H. GENERAL IMPROVEMENTS
Train certain state employees to be aware of possible indicators of a threatening situation.
For example, receptionists, secretaries, mail handlers, and any other front line contacts with the public will be taught how to recognize suspicious packages or people coming into state buildings.
The Ohio Highway Patrol will provide additional training on how to handle bomb threats received by telephone.
The Ohio Highway Patrol has completed a draft of a pamphlet that will be circulated to state employees which outlines what to do in cases of bomb threats, criminal acts, and several other emergency situations (section 7).
Institute a caller ID system so threatening calls can be traced.
Purchase a "bomb dog" and conduct regular inspections by roving patrols.
The dog will be stationed with the Capitol Square Highway Patrol officers.
This service will be made available to all state buildings.
Purchase inexpensive x-ray equipment to inspect packages in mail rooms.
Centralize special delivery (i.e., Federal Express and UPS) and mail service in the same point thus directing all deliveries to mail rooms instead of to individual floors.
This will allow easier inspection of suspicious packages.
I. BUILDING SPECIFIC IMPROVEMENTS Rhodes Tower (section 2)
Several cameras will be added in strategic locations that are currently not monitored.
Of primary concern is the perimeter of the building and the loading dock area.
These cameras will allow the monitoring of vehicles parked next to the building.
Equipment will be added that will be able to record events seen by the cameras.
A list of vehicles authorized to park at the loading dock and next to the building will be compiled to keep track of who should and should not be parked in these areas.
The entrance tunnel from the Capitol parking garage will be staffed full time where as now it is only part time post.
The guard in the lobby during daytime hours will be dressed in a uniform where now the guard is not in uniform.
Ohio Department of Public Safety Page 23
Riffe Center (section 3)
Several cameras will be added in strategic locations that are currently not monitored.
Of primary concern is the perimeter of the building and the loading dock area.
Equipment will be added that will enable the recording of events on tape so they are accessible for recall when and if they are needed.
An additional daytime security post is being created on the third floor level to monitor the main elevator banks and traffic to and from the garage.
Ohio Departments Building (section 5)
Access will be limited to one entrance thus enabling the security guards to monitor those entering and exiting the building.
Several cameras will be added in strategic locations that are currently not monitored.
J. Additional Considerations Requiring Executive Action
Identification cards with a photograph and a bar code could be made for all state employees.
This would make it quicker and easier to determine who is authorized to be in certain areas of state buildings.
With cooperation from Public Safety and BMV these ID's could be produced with minimal cost.
Some or all state parking garages could be restricted to state employees only.
The public now has access to all or part of all state garages in Columbus.
The Riffe Center garage is approximately two-thirds state employees already and would inconvenience a relatively small number of non-state employees if restricted.
However, this would cost approximately $120,000 in lost revenue and the garage would sit vacant in the evening.
Another option is to open the garage in the evening for public use for special events such as plays and concerts.
A large portion of the underground garage at the state house is open to the public and would be more difficult to restrict.
Floor plans could be re-configured to control access to state employee offices similar to that on the 30th floor of the Riffe Center.
Placing motion detectors in strategic areas (such as stairwells) to alert security of unauthorized entry and or movement.
Erect barriers or partitions surrounding public entrances that would physically restrict access by motor vehicles.
Ohio Department of Public Safety Page 24
Restrict access for all employees to sensitive areas such as boiler and maintenance rooms, computer rooms, mail rooms, etc.
Ohio Department of Public Safety Page 25
Attachment "D" 1997 Recommendations Charge the Director of Public Safety with the overall responsibility of security of all state owned and/or occupied buildings.
Appoint an advisory committee to assist the Director of Public Safety in the development of a comprehensive security plan.
The advisory committee to consist of the members of the State Building Security Review Committee, a representative from the General Assembly, and representatives from the statewide elected officials.
The advisory committee to have the authority to review and advise the Director of Public Safety regarding policies and procedures as well as to suggest new policy initiatives.
Direct each cabinet member and encourage elected officials to appoint a senior member of his or her management team who will have the responsibility for the security needs of the agency, who will serve as liaison to the agency's labor/management health and safety committee and who will be responsible for the agency's compliance with the policies and practices that are adopted.
Grant the Director of Public Safety the authority to prepare a comprehensive plan for building security that balances the need to ensure the safety of the building tenants and customers while maintaining acceptable public access.
The Director of Public Safety should engage the services of a risk assessment consultant to assist with the security assessment plan.
The plan should include the following elements:
A standard method for conducting periodic risk assessments of each state building as well as leased commercial space for state agencies.
An employee training program which stresses awareness and the need for each employee to take personal responsibility for security, to evaluate and recognize dangerous situations and/or suspicious persons, and to respond accordingly.
A joint plan with local law enforcement agencies to provide a coordinated response to emergency situations.
A joint plan with local law enforcement agencies regarding their enforcement of security issues within their control.
A uniform system for gathering and reporting building specific incidents to continually evaluate building security.
Ongoing review and research into the best practices of other states and jurisdictions to determine if the practices should be incorporated into a comprehensive security plan.
A method for testing the adequacy of building security measures.
A plan for a continuous review of security for the purpose of updating policies and employee training as risk experiences and societal changes occur.
A security component to all building design contracts.
Communication with each state agency representative having management responsibility for building security and who acts as a liaison to the agency's labor/management health and safety committee.
Recommendation of legislation as appropriate.
Ohio Department of Public Safety Page 26
The Director of Public Safety in cooperation with the building owners as appropriate, immediately implement the following recommendations:
Expand and coordinate the current photo ID system to all state employees.
Require all state-owned and/or occupied buildings to have an emergency procedure and building services pamphlet for all state employees.
Expand the presence of the State Highway Patrol Capitol Square Police beyond the State House to include other state-owned and/or occupied buildings connected to the State House and explore the feasibility of State Highway Patrol presence in other state buildings.
Continue the implementation of the recommendations of the 1995 task force.
Recommends the exploration of the following actions utilizing the criteria set forth in section IV as well as other relevant criteria: " Require visitor ID badges in all state occupied buildings.
" Restrict access of non-employees to only public lobbies unless they have a visitor's badge.
" Restrict building access to only those that have business in the building.
" Group tenants by extent to which they need to be accessed by the public.
" Restrict public from certain areas of parking garages.
