State of Utah Homeland Security TERRORIST THREAT CONDITIONS Threat Condition Critical Facilities Protective Action Local Government Actions Anticipated Public Response Definition: A terrorist attack has occurred or credible and corroborated intelligence indicates that one is imminent.
Normally, this threat condition is declared for a specific location or critical facility."
Continue all precautions from Continue all precautions from In addition to all previously lower Threat Conditions. lower Threat Conditions . mentioned precautions, citizens
S E V E R E
? Announce Threat Condition SEVERE and explain expected actions.
? Deploy security personnel based on threat assessments.
? Close or restrict entry to the facility to emergency personnel only and restrict parking areas close to critical buildings.
? Maintain a skeleton crew of essential employees.
? Deploy emergency response and security teams.
? Activate Operations Center and send a liaison to the county or state EOC. ? Maintain close contact with local law enforcement.
? Be prepared to implement mutual aid agreements with government and with other critical facilities.
? Provide security in parking lots and company areas.
? Report suspicious activity immediately to local law enforcement.
? Restrict or suspend all deliveries and mail to the facility.
Emergency supplies or essential shipments should be sent to and off-site location for inspection.
? Announce Threat Condition
SEVERE to employees and to the public and explain anticipated actions that should be taken.
? Deny unauthorized access to critical facilities and infrastructure.
Continue 100% inspections of personnel, vehicles and packages.
? Visually inspect the interior and undercarriage of vehicles entering parking lots and terraces.
? Deploy equipment assets and ensure physical security measures be afforded to them at critical sites.
? Assemble trained volunteers to assist in emergency operations.
? Implement Mutual Aid Agreements as required.
? Continue to assess the vulnerability of key assets and facilities.
Take appropriate action to protect them by deploying armed security forces to these sites.
? Cancel or delay unnecessary employee travel and leave.
? Activate the Emergency Operations Center.
? Control release of information to the public and news media.
? Send a public Information Officer to the state Joint Information Center (JIC).
? Provide security for personnel dispatched to repair or restore damaged facilities and systems.
are advised to: ? Report suspicious activities and call 9-1-1 for immediate response.
? Expect delays, searches of purses and bags and restricted access to public buildings.
? Expect traffic delays and restrictions .
? Take personal security precautions to avoid becoming a victim of crime or terrorist attack.
? Avoid crowded public areas and gatherings.
? Do not travel into areas affected by the attack or is an expected terrorist target.
? Keep emergency supplies accessible and automobile fuel tank full.
? Be prepared to evacuate your home or shelter in place on order of local authorities.
? Be suspicious of persons taking photographs of critical facilities, asking detailed questions about physical security or dressed inappropriately for weather conditions (suicide bomber).
Report these incidents immediately to law enforcement.
? Closely monitor news reports and Emergency Alert System (EAS) radio/TV stations.
? Assist neighbors who may need help.
? Avoid passing unsubstantiated information and rumors.
Threat Condition
Critical Facilities Protective Action
Local Government Actions
Anticipated Public Response
Definition: Credible intelligence indicates that there is a high risk of a local terrorist attack but a s pecific target has not been identified.
Continue all precautions Continue all precautions from lower In additio n to all previously mentioned from lower Threat Threat Conditions. precautions, citizens are advised to: Conditions.
H I G H
? Announce Threat Condition HIGH to all employees and explain expected actions.
? Place emergency response teams on notice.
? Ac tivate the operations center if required.
? Monitor world and local events.
Pass on credible threat intelligence to key personnel.
? Ensure appropriate security measures are in place and functioning properly.
? Instruct employees to report suspicious activities, packages and people.
? Search all personal bags, parcels and require personnel to pass through magnetometer, if available.
? Restrict vehicle parking close to buildings.
? Inspect intrusion detection systems and lighting, security fencing and locking systems.
? Inspect all deliveries and consider accepting shipments only at offsite locations.
? Remind employees to expect delays and baggage searches.
? Announce Threat Condition HIGH to employees and public and explain expectted actions to be taken.
? Restrict or control access to government buildings, critical facilities and infrastructure.
? Erect outside barricades, security checks to deny access to underground parking areas, loading docks and building entrance.
? Require identification, sign-in and escorts as required.
? Restrict parking areas located close to buildings or critical facilities.
? Remove trash containers, dumpsters and mailboxes located near government buildings and facilities.
? Closely monitor available security and intelligence data from state and local law enforcement agencies.
? Instruct employees to be especially watchful for suspicious or unattended packages and articles received through the mail servic e. ? Inspection buildings and parking areas for suspicious packages.
? Implement rumor control to avoid public panic.
? Employ armed security at airports, dams, public utilities and critical facilities.
? Based on threat assessment, define rules of engagement and authorize use of deadly force.
? Test communication plans.
? Secure and regularly inspect all buildings, vehicles, and parking and storage areas for intrusion.
? Conduct 100% verification of deliveries and restrict shipments.
? Resume normal activities but expect some delays, baggage searches and restrictions as a result of heightened security at public buildings and facilities.
? Continue to monitor world and local events as well as local government threat advisories.
? Report suspicious activities at or near critical facilities to local law enforcement agencies by calling 9-1-1. ? Avoid leaving unattended packages or brief cases in public areas.
? Inventory and organize emergency supply kits and discuss emergency plans with family members.
Reevaluate meeting location based on threat.
? Consider taking reasonable personal security precautions.
Be alert to your surroundings, avoid placing yourself in a vulnerable situation and monitor the activities of your children.
? Maintain close contact with your family and neighbors to ensure their safety and emotional welfare.
Threat Condition
Critical Facilities Protective Action
Local Government Actions
Anticipated Public Response
Definition: Elevated risk of terrorist attack but a specific region of the USA or target has not been identified.
Continue all precautions Continue all precautions from In addition to all previously mentioned from lower Threat lower Threat Conditions. precautions, citizens are advised to: Conditions.
? Announce Threat Condition ? Announce Threat ELEVATED to employees and to ? Continue normal activities, but report Condition ELEVATED the public.
suspicious activities to the local law to employees.
? Review physical security plans enforcement agencies.
? Review vulnerability for critical facilities.
? Take a first aid or Community and threat assessments ? Assess potential terrorist Emergency Response Team (CERT) and revise as needed.
targets and develop plans to class.
? Identify and monitor counteract an attack.
? Become active in your local governmental ? Conduct vulnerability Neighborhood Crime Watch program.
information sharing assessments of each critical ? Network with your family, neighbors sources for warnings facility and government buildin g. and community for mutual support during and alerts.
Estimate the consequence of loss a disaster or terrorist attack.
? Update and test call and assign a priority for their ? Learn what critical facilitie s are located down list for protection.
in your community and report suspicious emergency response activities at or near these sites.
teams and key ? Ensure all buildings are ? Attend your local emergency planning employees.
secured to prevent theft or committee (LEPC) meeting to learn more ? Review and tampering.
about local hazards.
(Call the city/county coordinate and update ? Conduct physical inspection of emergency manager to learn dates and mutual aid agreements buildings for suspicious locatio ns of the meetings.)
with other critical unattended packages.
? Increase individual or family facilities and ? Develop a cadre of train ed emergency preparedness through training, government agencies.
volunteers.
maintaining good physical fitness and ? Establish and ? Closely monitor current news health, and storing food, water and monitor active and events and state and federal emergency supplies.
passive security terrorist advisories. measures.
? Keep the public informed on ? Review employee current threat conditions and training on security advisories. precautions (bomb ? Coordinate with adjacent threat procedures, municipalities for mutual aid reporting suspicious support in the event of a disaster packages, activities and or terrorist threat.
people).
? Conduct tabletop and ? Conduct functional exercises to ensure that communications checks response plans are understood and to ensure radio contact current.
can be established.
? Review existing physical security measures employed and install intrusion detection and passive systems as funding permits.
? Conduct weekly radio communication checks.
E L
E V
A T
E
D
Threat Condition
Critical Facilities Protective Action Continue all precautions from lower Threat Conditions.
Local Government Actions
Anticipated Public Response
G U A R D E D
Definition: General Risk with no credible threats to specific targets.
Continue all precautions from In addition to all previously lower Threat Conditions . mentioned precautions, citizens are advised to: ? Estimate the threat ? Ensure that key ? Continue normal activities but vulnerability of each critical leaders are familiar be watchful for suspicious facility and the countermeasures with the emergency activities.
Report criminal activity required to protect them.
response and business ? Ensure that each department is to local law enforcement.
resumption plans.
? Review family emergency familiar with their assigned ? Review, update and responsibilities during a disaster plans.
routinely exercise for ? Increase family emergency as shown in the plan and are functional areas of preparedness by purchasing prepared to respond.
plans.
? Review communications plans supplies, food and storing water.
? Review and update ? Be familiar with local natural and ensure the call-down the call down list for and technologic al (man made) procedures are current and emergency response hazards in your community.
accurate.
teams ? Increase individual or family ? Conduct emergency ? Develop or review emergency preparedness through management training and Mutual Aid training, maintaining good exercise emergency response agreements with other physical fitness and health, and plans.
facilities and/or with storing food, water and emergency ? Ensure all emergency local government for supplies.
management and response use during functions are adequately staffed.
? Monitor local and national news emergencies.
for terroris t alerts.
Recruit and train volunteers to ? Review physical ? Update immunizations. augment full time staff.
security precautions to ? Volunteer to assist and support ? Actively support the prevent theft, the community emergency Neighborhood Watch, unauthorized entry or response agencies.
Community Emergency destruction of property.
Response Team (CERT) and Have you provided for: other Freedom Corps programs.
? Employee picture ? Remind citizen and employees ID badges? to be alert for suspicious ? Background packages, activities, vehicles and checks on all to report these occurrences to the employees? proper authority.
? Access control ? Secure buildings, unused and locking of high rooms, storage areas, equipment security areas at all and vehicles to prevent theft, times? tampering or destruction.
? All security keys ? Evaluate information available marked with "Do on public websites that could not Duplicate? compromise security.
? Surveillance ? Encourage all citizens and Cameras? employees to have necessary ? Backup power? immunizations.
? An alarm system?
Threat Condition
Critical Facilities Protective Action
Local Government Actions
Anticipated Public Response
Definition: Low risk of terrorism.
Routine security is implemented to preclude routine criminal threats.
Citizens are advised to: ? Develop emergency ? Identify critical facilities that response and business may need protection.
? Continue to enjoy individual resumption plans.
? R eview Emergency Response freedom.
Particip ate freely in ? Encourage and Plans.
travel, work and recreational assist employees to be ? Conduct training, seminars, activities.
prepared for personal, workshops and exercises using ? Be prepared for disasters and natural and the emergency response plans.
family emergencies.
(See DESHS technological ? Conduct emergency and American Red Cross emergencies.
preparedness training for citizens brochures.)
? Develop a and employees.
? Develop a family emergency communications plan ? Encourage response agencies plan.
(See DESHS and American for emergency (fire fighters, law enforcement, Red Cross brochures.)
response and key EMS, public works and elected ? Know how to tur n off your personnel officials) to take emergency power, gas and water service to ? Conduct training for management and American Red your house.
employees on physical Cross first aid and CPR training.
? Know what hazardous materials security precautions.
? Provide emergency are stored in your home and how to ? Budget for physical preparedness information to properly dispose of unneeded security measures.
employees via paycheck stubs chemicals.
tips, newsletters, articles and ? Support the efforts of your local posters.
emergency responders (fire ? Conduct routine inventories of fighters, law enforcement and emergency supplies and medical emergency medical service). aid kits. ? Know what natural hazards are ? Budget for physical security prevalent in your area and what measures.
measures you can take to protect ? Encourage programs for your family.
employee immunization and preventive health care
L
O
W
