Lewis Little Folks, Inc. 21000 Brookpark Road MS LLF-1 Cleveland, Ohio 44135 December 2001
Dear Parents: Here we are again, entering a new Holiday season.
Boy, does time fly by.
As we reflect on the past year, I'm sure you'll agree that we all have so much to be grateful for and so much to look forward to.
You all now know that change is about to take place in my personal life as I move on from Lewis Little Folks.
I feel especially lucky to have been a part of this fantastic center for the past 5 years.
I've experienced so much.
I've been able to work closely with professional staff members who deeply care for our children.
I've worked closely with the parents on the Board of Directors who have strived to improve the quality of this center and are succeeding! I've seen the love and concern all of you parents have for your children and the time you make to be involved in their lives.
But, I'm most grateful for the time I've spent with the children of LLF, watching them grow over the years, getting to know new children, and hearing of how our graduates are doing so well in their new lives.
My last 5 years have been very, very rich with hugs, jokes, hand-drawn pictures and many laughs.
Thank you all for your constant support and kind words.
I will miss you all very much, but I leave with the confidence that LLF will continue to provide excellent child care.
The entire staff and Board are as committed as I am to your children.
My husband and I are looking forward to spending time with our growing family, but I'll always keep in touch with my LLF family.
I wish you all the best in the coming New Year and Happy Holidays to each of you! Maureen Sartain CHRISTMAS / NEW YEAR WEEK SIGN UP SHEETS Thank you to all parents who have signed up to let us know which days your child will be at LLF during the holiday weeks.
If you haven't done this already, please sign up as soon as possible.
The sign up sheets are available in each classroom.
These sheets help us plan our staffing on these days.
Also, just a reminder that LLF will be closed on December 24 and 25, 2001.
HATS, MITTENS, SOCKS COLLECTION The Tiger 3 class is collecting hats, mittens, and socks to donate to needy families of greater Cleveland.
This is such a great way to teach our children about giving to people who are not as fortunate as us.
Please consider participating in this wonderful event with your child.
It is open for all LLF students.
You can drop off your donation in the box located outside of the Tiger 3 classroom.
The hats, mittens, and socks will be donated on Dec. 21, 2001.
December 2001
Lewis Little Folks, Inc. - 2 of 5
HOLIDAY EVENTS We plan to have our Holiday Programs/Parties this coming Thursday and Friday, December 20 
All parents are invited to come! A schedule for each classroom is below.
This year, we are trying to closely follow Developmentally Appropriate Practices regarding the holidays and performances.
We are not focusing only on Christmas, but trying to educate the children about all celebrations at this time.
We would also like to focus on winter and the season.
Also, it is inappropriate to force children to "perform" in front of an audience if they do not want to, so some classes will be having "sing-alongs" where family members can participate with the children.
Miss Alane, our music teacher, has agreed to be a part of this program.
We look forward to having you there.
If you would like to invite family members who are not badged, then you need to contact the LLF office as soon as possible.
We will need to know of anyone who is not a U.S. citizen.
We will create a list of visitors that the guards will keep at the gates.
PROGRAM SCHEDULE Thursday, Dec. 20: 3:00 pm Bunnies: Ducklings: 3:15 pm Friday, Dec. 21: Kindergarten Tiger 3 Bears Puppies Tigers 1 
2:45 3:00 3:00 3:15 3:30
pm pm pm pm pm
STAFF INFORMATION Congratulations to nine of our teachers who have finished their third class with Cuyahoga Community College to earn a CDA (Child Development Associate).
They are: Shelly Conrad, Natalie Clark, Janice Kundtz, Erlinda Stephens, Cheri Pogozelski, Brie Dobrow, Anita Ranieri, Maureen Becker, and Carmella Genaro.
These staff members will soon be starting their final class and should have their CDA credentials by June.
We're very proud of all of them for the dedication to such an important accomplishment.
SECURITY PLAN INFORMATION LLF has recently completed a Security Plan with GRC security.
This plan clearly outlines our responsibilities and GRC's responsibilities with security.
This document is now a part of LLF's policies and is posted on our website at the following address: http://www.grc.nasa.gov/WWW/OHR/Childcare/LLF/security.pdf It is very important that each parent, both badged and unbadged, read this document.
If you are badged and have an unbadged spouse, please print out this document so that you both can read it.
Please contact LLF if you have any questions regarding this document.
December 2001
Lewis Little Folks, Inc. - 3 of 5
THANK YOU
( ( ( ( ( ( (
Thank you to staff members, Donna Reuter and Patty Raimer, for purchasing new riding toys for our bike trail.
Thank you to Bob Orszycki for assembling each of those riding toys.
The children are really enjoying them! Thank you to Barry Piendl for fixing a new sensory table that was donated to us.
Thank you to all of the parents who volunteered to help with the Pumpkin Patch in October.
Thank you to Michelle Knox who arranged to have the pumpkins and hay bales donated and delivered free of charge from Wilson Feed Mill to LLF for the Pumpkin Patch! Thank you to Cathy McDonnell for setting up the cardboard box maze in our basement and for reading spooky stories to all classrooms.
Thank you to Brian and Marie Borowski for donating the large boxes, and to Terri Deacey for donating the cardboard tubes.
CLASSROOM NEWS BUNNIES We would like to wish a Happy 1 st Birthday to Nathan Van Drie on December 14, 2001.
We wish all our bunnies and parents Happy Holidays and a Happy New Year.
Our holiday party is on December 20th.
We will be posting a sheet in our room for holiday treats.
We would like to welcome our new babies who will be starting in December and January.
They are Matthew Williams, Nicholas Leissler, and Victoria Holtz.
Shelly, Natalie, Renee, and Melanie DUCKLINGS We would like to wish Maureen Sartain and her family best wishes and good luck in the future.
We will all miss her.
We would like to wish everyone a Happy Holiday.
Parents, please join us for our Holiday party on the 20th.
Janice, Susan, and Christine PUPPIES It's hard to believe that the holidays are already upon us! We would like to take this opportunity to wish you and your family Happy Holidays and a Happy and Prosperous New Year.
We will be having our holiday party on Friday, Dec. 21st.
You are all invited for food and festivities including a holiday singalong.
More details will follow in your child's locker.
Happy Birthday to Thomas Legeza-Narvaez, Ethan Curry, Carol Hall, and Alex Rodgers who all celebrate birthdays in December.
Happy Holidays! Erlinda, Donna, Patty, Cheri
December 2001
Lewis Little Folks, Inc. - 4 of 5
BEARS This year's Holiday Party is titled, "Make a Mess in the Bear Room".
We will have lots of activities planned for the afternoon.
We want this day to be more interactive with the parents in your child's classroom.
Hope to see you there! Also, Miss Brie continues to give self-esteem tips on the Bear 1 bulletin board.
There is a new tip posted every Wednesday.
Happy Birthday to Cindy Zheng on Dec. 18th and to Nicholas DiBiasio on Dec. 28th.
Merry Christmas and Happy New Year! Brie and Anita TIGER 1 
All children need to have a winter coat, hat, and gloves at school everyday.
We go outside if weather permits we don't want the children to be cold.
Fun activities are planned in December.
We are learning about holidays of different cultures.
If you are interested in sharing your heritage and how your family celebrates, please contact us.
We would enjoy hearing about your culture.
Here are some dates to mark on your calendar: Thursday, Dec. 20-Classroom Ornament Exchange- Each child draws a name and exchanges an ornament worth $5.00 or less.
Friday, Dec. 21-Classroom Open House-Fun activities planned from 9:30 am to 4:30 pm. Parents are invited to visit throughout the day.
Please check your child's locker for upcoming events and details.
We wish everyone a safe and happy holiday! Linda A. and Maureen B. TIGER 3 With the holidays just around the corner, the Tiger 3 children have already been busy getting things ready.
The children picked out the songs for our holiday sing-along.
There is a sign up sheet in our room for cookies and punch.
One of the themes this month is "World Celebrations".
If you have any family traditions that you would like to share with the class, please see me.
This would be an excellent time to share what you do as a family with our class.
In keeping with the true meaning of the holidays, we will be having a mittens, hats, and socks tree for needy children.
This will reinforce to the children how we are all friends and how we can all work together to help each other out.
Please don't forget to bring in those warm coats, mittens, and hats for your children.
We will be going outside.
May you all have a happiest of holidays.
Cathy McDonnell KITCHEN Thank you for saving Campbell's labels.
We collected over 2,000 labels and 1,100 bonus points.
An order for assorted playground balls was placed in November.
Also, I would like to thank you for the donations given to the "Caring 
Your kindness is very appreciated by the groups that receive and distribute the donations.
I would like to wish each of you a peaceful and joyous holiday season.
Linda Ryan
December 2001
Lewis Little Folks, Inc. - 5 of 5
KINDERGARTEN Happy Holidays everyone! The children are busy decorating the room for the holidays.
We are all so excited about the coming holiday.
We love to sing all day long.
We are busy little elves learning to read the color words and number words.
We are also learning to count and write numbers to 30, recognize and complete patterns, identify the beginning sound in words A-N, and learn about the various holiday traditions.
I am looking forward to seeing everyone at our sing-along holiday party on Friday, Dec. 21 at 2:45 pm. `Twas 2 weeks before Christmas when all through the school...
Not a Kindergartner was talking, they all followed the rules Their work was all finished and put on my desk, In hopes that St. Nicholas would be so impressed.
The children all sat so quietly in their chairs, with visions of free play running through their heads.
When up on the second floor there arose such a clatter, We all sprung upstairs to see what was the matter.
And what to our sensitive ears should we hear, but Miss Maureen and Miss Carm singing: "You better watch out, you better not cry, You better do your work because we're telling you why.
Santa Claus is coming to town."
We would like to wish everyone a Happy Christmas, Happy Hanukkah, Happy Kwanzaa, and...
"God Jul".............Sweedish "Feliz Navidad".....Spanish "Froehliche Weihnachten" ....Italian "Joyeux Noel".......French "Bozego Narodzenia".....Polish "Glaedelig Jul".......Danish Ms. Foster
