Research 
Exclude team or work leaders.
Illustrative Examples: Laundromat Manager, Station Chief, Assembly Line Supervisor
51-2021 Coil Winders, Tapers, and Finishers Wind wire coils used in electrical components, such as resistors and transformers, and in electrical equipment and instruments, such as field cores, bobbins, armature cores, electrical motors, generators, and control equipment.
Illustrative Examples: Coil Builder, Motor Winder, Wire Coiler
51-2022 Electrical and Electronic Equipment Assemblers Assemble or modify electrical or electronic equipment, such as computers, test equipment telemetering systems, electric motors, and batteries.
Illustrative Examples: Anode Builder, Battery Builder, Industrial Equipment Wirer
51-2041 Structural Metal Fabricators and Fitters Fabricate, lay out, position, align, and fit parts of structural metal products.
Illustrative Examples: Manufacturing Ornamental Metal Worker, Metal Box Maker, Protector Plate Attacher
51-2092 Team Assemblers Work as part of a team having responsibility for assembling an entire product or component of a product.
Team assemblers can perform all tasks conducted by the team in the assembly process and rotate through all or most of them rather than being assigned to a specific task on a permanent basis.
May participate in making management decisions affecting the work.
Team leaders who work as part of the team should be included.
Exclude assemblers (51-2011 through 51-2099) who continuously perform the same task.
Illustrative Examples:
51-3011 Bakers Mix and bake ingredients according to recipes to produce breads, rolls, cookies, cakes, pies, pastries, or other baked goods.
Include pastry chefs in restaurants and hotels with "Chefs and Head Cooks" (35-1011).
Illustrative Examples: Cake Maker, Head Baker, Pastry Finisher
51-3021 Butchers and Meat Cutters Cut, trim, or prepare consumer-sized portions of meat for use or sale in retail establishments.
Illustrative Examples: Carver, Meat Department Manager, Cleaver
51-3022 Meat, Poultry, and Fish Cutters and Trimmers Use hand tools to perform routine cutting and trimming of meat, poultry, and fish.
Illustrative Examples: Calf Skinner, Eviscerator, Filleter
51-3023 Slaughterers and Meat Packers Work in slaughtering, meat packing, or wholesale establishments performing precision functions involving the preparation of meat.
Work may include specialized slaughtering tasks, cutting standard or premium cuts of meat for marketing, making sausage, or wrapping meats.
Illustrative Examples: Hog Sticker, Shactor, Beef Splitter
51-3092 Food Batchmakers Set up and operate equipment that mixes or blends ingredients used in the manufacturing of food products.
Include candy makers and cheese makers.
Illustrative Examples: Candy Maker, Honey Blender, Peanut Butter Maker
51-4022 Forging Machine Setters, Operators, and Tenders, Metal and Plastic Set up, operate, or tend forging machines to taper, shape, or form metal or plastic parts.
Illustrative Examples: Cold Header Operator, Swager Operator, Drop Hammer Operator
51-4031 Cutting, Punching, and Press Machine Setters, Operators, and Tenders, Metal and Plastic Set up, operate, or tend machines to saw, cut, shear, slit, punch, crimp, notch, bend, or straighten metal or plastic material.
Illustrative Examples: Perforator Operator, Crimping Machine Operator, Four Slide Machine Setter
51-4033 Grinding, Lapping, Polishing, and Buffing Machine Tool Setters, Operators, and Tenders, Metal and Plastic Set up, operate, or tend grinding and related tools that remove excess material or burrs from surfaces, sharpen edges or corners, or buff, hone, or polish metal or plastic work pieces.
Illustrative Examples: Barrel Polisher, Jewel Bearing Facer, Metal Filer
51-4041 Machinists Set up and operate a variety of machine tools to produce precision parts and instruments.
Include precision instrument makers who fabricate, modify, or repair mechanical instruments.
May also fabricate and modify parts to make or repair machine tools or maintain industrial machines, applying knowledge of mechanics, shop mathematics, metal properties, layout, and machining procedures.
Illustrative Examples: Electrical Instrument Maker, Machine Fitter
51-4081 Multiple Machine Tool Setters, Operators, and Tenders, Metal and Plastic Set up, operate, or tend more than one type of cutting or forming machine tool or robot.
Illustrative Examples: Machine Tool Operator, Combination Machine Tool Setter, Metal and Plastic Transfer Machine Operator
51-4121 Welders, Cutters, Solderers, and Brazers Use hand-welding, flame-cutting, hand soldering, or brazing equipment to weld or join metal components or to fill holes, indentations, or seams of fabricated metal products.
Illustrative Examples: Acetylene Burner, Arc Welder, Blowtorch Operator
51-4194 Tool Grinders, Filers, and Sharpeners Perform precision smoothing, sharpening, polishing, or grinding of metal objects.
Illustrative Examples: Die Polisher, Precision Honer, Tool Maintenance Worker
51-5011 Bindery Workers Set up or operate binding machines that produce books and other printed materials.
Include hand bindery workers.
Exclude "Bookbinders" (51-5012).
Illustrative Examples: Book Coverer, Stitching Machine Operator, Bookbinding Machine Operator
51-5021 Job Printers Set type according to copy operate press to print job order and read proof for errors and clarity of impression, and correct imperfections.
Job printers are often found in small establishments where work combines several job skills.
Illustrative Examples: Job Press Operator, Apprentice Job Printer
51-5022 Prepress Technicians and Workers Set up and prepare material for printing presses.
Illustrative Examples: Compositor, Lithographer, Photoengraving Etcher
51-5023 Printing Machine Operators Set up or operate various types of printing machines, such as offset, letterset, intaglio, or gravure presses or screen printers to produce print on paper or other materials.
Illustrative Examples: Bag Printer, Offset Press Operator, Lithoplate Maker
51-6011 Laundry and Dry-Cleaning Workers Operate or tend washing or dry-cleaning machines to wash or dry-clean industrial or household articles, such as cloth garments, suede, leather, furs, blankets, draperies, fine linens, rugs, and carpets.
Illustrative Examples: Laundry Carpet Cleaner, Silk Spotter, Washing Machine Operator
51-6021 Pressers, Textile, Garment, and Related Materials Press or shape articles by hand or machine.
Illustrative Examples: Clothes Ironer, Garment Steamer, Steam Operator
51-6031 Sewing Machine Operators Operate or tend sewing machines to join, reinforce, decorate, or perform related sewing operations in the manufacture of garment or nongarment products.
Illustrative Examples: Blind Stitch Machine Operator, Loop Tacker, Hemmer
51-6052 Tailors, Dressmakers, and Custom Sewers Design, make, alter, repair, or fit garments.
Illustrative Examples: Coat Maker, Hand Finisher, Except Toy Shop Tailor
51-6093 Upholsterers Make, repair, or replace upholstery for household furniture or transportation vehicles.
Illustrative Examples: Car Seat Maker, Casket Coverer, Auto Top Mechanic
51-7011 Cabinetmakers and Bench Carpenters Cut, shape, and assemble wooden articles or set up and operate a variety of woodworking machines, such as power saws, jointers, and mortisers to surface, cut, or shape lumber or to fabricate parts for wood products.
Exclude "Woodworking Machine Setters, Operators and Tenders" (51-7041 through 51-7042) who specialize in one or a limited number of machine phases.
Illustrative Examples: Marquetry Worker, Antique Furniture Repairer, Wood Machinist
51-7021 Furniture Finishers Shape, finish, and refinish damaged, worn, or used furniture or new high-grade furniture to specified color or finish.
Illustrative Examples: Furniture Polisher, Refinisher, Wood Grainer
51-7041 Sawing Machine Setters, Operators, and Tenders, Wood Set up, operate, or tend wood sawing machines.
Include head sawyers.
Illustrative Examples: Crozer Operator, Sawyer, Wood Cutter
51-7042 Woodworking Machine Setters, Operators, and Tenders, Except Sawing Set up, operate, or tend woodworking machines, such as drill presses, lathes, shapers, routers, sanders, planers, and wood nailing machines.
Illustrative Examples: Frazer, Molding Sander
51-8012 Power Distributors and Dispatchers Coordinate, regulate, or distribute electricity or steam.
Illustrative Examples: Feeder Switchboard Operator, Electric and Gas Load Dispatcher, Substation Operator
51-8021 Stationary Engineers and Boiler Operators Operate or maintain stationary engines, boilers, or other mechanical equipment to provide utilities for buildings or industrial processes.
Operate equipment, such as steam engines, generators, motors, turbines, and steam boilers.
Illustrative Examples: Cooling System Operator, Low Pressure Firer, Steam Engineer
51-8031 Water and Liquid Waste Treatment Plant and System Operators Operate or control an entire process or system of machines, often through the use of control boards, to transfer or treat water or liquid waste.
Illustrative Examples: Disposal Operator, Filtration Plant Operator, Sewage Plant Operator
51-8093 Petroleum Pump System Operators, Refinery Operators, and Gaugers Control the operation of petroleum refining or processing units.
May specialize in controlling manifold and pumping systems, gauging or testing oil in storage tanks, or regulating the flow of oil into pipelines.
Illustrative Examples: Absorption Plant Operator, Gasoline Plant Operator, Oil Refiner
51-9012 Separating, Filtering, Clarifying, Precipitating, and Still Machine Setters, Operators, and Tenders Set up, operate, or tend continuous flow or vat-type equipment; filter presses; shaker screens; centrifuges; condenser tubes; precipitating, fermenting, or evaporating tanks; scrubbing towers; or batch stills.
These machines extract, sort, or separate liquids, gases, or solids from other materials to recover a refined product.
Include dairy processing equipment operators.
Exclude "Chemical Equipment Operators and Tenders" (51-9011).
Illustrative Examples: Brewmaster, Dairy Processing Equipment Operator, Distiller
51-9021 Crushing, Grinding, and Polishing Machine Setters, Operators, and Tenders Set up, operate, or tend machines to crush, grind, or polish materials, such as coal, glass, grain, stone, food, or rubber.
Illustrative Examples: Beveling and Edging Machine Operator, Pulverizer Operator, Sandblast Operator
51-9022 Grinding and Polishing Workers, Hand Grind, sand, or polish, using hand tools or handheld power tools, a variety of metal, wood, stone, clay, plastic, or glass objects.
Include chippers, buffers, and finishers.
Illustrative Examples: Metal Sander, Gun Barrel Finisher, Hand Buffer
51-9023 Mixing and Blending Machine Setters, Operators, and Tenders Set up, operate, or tend machines to mix or blend materials, such as chemicals, tobacco, liquids, color pigments, or explosive ingredients.
Exclude "Food Batchmakers" (51-3092).
Illustrative Examples: Batchmaker, Clay Mixer, Tumbler Tender
51-9031 Cutters and Trimmers, Hand Use hand tools or hand-held power tools to cut and trim a variety of manufactured items, such as carpet, fabric, stone, glass, or rubber.
Illustrative Examples: Buttonhole Maker, Fur Trimmer, Thread Clipper
51-9051 Furnace, Kiln, Oven, Drier, and Kettle Operators and Tenders Operate or tend heating equipment other than basic metal, plastic, or food processing equipment.
Includes activities, such as annealing glass, drying lumber, curing rubber, removing moisture from materials, or boiling soap.
Illustrative Examples: Brick Baker, Stoker, Tunnel Kiln Operator
51-9061 Inspectors, Testers, Sorters, Samplers, and Weighers Inspect, test, sort, sample, or weigh nonagricultural raw materials or processed, machined, fabricated, or assembled parts or products for defects, wear, and deviations from specifications.
May use precision measuring instruments and complex test equipment.
Illustrative Examples: Bearing Inspector, Quality Checker, Testing and Regulating Technician
51-9071 Jewelers and Precious Stone and Metal Workers Design, fabricate, adjust, repair, or appraise jewelry, gold, silver, other precious metals, or gems.
Include diamond polishers and gem cutters and persons who perform precision casting and modeling of molds, casting metal in molds, or setting precious and semi-precious stones for jewelry and related products.
Illustrative Examples: Diamond Expert, Gemologist, Goldsmith
51-9081 Dental Laboratory Technicians Construct and repair full or partial dentures or dental appliances.
Exclude "Dental Assistants" (31-9091).
Illustrative Examples: Ceramist, Crown and Bridge Technician, Orthodontic Technician
51-9083 Ophthalmic Laboratory Technicians Cut, grind, and polish eyeglasses, contact lenses, or other precision optical elements.
Assemble and mount lenses into frames or process other optical elements.
Include precision lens polishers or grinders, centerer edgers, and lens mounters.
Exclude "Opticians, Dispensing" (29-2081).
Illustrative Examples: Eyeglass Maker, Lens Grinder, Spectacle Truer
51-9111 Packaging and Filling Machine Operators and Tenders Operate or tend machines to prepare industrial or consumer products for storage or shipment.
Include cannery workers who pack food products.
Illustrative Examples: Bottle Caser, Wrapper Layer, Strapping Machine Operator
51-9121 Coating, Painting, and Spraying Machine Setters, Operators, and Tenders Set up, operate, or tend machines to coat or paint any of a wide variety of products including food, glassware, cloth, ceramics, metal, plastic, paper, or wood, with lacquer, silver, copper, rubber, varnish, glaze, enamel, oil, or rust-proofing materials.
Exclude "Plating and Coating Machine Setters, Operators and Tenders, Metal and Plastic" (51-4193) and "Painters, Transportation Equipment" (51-9122).
Illustrative Examples: Electrostatic Paint Operator, Silvering Applicator, Supercalender Operator
51-9123 Painting, Coating, and Decorating Workers Paint, coat, or decorate articles, such as furniture, glass, plateware, pottery, jewelry, cakes, toys, books, or leather.
Exclude "Artists and Related Workers" (27-1011 through 27-1019), "Designers" (27-1021 through 27-1029), "Photographic Process Workers" (51-9131), and "Etchers and Engravers" (51-9194).
Illustrative Examples: Stenciler, Candy Dipper, Mirror Silverer
51-9131 Photographic Process Workers Perform precision work involved in photographic processing, such as editing photographic negatives and prints, using photo-mechanical, chemical, or computerized methods.
Illustrative Examples: Photographic Colorist, Darkroom Technician, Photo Finisher
51-9132 Photographic Processing Machine Operators Operate photographic processing machines, such as photographic printing machines, film developing machines, and mounting presses.
Illustrative Examples: Film Printer, Film Processor, Reproduction Machine Loader
51-9191 Cementing and Gluing Machine Operators and Tenders Operate or tend cementing and gluing machines to join items for further processing or to form a completed product.
Processes include joining veneer sheets into plywood; gluing paper; joining rubber and rubberized fabric parts, plastic, simulated leather, or other materials.
Exclude "Shoe Machine Operators and Tenders" (51-6042).
Illustrative Examples: Bonding Molder, Paper Sealer, Taper Operator
51-9198 Helpers--Production Workers Help production workers by performing duties of lesser skill.
Duties include supplying or holding materials or tools, and cleaning work area and equipment.
Illustrative Examples: Welder's Assistant, Tailor's Aide, Millwright's Helper
HOME || Program Data || Press Releases || Publications || Links || Contact Us || What's New || Site by Subject || Guide Current Employment Statistics (CES) || Consumer Price Index || Census of Fatal Occupational Injuries || ES-202 Program Local Area Unemployment Statistics (LAUS) || MT Prevailing Wages || MT Ranks || Occupational Employment Statistics (OES) Occupational Injuries 
