022120 11/25/02 8:05 AM Page 15 (xiv)Showing that driving ability does not meet requirements (xv) Failure to follow instr uctions (xvi)Accumulation of eleven (11) points Applicants failing the drive test must wait four teen (14) days before another drive test may be administered.
5.
Restrictions on the Driver License: a. Purpose/Summary: In many instances restrictions may be placed on a driver license.
These restrictions allow persons to operate a vehicle but only under conditions that ensure safety to the driver and to the public.
The most common restriction is restriction "A", which requires the driver to wear glasses or contact lenses when operating a vehicle.
Restrictions appear in the lower left- hand cor ner of the data por tion of the driver license and are described on the back of the license.
If you have any questions per taining to a restriction on your license, please contact your local license branch.
CHAPTER F IDENTIFICATION CARDS FOR NON-DRIVERS: Availability: The BMV of fers identification cards for Indiana residents who are non-drivers.
The identification card looks similar to a standard driver license except that it is clearly marked as a non-driver identification card at the top of the document.
To obtain a non-driver identification card, the applicant must meet the requirements for proof of identity and date of bir th. Persons any age may obtain a non-driver identification card.
CHAPTER G LICENSE RENEWALS AND AMENDMENTS, DUPLICATE LICENSES AND THE IMPORTANCE OF NOTIFYING THE BMV OF ADDRESS CHANGES: 1.
License Renewal: A person may renew his or her driver license at any license branch during the six (6) month period prior to the expiration of the license.
If your license has expired please refer to the proof of identity requirements to determine whether the expired license alone will satisfy as proof of identity.
All applicants for renewal of a license must pass the vision-screening test.
There are no other eligibility requirements except as follows: a.
If a person renewing an operator license has not reached twenty-one (21) years of age, or has accumulated six (6) or more active "points" on his or 15 022120 11/25/02 8:05 AM Page 16 her driving record he or she must take the standard written examination for an operator license.
Individuals age seventy-five (75) years and older must renew their driver license ever y three (3) years
.c. Individuals who have a "4" restriction on their license that indicates the need to use special driving controls or who have a disability that requires special driving techniques, are required to see a BMV driver examiner to see if their condition has changed since they last obtained a license.
The BMV driver examiner determines if the existing restrictions on the license are adequate.
2.
License Amendments and the Importance of Updating Your Mailing Address with the BMV: A person may obtain an amended driver license from any license branch in the state.
a.
Name Changes: A person may obtain a name change on his or her license by filling out an af fidavit available at the license branch if eighteen (18) years of age or older, or if emancipated (the person must show cour t order of emancipation), or by presenting an original or cer tified copy of a mar riage license, divorce decree or cour t order indicating the new name to be used. b. Address Changes: IMPORTANT: Pursuant to IC 9-24-13-4, driver license holders are required to immediately notify BMV of an address change.
Avoid license suspension by complying with this requirement! To amend your driver license so that your new address will be on your driver license document, you must go into the license branch and physically change your and pay the required fee. c. Duplicate Licenses: If your license is lost or stolen, an individual may obtain a duplicate license at any license branch in this state.
Please note: An applicant for a duplicate license must provide proof of identity in the same manner as a first time applicant.
CHAPTER H FRAUDULENT LICENSE APPLICATIONS, MISUSE OF LICENSE AND ILLEGAL MANUFACTURE OF LICENSES (IC 9-24-16-12; 9-24-18-2,7): It is a criminal of fense to: 16
