TOPIC: What You Should Know About Pyramid Schemes Working on Your Behalf By: Attorney General Patricia Madrid DATE: September 2001 While pyramid schemes are not new, they travel about the world in various guises.
Pyramid schemes may appear as investment opportunities or ways to help others.
But remember that a scheme need not look like a pyramid to be an unlawful pyramid scheme.
The common feature shared by pyramid schemes is the fact that the money is made by recruiting others into the program.
Programs that depend upon the recruitment of others to make money for those already in the program are doomed to eventual losses because of market saturation.
There is not an endless supply of individuals who are willing to become involved in these schemes and as soon as that supply dwindles people who have already joined the scheme begin to experience losses.
The country of Albania provides a startling example of the devastating impact of pyramid schemes.
In late 1996 "pyramid scheme mania" appeared in Albania.
The scheme took the form of investment opportunities that promised investors huge returns on their investments.
In fact, the early investors were paid high returns from the funds received by the later investors.
As news of the high returns spread, more investors joined the scheme.
However, the continued growth could not be sustained and when investors tried to get their money back, they discovered the truth and the scheme collapsed with remaining monies stolen by the scheme operators.
It is estimated that the life savings of seven out of ten families were lost to pyramid schemes - more than one billion dollars in all.
Consider this: a program begins with one person who recruits two people, each one of whom recruits two more people, and so on.
In 28 levels the entire population of the United States -- every man, woman and child -- would be involved in the scheme.
This is why pyramid schemes are doomed to collapse.
Obviously, some people will make money.
But in the schemes seen in New Mexico, eight people give up their money for each person who receives money.
It should be apparent that many more people lose than win in one of these scams.
Typically, promoters of a pyramid scheme will provide you with a lot of information.
Some schemes have provided information about the federal tax code in an effort to legitimize the notion of gifting.
However, the federal tax code has no relationship to pyramid schemes.
Such material serves to divert attention from the real issue that is central to the legality of the scheme - much as a magician uses sleight of hand to draw attention away from the real workings of a magic trick.
What is central to the legality of a pyramid scheme is how the money is made.
If money is made from new recruits into the scheme then the chances are great that you are looking at an illegal pyramid scheme.
If you are approached with an opportunity to make a lot of money for very little effort, consider the following: * A pyramid does not have to take the shape of pyramid to be one.
Pyramids schemes function as a pyramid rather than look like a pyramid.
A scheme that operates as a pyramidmay be called a circle or a matrix and still be a pyramid! If you are told you will make your money by bringing others into the scheme, watch out! * Literature from schemes may say that the Attorney General's Office, Better Business Bureau, FBI or any other organization endorses or has approved a plan.
Such endorsements or approvals are not made by these organizations.
* And finally, if something sounds to good to be true, it is.
Remember, pyramid schemes are illegal under New Mexico law.
A violation of the Pyramid Promotional Schemes Act is a fourth degree felony.
Numerous New Mexicans have been indicted for violations of this Act.
The Pyramid Promotional Schemes Act (Chapter 57, Article 13 NMSA 1978) offers the following definition:
"pyramid promotional scheme" means any plan or operation by which a participant gives consideration for the opportunity to receive compensation which is derived primarily for any person's introduction of other persons into participation in the plan or operation rather than from the sale of goods, services or intangible property by the participant or other persons introduced into the plan or operation.
#####
