ENVIRONMENTAL ASSESSMENT A. PROJECT IDENTIFICATION Project Name: Town of Mount Desert Consolidation of Otter Creek and Seal Harbor Wastewater Treatment Plants P.O. Box 248 Northeast Harbor, Maine 04662 Town of Mount Desert Hancock County 230087-03
Address: Project Location: Project No.:
B. SUMMARY OF ENVIRONMENTAL REVIEW The applicant's reports entitled (1) Feasibility Study for Consolidation of Otter Creek and Seal Harbor Wastewater Treatment Plants, Town of Mount Desert, Maine, July 2001 prepared by Olver Associates, Inc. and (2) Environmental Informational Document: Otter Creek 
This assessment has been prepared in support of a State Revolving Loan Fund application and to address National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA) requirements in support of the project for the National Parks Service (NPS).
The review of the proposed alternative and the various options will lead to one of three approval mechanisms that can apply to environmental reviews and determinations of proposed projects.
These are: 1) the project qualifies for a Categorical Exclusion (CE) from further evaluation, 2) a Finding of No Significant Impact (FONSI) can be issued from this Environmental Assessment (EA), or 3) a Record of Decision can be issued based on an Environmental Impact Statement (EIS).
This project does not qualify for a CE and as a result, this EA has been prepared by the DEP.
Upon issuance of this EA and following a 30-day public review period, the DEP and the NPS will issue either a FONSI of one alternative or a public notice that an EIS will be required.
To meet additional project requirements, we have shown the side by side comparison of (1) The No Action alternative and (2) The Improvements to Otter Creek Wastewater Treatment Plant alternative within each section discussing impacts of each alternative.
1
1.
Project Description The Town of Mount Desert and part of Acadia National Park are located on Mount Desert Island on the Atlantic Ocean in Maine.
The 2000 Census for the Town of Mount Desert reported a population of 2,109 people.
Peak, seasonal populations reportedly approach 9,000 people.
The Town owns, operates, and manages the Otter Creek and Seal Harbor wastewater treatment plants as well as two other wastewater treatment facilities (i.e. Northeast Harbor and Somesville), nine pump stations, and approximately fifteen miles of sewer pipe and force mains.
The proposed consolidation project would involve the abandonment of the Otter Creek treatment facility, construction of a pump station at the Otter Creek facility, installation of force and gravity mains from Otter Creek to Seal Harbor, and improvements to the Seal Harbor wastewater treatment facility.
Figure 1 shows the area of Mount Desert Island.
A location map for the project is included as Figure 2.
More specifically, the following work is proposed at each facility: Otter Creek Facility The Otter Creek wastewater treatment facility was constructed in 1971.
It was designed to process 125,000 GPD from sewer users in the Otter Creek village area.
It discharges treated effluent to nearby Otter Creek.
The abandonment of the Otter Creek treatment facility would consist of the cleaning of the existing bar screen, oxidation ditch, final clarifier, piping, pumps, chlorine contact reactor, and sludge storage tank.
The abandonment would also include the removal of equipment, demolition of the existing Otter Creek buildings, and filling of the oxidation ditch.
Prior to demolition, all chemicals and residuals would be removed from the building.
All recovered residues, chemicals, and demolition debris would be disposed of in accordance with applicable rules and regulations.
The presence of asbestos containing materials (ACM) would be determined prior to demolition activities and if found, abatement or other approved removal methods would be employed prior to demolition.
Underground piping would be removed, re-utilized, or abandoned in-place.
The existing outfall pipe would be abandoned in place to limit direct disturbance to Otter Cove.
A pump station and forcemain that will convey sewage from the Otter Creek area to the existing treatment plant in Seal Harbor would replace the existing Otter Creek Wastewater Treatment Plant and outfall.
The force main route would generally follow the shoulder of Route 3.
There would be one bridge crossing where Route 3 crosses the Park Loop Road near Hunter's Brook.
The forcemain would discharge into a gravity sewer approximately 1,600 feet long that would discharge into an existing sanitary manhole near Upper Dunbar Road.
The sewage would then be conveyed by the 2
existing gravity sewer system to the treatment plant in Seal Harbor.
The location of the proposed force and gravity mains is shown on Figure 2.
Seal Harbor Facility The improvements to the Seal Harbor wastewater treatment facility would consist of installing and/or replacing: an influent grinder, pre-aeration reactor; selector basin; aeration basin; final clarifiers; return sludge pumps; aerated sludge storage tanks; chlorine contact chamber; and outfall pipe extension.
The improvements would also include a 400-foot extension of the existing outfall.
It is anticipated that construction for these projects would commence in the Fall of 2003 with completion of the proposed facilities by June 2005.
Flows The observed historical flows in gallons per day (GPD) for the Otter Creek and Seal Harbor Treatment Plants (Olver, 2001) are summarized below in Tables 1 and 2.
Table 1: Observed Historical Flows Facility Average Daily Dry Weather (GPD) 54,000 109,000 Maximum Daily Dry Weather (GPD) 72,000 154,000 Peak Hourly Dry Weather (GPD) 213,000 350,000 Peak Hourly Wet Weather (GPD) 283,000 455,000
Otter Creek Seal Harbor
The proposed combined design flows in GPD for the consolidated facility (Olver, 2001) are summarized below.
Table 2: Combined Design Flows Facility Otter Creek Seal Harbor Combined Design Flow Average Daily Flow (GPD) 75,000 155,000 230,000 Peak Hourly Flow (GPD) 430,000 500,000 930,000
3
2.
Purpose and Need The Town of Mount Desert presently owns and operates four wastewater treatment facilities in Otter Creek, Seal Harbor, Northeast Harbor and Somesville.
The Town employs three to five people to operate all four plants.
This project is part of the Town's capital improvement process and is expected to upgrade and improve the facilities on a priority basis, specifically the obsolete Otter Creek Treatment Plant.
The Town was recently issued a Notice of Violation by the Maine Department of Environmental Protection stating particular violations of its wastewater license discharge limits at both Otter Creek and Seal Harbor facilities.
Of note were violations of Biological Oxygen Demand (BOD), Total Suspended Solids (TSS), pH, Trace Residual Chlorine (TRC) and fecal coliform, as well as the discharge of wastewater containing pollutants in concentrations that impart toxicity.
The DEP and United States Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) have both expressed concern that the end of the outfall pipe from the Otter Creek treatment plant is not covered at low tide.
This prevents the appropriate dilution and dispersion of some of the residuals that remain in the effluent (Olver Associates, Inc., 1999).
The outfall discharges into a sensitive waterbody within the inner cove section of Otter Creek on the land side of the causeway (Olver Associates, Inc., 1998).
Historically, Otter Creek has been allowed a dilution factor of 1000/1, which resulted in reportable values far below allowable limits.
Both the DEP and the EPA have revised these requirements partly based on the location of the discharge and now would require evaluating the effluent toxicity on the basis of a 1/1 dilution.
This has caused measured results for several pollutants to exceed allowable limits, specifically copper, zinc and cyanide.
Additionally, there are indications that blockages in the present Otter Creek outfall line are causing effluent to back up and flow out of upstream manholes before the end of the outfall, discharging into the streambed of Otter Creek.
Verbal reports from Otter Creek treatment plant personnel have indicated that the plant effluent has discharged from a manhole upstream of the outlet structure.
Verbal reports from treatment plant personnel and Mr. Bob Breen of the National Park Service have also indicated that the outlet structure has been buried under sediment.
Based on the above conditions, the Town has decided to proceed with a plan that will enable compliance with DEP licenses and minimize the present environmental and public health issues associated with aging treatment works.
3.
Discussion of Alternatives The alternatives considered for this project are summarized as follows.
Table 3 provides a Net Present Worth analysis (using 2 discount rate scenarios).
It also provides a summary of the discussed alternatives and those considered but rejected 4
(Alternatives 4 and 5).
Table 4 provides an Alternative matrix that illustrates the differences in the alternatives discussed in this Environmental Assessment.
For cost comparisons, the initial capital cost, future capital cost, and annual operations and maintenance (O
In order to conduct an accurate cost comparative analysis of the alternatives, the net present worth of these costs is provided in Table 3.
In accordance with applicable EPA guidance, a discount rate of 7% is used to calculate the net present worth of each alternative.
The Maine DEP also requested a discount rate of 3% be analyzed to provide a sensitivity of this number and to reflect a value more indicative of the current rate environment.
A life cycle duration of 20 years is used for each alternative.
The Otter Creek Treatment Plant is currently the only facility operated by the Town of Mount Desert that has a regulatory requirement for improvement.
However, due to the age and condition of these facilities, improvements to the Seal Harbor and Northeast Harbor plants will be necessary within the next five years.
Some of the alternatives discussed below involve consolidation of the Otter Creek facility with the Seal Harbor and Northeast Harbor Treatment Plants.
Therefore, to perform an appropriate cost comparison, the costs to upgrade the individual facilities are included as future year (i.e., five years out) costs.
An alternative that includes consolidating all four treatment plants owned and operated by the Town of Mount Desert has not been considered in the detailed alternatives evaluation since pumping wastewater from Somesville to any of the other treatment plants would not be practical.
Alternative #1 - No Action: Under the no action alternative, no improvements would be made to the Otter Creek, Seal Harbor, or Northeast Harbor treatment plants.
This alternative will discharge effluent from the Otter Creek facility that will not meet EPA and DEP standards as discussed in Section 3 of this report.
The No Action alternative would not resolve the license violations nor the toxicity concerns at each treatment facility.
The initial cost for this alternative is zero.
Doing nothing however, increases the risk of environmental impact to the local environment, and if violations to license conditions persisted or were ignored, could result in severe financial penalties to the Town.
Future capital costs for improvements that will eventually be required are estimated to be $2,500,000 for Otter Creek, $1,500,000 for Seal Harbor, and $1,500,000 for Northeast Harbor.
The annual O
Alternative #2 - Consolidation of Otter Creek/Seal Harbor Wastewater Treatment Plants: The Consolidation of Otter Creek/Seal Harbor Wastewater Treatment Plants is the preferred alternative and is described in Section 2 of this document.
The proposed consolidation would involve the abandonment and demolition of the Otter Creek treatment facility, construction of a pump station at the Otter Creek facility, installation of force and gravity mains from Otter Creek to Seal Harbor, and improvements to the Seal Harbor wastewater treatment facility and outfall.
5
The initial cost for this alternative is $4,400,000.
Future capital costs for improvements that will eventually be required are estimated to be $1,500,000 for the Northeast Harbor Treatment Plant.
The annual O
Alternative #3 - Improvements to Otter Creek Wastewater Treatment Plant: The improvements to the Otter Creek Wastewater Treatment Plant alternative would involve a new influent grinder to replace the present marginal manual screen, major structural improvements to maintain the present oxidation ditch in a watertight manner, a complete upgrade of the plant's aeration system, upgrades to the plant's final clarifier, new return sludge pumps, and additional miscellaneous improvements needed to address deficiencies in the plant's building, heating systems and electrical systems.
An outfall extension would be required to address the treatment plant's poor effluent outfall location.
The initial cost for this alternative is $2,500,000.
Future capital costs for improvements that will eventually be required are estimated to be $1,500,000 for Seal Harbor and $1,500,000 for Northeast Harbor.
The annual O
Consideration was given to construction of a storage tank at this treatment plant to hold the effluent during low tide periods and discharge it during high tide events.
This modification to Alternative #3 was rejected because the outfall location remains above the causeway and effluent dilution likely remains a problem and under this scenario, the level of complexity increases at the treatment facility which is undesirable given the present staff size.
Alternative #4 - Consolidation of Otter Creek/Seal Harbor/Northeast Harbor Wastewater Treatment Plants: The Consolidation of Otter Creek/Seal Harbor/Northeast Harbor Wastewater Treatment Plants would involve the abandonment of the Otter Creek and Seal Harbor treatment facilities, construction of pump stations at Otter Creek and Seal Harbor, installation of force and gravity mains from Otter Creek to Seal Harbor and Seal Harbor to Northeast Harbor, and modifications to the Northeast Harbor wastewater treatment facility.
The modifications would include major improvements to accept the added flow from both Otter Creek and Seal Harbor.
The initial cost for this alternative is $9,650,000.
Under this alternative, two of the plants would be abandoned and the third would undergo a major upgrade.
There would be no future capital costs.
The annual O
This alternative has a significantly higher initial capital cost and net present worth.
As a result, it will not be considered further.
Alternative #5 - Septi-Tech for Otter Creek Wastewater: The Septi-Tech system is a packaged plant that allows onsite disposal of the wastewater effluent.
This 6
system was considered as an alternative for the Otter Creek treatment facility.
The Septi-Tech system would allow for a reduction of a sub-surface disposal bed area over typical septic tank and disposal bed systems due to the cleaner effluent that is produced.
The initial cost for this alternative is $3,200,000.
Future capital costs for improvements that will eventually be required are estimated to be $1,500,000 for Seal Harbor and $1,500,000 for Northeast Harbor.
The annual O
The Septi-Tech system is not a preferred alternative for technical, monetary and sanitary reasons including the following: i.
It is suspected that a large disposal bed area would be required with this system.
Sufficient land to accommodate the system may not be available and would also result in further costs associated with the alternative.
On-site treatment systems were abandoned for a central treatment system over thirty years ago and had been deemed impractical.
ii.
iii.
It has been noted that peak sustained flows in the Otter Creek sewer system more than double after precipitation, snowmelt, or high groundwater events, indicating that there is likely excessive leakage in portions of the Town's sewer piping.
These points of leakage would most likely have to be repaired to avoid an extremely large disposal bed area.
The cost of the sewer upgrade work must be considered when evaluating the cost of the Septi-Tech system.
iv.
The Septi-Tech vendor recommends the use of a Zabel septic tank filter at the outlet of the septic tank to prevent peak flows from washing out from the tank and plugging their system (Olver 
This is not recommended for an end of pipe municipal system because peak hydraulic flows will pass through the septic tanks of a municipal system will likely plug the filter.
The flow would then seek the point of least resistance, which may result in septic tank overflows, or residential basement flooding.
Excess hydraulic flows are a problem with any septic system and a Zabel filter does not necessarily eliminate this concern given the magnitude of peak flows present in Otter Creek.
v.
It has been noted that Otter Creek does not have a public water supply.
The potential exists for a sub-surface system to overflow and cause health concerns for private wells that rely on uncontaminated groundwater.
vi.
The high strength waste from the adjacent Blackwoods Campground may be difficult to treat in a sub-surface treatment system.
Eliminating the Park from the public sewer system would result in a significant loss of the Town's major treatment revenue source.
Shutting the Park off of the public sewer system could also result in practical and political issues that may have adverse effects on the Town in the long run.
7
vii.
Sub-surface disposal systems have a high potential for failure over time.
If the Town uses State Revolving Loan Fund (SRF) money to build this system as is proposed, it will likely be required to maintain the subsurface disposal systems as a public system.
The Town would then be responsible for any maintenance, repair or failure costs that may occur in the future.
Due to the technical and monetary issues outlined above, this alternative will not be evaluated any further.
Table 3: Net Present Worth Analysis Alternatives Initial Capital Costs $0 $4,400,000 Future Capital Costs $5,500,000 $1,500,000 Annual Operational Costs $650,000 $520,000 Net Present Worth at Discount Rate of 7% $10,807,600 $10,978,380 Net Present Worth at Discount Rate of 3% $14,417,200 $13,431,060
1.
No Action 2.
Consolidation of Otter Creek/Seal Harbor Wastewater Treatment Plants 3.
Improvements to Otter Creek Wastewater Treatment Plant
$2,500,000
$3,000,000
$650,000
$11,525,100
$14,759,700
Alternatives Considered but Rejected 4.
Consolidation of Otter Creek/Seal Harbor/Northeast Harbor Wastewater Treatment Plants 5.
Septi-Tech for Otter Creek Wastewater $9,650,000 $0 $360,000 $13,463,840 $15,006,080
$3,200,000
$3,000,000
$650,000
$12,225,100
$15,459,700
Table 3 illustrates that although the preferred alternative (Alternative # 2) has a higher construction cost (Initial and Future Capital Costs), the savings in annual operating costs more than makes up the difference over the next 20 years (Net Present Worth value).
This makes the Preferred Alternative the most economical choice over the next 20 years.
8
Table 4: Alternative Matrix Item Alternative #1: No Action Alternative #2: Consolidation of Otter Creek/Seal Harbor Treatment Plants Yes.
Effluent into Otter Cove would be eliminated and upgrades to Seal Harbor would produce a cleaner effluent.
* Demolish current facility and construct a pump station; restore vegetation.
* Install force and gravity main from Otter Creek facility to Seal Harbor facility.
Alternative #3: Improvements to Otter Creek plant Yes.
Upgrades to Otter Creek would produce a cleaner effluent and outfall pipe extension would provide a greater dilution rate.
* Install new influent grinder * Rehabilitate plant to make oxidation ditch watertight * Upgrade aeration system, clarifier, return sludge pumps, heating and electrical systems.
* Extend outfall by 3,000 LF. Improvements would eventually be required.
Meets basic goals of treating sewage to Federal 
No.
Alternative is included only to provide a baseline upon which to compare the effects of other alternatives.
None.
Problems with current outfall pipe would remain.
Proposed Actions at Seal Harbor
Improvements would eventually be required.
Install and/or replace: * influent grinder * pre-aeration reactor * selector basin * final clarifiers * return sludge pumps * aerated sludge storage tanks * ultraviolet disinfection * chlorine contact chamber * extend outfall by 400LF Improvements would eventually be required.
Cost Comparison
Proposed Actions at Northeast Harbor
Improvements would eventually be required.
Improvements would eventually be required.
Capital costs improvements (by facility)
for
Otter Creek: Seal Harbor: NE Harbor:
$0 $0 $0
Otter Creek: Seal Harbor: NE Harbor: NE Harbor:
$925,000 $3,475,000 $0 $1,500,000
Otter Creek: Seal Harbor: NE Harbor: Seal Harbor: NE Harbor:
$2,500,000 $0 $0 1,500,000 1,500,000 $650,000 $14,759,700 $11,525,100
Future Capital costs
Otter Creek: 2,500,000 Seal Harbor: 1,500,000 NE Harbor: $1,500,000 $650,000 $14,417,200 $10,807,600
O
$520,000 $13,431,060 $10,978,380
9
The Environmentally Preferred Alternative is defined by the Council of Environmental Quality as "the alternative that will promote the national environmental policy as expressed in the National Environmental Policy Act [Section 101(b)].
Section 101(b) states that the Environmentally Preferred Alternative should: i. Fulfill the responsibilities of each generation as trustee of the environment for succeeding generations.
ii. Ensure for all Americans safe, healthful, productive and aesthetically and culturally pleasing surroundings.
iii.
Attain the widest range of beneficial uses of the environment without degradation, risk of health or safety, or other undesirable and unintended consequences.
iv. Preserve important historic, cultural and natural aspects of our national heritage and maintain, wherever possible, an environment that supports diversity and variety of individual choice.
v. Achieve a balance between populations and resource use that will permit high standards of living and a wide sharing of life's amenities. vi. Enhance the quality of renewable resources and approach the maximum attainable recycling of depletable resources."
Based on the analysis of impacts of the alternatives, Alternative #2 has been identified as the Environmentally Preferred Alternative.
As noted above, Alternative #2 best meets the purpose of the project by providing effective and efficient sewage treatment while minimizing environmental and economic costs.
Because the outfall line at Otter Cove would not be extended, there would be less adverse effects on the marine environment and the National Registereligible Park Loop Road than under Alternative #3.
4.
Impact of the Proposed Project and Various Alternatives on the Environment This section describes the potential impacts that the preferred alternative (Alternative #2) and two other reasonable alternatives (Alternative #1 and #3) would have on the environment.
The existing conditions, whether beneficial, adverse or neither, are described, followed by the probable impacts and consequences associated with each of the remaining three alternatives.
In order to assist agencies with NEPA compliance, the potential impacts are described in terms of type (beneficial or adverse), context (site-specific, local, or regional), duration (short-term or long-term) and levels of intensity (negligible, minor, moderate, or major).
10
A. Direct Impacts i. Air Quality
As described in 06 096 CMR Chapter 114, Acadia National Park is located in the Downeast and Central Maine Air Quality Regions and has been established as a mandatory Class I area by the Federal Clean Air Act (CAA), which means that the Park deserves the highest level of airquality protection.
The State of Maine has classified the Downeast and Central Maine Air Quality Regions as Class II regions.
The Central Maine Air Quality Control Region has also been classified as a nonattainment area for Ozone (photochemical oxidants).
No Action Alternative: The No Action alternative would result in neither a beneficial or adverse impact to air quality.
Existing air quality in and around the treatment plants at Otter Creek and Seal Harbor would not change.
The existing odors associated with the treatment plants would be considered moderate and would remain unchanged.
Reasonably foreseeable actions relative to this alternative involve the eventual upgrades to the Otter Creek, Seal Harbor and Northeast Harbor treatment plants.
The cumulative impact of construction activities and the use of heavy equipment would have a minor adverse impact on the air quality.
Consolidation of Otter Creek/Seal Harbor Wastewater Treatment Plants Alternative: The preferred alternative will reduce the potential of odors from the wastewater at both the Seal Harbor and Otter Creek treatment plants through the facility upgrades that are part of the project.
Most of the past odor problems at Seal Harbor have been caused by obsolete, malfunctioning, or inadequate aeration or sludge processing facilities at the plant (Olver 
New and sufficiently sized aeration equipment and sludge handling equipment will be a part of this alternative.
No odor control systems are presently in place at the Seal Harbor Treatment Plant.
The addition of odor control systems at the plant will result in a reduction of odors associated with the Seal Harbor Treatment Plant.
The sewage from the Otter Creek facility will be pumped directly to Seal Harbor eliminating any odor issues at Otter Creek.
Due to the significant distance that the Otter Creek wastewater will have to travel, chemical metering pumps are anticipated in order to allow an oxidizing agent to be added to the force main to control odors (Olver 
The proposed changes will have a longterm moderate beneficial effect to air quality in both Otter Creek and Seal Harbor.
11
During the Otter Creek demolition and the construction activities, some dust and material emissions will be inevitable.
Standard construction mitigation techniques of spraying water or spreading calcium chloride will be used to minimize the dust.
Dust and material emissions associated with the demolition of the Otter Creek Treatment Plant would be shortterm and negligible in site-specific and local context.
Mitigative measures such as the application of water and calcium would help reduce on-site generated dust.
Natural vegetation would be restored to the demolition site after the completion of the pump house.
Exhaust produced from the use of heavy equipment negligible to minor adverse impact to air quality on the Seal Harbor sites.
However, any impact would be short-term.
Air quality would return to normal once completed.
could result Otter Creek site-specific the project in a and and was
The presence of asbestos containing materials (ACM) in the Otter Creek Treatment Plant will be determined.
If ACM is present, abatement or other approved methods will be required prior to demolition occurring.
An enclosure, containment system, or other approved method will minimize the potential for a release of asbestos into the atmosphere.
Reasonably foreseeable actions relative to this alternative involve the eventual upgrade to the Northeast Harbor treatment plant.
The cumulative impact of construction activities and the use of heavy equipment would have a minor adverse impact on the air quality.
Improvements to Otter Creek Wastewater Treatment Plant Alternative: This alternative will reduce the potential of odors from the wastewater at Otter Creek Treatment Plant because of the facility upgrades.
No odor control systems are presently in place at the Otter Creek Treatment Plant.
The addition of odor control systems at the plant will result in a reduction of odors.
The proposed changes will have a long-term beneficial effect without any impairment to air quality.
The demolition and construction at the Otter Creek facility would require the use of heavy equipment.
This will result in the destruction of surface vegetation and an increase of dust and material emissions.
Windy conditions may attribute to dust generated on-site being blown off-site.
Some of the demolition debris will have to be transported off site via dump truck.
This may result in dusty road conditions from the Otter Creek site to the proposed disposal facility.
However, dust and material emissions associated with the construction of the Otter Creek Treatment Plant would be short-term and negligible in site-specific and local context.
Mitigative measures such as the application of water and
12
calcium would help reduce on-site generated dust.
Natural vegetation would be restored to the site after the completion of the project.
Exhaust produced from the use of heavy equipment could result in a negligible to minor adverse impact to air quality during the project.
However, any impact would be site-specific and short-term.
Air quality would return to normal once the project was completed.
The presence of asbestos containing materials (ACM) in the Otter Creek treatment plant will be determined.
If ACM is present, abatement or other approved methods will be required prior to demolition occurring.
An enclosure, containment system, or other approved method will minimize the potential for a release of asbestos into the atmosphere.
Reasonably foreseeable actions relative to this alternative involve the eventual upgrades to the Seal Harbor and Northeast Harbor treatment plants.
The cumulative impact of construction activities and the use of heavy equipment would have a minor adverse impact on the air quality.
ii. Soundscape
The National Parks Service (NPS) has established policies, described in Director's Order #47: Soundscape Preservation and Noise Management, to protect, maintain, and restore the natural soundscape resource to the fullest extent practicable.
Natural sounds are intrinsic elements of the environment and are protected under the NPS Organic Act.
No Action Alternative: The No Action alternative would have no additional impact (beneficial or adverse) on the soundscape of any of the treatment plant sites.
The existing conditions at the Otter Creek Treatment Plant involve motors associated with the plant's oxidation ditch.
These motors are located outside with no structures designed for noise reduction.
Existing conditions would not change and the existing long-term minor adverse effect on the area's Soundscape would remain.
Reasonably foreseeable actions relative to this alternative involve the eventual upgrades to the Otter Creek, Seal Harbor and Northeast Harbor treatment plants.
The cumulative impact of construction activities and the use of heavy equipment would have a minor adverse impact on the area soundscape.
Consolidation of Otter Creek/Seal Harbor Wastewater Treatment Plants Alternative: The preferred alternative would have a short-term moderately adverse impact on the noise environment of the Otter Creek
13
and Seal Harbor Treatment Plant sites during construction activities.
The use of heavy equipment during the day may disturb local residents.
This effect could be reduced to a minor impact simply because many residents may be working or not at home during construction hours.
The project schedule would coincide with normal working hours to minimize disturbance to local residents during historically quiet hours.
Noise levels in the project area would return to normal once the project was completed.
Increased noise levels along Route 3 would be short-term and limited since construction along Route 3 would not be allowed during tourist season.
Construction along Route 3 would be stopped between Memorial Day and Labor Day to minimize adverse impacts to the noise environment that could potentially affect visitor experience.
The effects on local residents would be negligible because the area along Route 3 is sparsely populated.
The existing conditions at the Otter Creek Treatment Plant involve motors associated with the plant's oxidation ditch.
These motors are located outside with no structures designed for noise reduction.
The new pump station would include a noise reducing pump house.
All future equipment that is expected to generate noise will be located inside the new pump station.
Therefore, the completed project would result in a long-term minor beneficial impact at the Otter Creek site due to the reduction of on-site generated noise.
The preferred alternative would have no long-term impact (beneficial or adverse) on the noise environment on Route 3 or at the Seal Harbor Treatment Plant site.
Reasonably foreseeable actions relative to this alternative involve the eventual upgrade to the Northeast Harbor treatment plant.
The cumulative impact of construction activities and the use of heavy equipment would have a minor adverse impact on the area soundscape.
Improvements to Otter Creek Wastewater Treatment Plant Alternative: This alternative would have similar short-term impacts as the preferred alternative at Otter Creek except on-site construction would take slightly longer to complete.
This alternative would have a minor, long-term beneficial effect on the soundscape of the Otter Creek site due to the reduction of onsite generated noise.
Noise from operations would decrease since operational equipment would be located within a building.
This alternative would have no long-term impact (positive or negative) on the noise environment on Route 3 or at the Seal Harbor Treatment Plant site.
14
Reasonably foreseeable actions relative to this alternative involve the eventual upgrades to the Seal Harbor and Northeast Harbor treatment plants.
The cumulative impact of construction activities and the use of heavy equipment would have a minor adverse impact on the area soundscape. iii.
Water Quality and Quantity
The Otter Creek and Seal Harbor Wastewater Treatment Plant facilities have State of Maine Waste Discharge Licenses (WDLs) under the federal National Pollutant Discharge Elimination System (NPDES) that limit the amount pollutants that can be discharged to the receiving waters of Otter Cove and Seal Harbor.
Each of the alternatives will require a revision to the WDL.
The State of Maine's Erosion and Sedimentation Control Law, Site Location of Development (Site Law), and Stormwater Management Law, the Natural Resource Protection Act, and the Maine Construction General Permit (MCGP) regulate construction activities to minimize eroded materials from discharging to water bodies.
All construction activities will be required to comply with these laws through contract documents.
No Action Alternative: The No Action alternative would have a long-term, moderate adverse effect on surface waters (i.e., Otter Cove and Otter Creek).
The treatment plant effluent would continue to discharge into Otter Creek and Otter Cove and exceed the effluent limitations for copper, cyanide and zinc.
The No Action alternative would continue to adversely impact the receiving surface water bodies.
The No Action alternative would have no impact on groundwater (quality or quantity) or drinking water supplies.
Reasonably foreseeable actions relative to this alternative involve the eventual upgrades to the Otter Creek, Seal Harbor and Northeast Harbor treatment plants.
The extension of the outfall pipe in Otter Cove and into the open ocean could have a short-term adverse impact on the surface water quality of Otter Cove.
The probable extension of the outfall pipe at Seal Harbor could have a short-term adverse impact on the surface water quality of Seal Harbor.
The cumulative impacts of these activities would be beneficial in the long-term since effluent dilution at both sites would be increased and human contact minimized.
Consolidation of Alternative: The beneficial effect beneficial effect Otter Creek/Seal Harbor Wastewater Treatment Plants preferred alternative would have a long-term, minor on Otter Cove and Otter Creek and a long-term, minor to Seal Harbor.
The preferred alternative will eliminate
15
the discharge of treated wastewater to Otter Creek and will treat the wastewater with an improved treatment system at Seal Harbor.
The Seal Harbor outfall will also be extended into deeper water achieving better dilution of the treated effluent.
The preferred alternative will have a short-term, minor adverse effect on the surface waters in immediate areas surrounding the Otter Creek and Seal Harbor facilities and sewer main due to construction activities.
The use of heavy equipment and site excavation will result in the disturbance of surface vegetation.
Underlying soil would then be susceptible to precipitation and erosion.
Fallout of site generated dust may also have a minor impact on surrounding surface waters.
Best Management Practices (BMP's), including sedimentation and erosion control requirements, will be used to control surface water runoff during construction.
Appropriate erosion and sedimentation controls would be specified in the design and contract documents.
Proper de-watering procedures, if needed, will also be used.
The preferred alternative will have no impact on the groundwater quality or quantity or drinking water supplies.
The cumulative impacts of this alternative would be beneficial.
Effluent would no longer be discharged into Otter Cove.
The extension of the outfall pipe into Seal Harbor may cause negligible short-term adverse impacts but would provide a long-term beneficial impact to the surface waters of Seal Harbor.
Improvements to Otter Creek Wastewater Treatment Plant Alternative: This alternative would have a long-term, moderate beneficial effect on Otter Cove and Otter Creek.
This alternative will treat the wastewater with an improved treatment system at Otter Creek that would be equivalent to the Seal Harbor plant.
The Otter Creek outfall would be extended approximately 3,000 LF into deeper water achieving appropriate dilution of the treated effluent.
This alternative would have a short-term, minor adverse effect on the surface waters in immediate areas surrounding Otter Creek.
The use of heavy equipment and site excavation would result in the disturbance of surface vegetation.
Underlying soil would then be susceptible to precipitation and erosion.
Fallout of site generated dust may also have a minor impact on surrounding surface waters.
Appropriate erosion and sedimentation controls would be specified in the design and contract documents.
Proper de-watering procedures, if needed, will also be used.
16
This alternative will have no impact on the groundwater quality or quantity or drinking water supplies.
Reasonably foreseeable actions relative to this alternative involve the eventual upgrades to the Seal Harbor and Northeast Harbor treatment plants.
The extension of the outfall pipe in Otter Cove and into the open ocean could have a short-term adverse impact on the surface water quality of Otter Cove.
The probable extension of the outfall pipe at Seal Harbor could have a short-term adverse impact on the surface water quality of Seal Harbor.
The cumulative impacts of these activities would be beneficial in the long-term since effluent dilution at both sites would be increased and human contact minimized. iv. Environmentally Sensitive Areas
No Action Alternative: The No Action alternative would have no impact on wetlands or floodplains within the area.
The No Action alternative would have no impact on Prime Agricultural Land.
The No Action alternative may have a moderate adverse impact to wildlife habitat, specifically wildlife within Otter Creek and Otter Cove.
The current accumulation of inorganic concentrations in the cove does not pose an immediate threat however, the No Action alternative would allow the Otter Creek Treatment Plant to continue discharging pollutants above licensed limits into Otter Creek and Otter Cove resulting in potential moderate adverse impacts to wildlife habitat.
The effluent discharge from an upstream manhole of the plugged outfall may also result in increased erosion of the streambed of Otter Creek.
Under the be located discharges Therefore, Rivers and No Action alternative, no work or structures are proposed to in or affect navigable waters of the United States nor any of dredged or fill material into waters of the United States.
no activities need to be addressed under Section 10 of the Harbors Act or Section 404 of the Clean Water Act.
Reasonably foreseeable actions relative to this alternative involve the eventual upgrades to the Otter Creek, Seal Harbor and Northeast Harbor treatment plants.
The extension of the outfall pipes in Otter Cove and Seal Harbor involves work in navigable waters of the United States and fill materials into waters of the United States.
This activity would involve floating the pipe extensions to the proper locations, sinking the pipes to
17
the bottom and placing minor amounts of riprap above the pipe for protection.
The cumulative impact of this activity would be a negligible adverse impact on Otter Cove and Seal Harbor.
Consolidation of Otter Creek/Seal Harbor Wastewater Treatment Plants Alternative: All proposed work is located within existing disturbed areas away from wetlands.
The contract documents for the construction project would specify appropriate erosion and sedimentation control measures to prevent any impacts to wetlands that are located downslope of construction activities.
Therefore, the preferred alternative would have no impact on wetlands.
The proposed work will require a permit under the NRPA (forcemain and gravity main) and will qualify for a Permit By Rule through the DEP.
The project areas along Route 3 and at Otter Creek and Seal Harbor are not located in areas that are subject to normal flooding from a 100-year flood (FEMA, 1990).
However, the outfalls at Otter Creek and Seal Harbor are within the 100-year flood zones.
The preferred alternative proposes no work on the outfall associated with the Otter Creek facility.
The outfall at Seal Harbor facility will be extended approximately 400 feet.
The preferred alternative would have no impact on Prime Agricultural Land.
The consolidation of the treatment plants will improve the quality of the effluent since all the wastewater would be pumped to the Seal Harbor plant; which will be upgraded to handle the increased flows.
Improving the quality of the effluent will prevent potential adverse impacts to wildlife.
The construction activities will increase the levels of noise and cause additional human activity.
This may result in minor adverse impacts to local wildlife species during construction.
Species may be forced to move out of the area to avoid this interaction.
However, this would be a short-term effect in a local and regional context.
Any long-term effect on local species would be negligible once human activity associated with the project had diminished.
Erosion and sediment control barriers placed along the side of Route 3 and around the Otter Creek and Seal Harbor sites could interrupt the movement of small mammals, reptiles, and amphibians during the amphibian breeding season.
Existing mitigation measures such as including offset gaps in the erosion control barrier, would minimize these impacts (National Park Service, 2002).
18
The proposed demolition of the Otter Creek treatment plant, subsequent construction of the pump house and construction at the Seal Harbor facility would have moderate adverse effects on the site vegetation.
Most of the natural vegetation within this portion of the project area would be adversely affected in the short-term.
After completion of the pump house, the construction area would be re-vegetated to restore native vegetation.
The pumphouse would be constructed to resemble a Park Service comfort station and would take up substantially less surface area than the treatment facility.
Thus, all short term adverse effects on the area would become long term beneficial effects in a sitespecific context.
The preferred alternative would require excavation within and along the shoulder of Route 3 in order to place the forcemain and gravity pipelines.
Soils along the side of Route 3 would undergo a moderate level of disturbance.
The potential need to import topsoil to stabilize and revegetate the disturbed slope of the road could result in the introduction of non-native species and invasive species (National Park Service, 2002).
The project would have to incorporate stringent mitigation measures to ensure that no invasive or non-native species were introduced to the area and include a three year monitoring period.
The extension of the outfall at Seal Harbor involves work proposed to be located in navigable waters of the United States and fill material into waters of the United States.
Therefore, these activities need to be addressed under Section 10 of the Rivers and Harbors Act, Section 404 of the Clean Water Act, and Maine Natural Resources Protection Act (NRPA).
This alternative includes floating an extension to the location in Seal Harbor, sinking the pipe to the bottom, and placing minor amounts of riprap above the pipe for protection.
This activity will have a negligible adverse impact on the Harbor.
The design details for the extension are still underway and will be based on an investigation and recommendations from a geotechnical engineering consultant.
Once the design details are complete, the permitting and agency correspondence will be initiated.
Abandonment in place is proposed for the outfall pipe and manholes along Otter Creek and within Otter Cove.
Any structures or parts of structures above existing grade will be removed to grade and any depressions created will be filled.
Reasonably foreseeable actions relative to this alternative involve the eventual upgrades to the Northeast Harbor treatment plant.
The extension of the outfall pipes in Otter Cove and Seal Harbor involves work in navigable waters of the United States and fill materials into waters of the United States.
This activity would involve floating the pipe
19
extensions to the proper locations, sinking the pipes to the bottom and placing minor amounts of riprap above the pipe for protection.
The cumulative impact of this activity would be a negligible adverse impact on Otter Cove and Seal Harbor.
Improvements to Otter Creek Wastewater Treatment Plant Alternative: All proposed work under this alternative would be located within existing disturbed areas away from wetlands.
The contract documents for the construction project would specify appropriate erosion and sedimentation control measures to prevent any impacts to wetlands that are located down-slope of construction activities.
Therefore, this alternative would have no impact on wetlands.
The project area along Route 3 and at Otter Creek and Seal Harbor are not located in areas that are subject to normal flooding from a 100-year flood (FEMA, 1990).
However, the outfalls at Otter Creek and Seal Harbor are within the 100-year flood zones.
The new outfall at the Otter Creek facility would need to be placed and extended to a total length of 3,000 feet.
This alternative would have no impact on Prime Agricultural Land.
The upgrades to the treatment plant and the extension of the outfall would improve the quality of the effluent and prevent potential impacts to organisms historically associated with marine sediment.
The treatment plant would meet the effluent limits.
The construction activities will increase the levels of noise and cause additional human activity.
This may result in minor adverse impacts to local wildlife species during construction.
Species may be forced to move out of the area to avoid this interaction.
However, this would be a short-term adverse effect in a local and regional context.
Any long-term effect on local species would be negligible once human activity associated with the project had diminished.
Erosion and sediment control barriers placed could interrupt the movement of small amphibians during the amphibian breeding measures such as including offset gaps in would minimize these impacts (National Park around the Otter Creek site mammals, reptiles, and season.
Existing mitigation the erosion control barrier, Service, 2002).
The proposed construction to upgrade the Otter Creek treatment plant would have moderate adverse effects on the site vegetation.
Most of the natural vegetation within this portion of the project area would be adversely affected in the short-term.
After completion of the project, the construction area would be re-vegetated to restore native vegetation.
20
Thus, all adverse effects on the area would be short-term and limited to a site-specific context.
This alternative could result in a modification to Otter Creek.
The outfall and manhole structures located within and next to Otter Creek would need to be repaired or replaced.
The construction activities would have a short-term adverse impact on Otter Creek.
The extension of the outfall at Otter Creek and probable extension of the outfall at Seal Harbor would involve work located in navigable waters of the United States and fill material into waters of the United States.
Therefore, these activities would need to be addressed under Section 10 of the Rivers and Harbors Act, Section 404 of the Clean Water Act, and Maine NRPA.
The alternative would include floating outfall extensions to the appropriate locations, sinking the pipes to the bottom, and placing minor amounts of riprap above the pipe for protection.
The outfall pipes would have a negligible adverse impact on Otter Cove and Seal Harbor.
However, constructing the outfall pipe in and through Otter Creek and Otter Cove to the open ocean side of the causeway would have a moderate impact until the project was completed and Otter Creek and Otter Cove were restored.
Reasonably foreseeable actions relative to this alternative involve the eventual upgrades to the Seal Harbor and Northeast Harbor treatment plants.
The extension of the outfall pipes in Otter Cove and Seal Harbor involves work in navigable waters of the United States and fill materials into waters of the United States.
This activity would involve floating the pipe extensions to the proper locations, sinking the pipes to the bottom and placing minor amounts of riprap above the pipe for protection.
The cumulative impact of this activity would be a negligible adverse impact on Otter Cove and Seal Harbor.
v.
Socio-Economic Impacts
The estimated project costs for each alternative is provided in Table 3.
The total estimated capital cost for the preferred alternative is $4,400,000.
The NPS has an agreement with the Town of Mount Desert to provide 37% of the total project cost.
The Town will be financing all remaining costs of the preferred alternative with a loan through the State Revolving Loan Fund (SRF).
The Town is presently developing a plan to implement a sewer user fee to recover costs associated with the preferred alternative.
The plan is scheduled for completion by August 2003.
If a sewer user fee is not implemented however, the cost of the project will be recovered through
21
general property taxes.
The user fees and/or increase in property taxes are not expected to have a significant impact on low-income users and no low-income persons will be relocated by the proposed project.
vi.
Historical/Archaeological Site and National Landmarks
Historically significant sites, structures and landscapes determined eligible or listed in the National Register of Historic Places within or in close proximity to the project area must be considered prior to any Federal undertaking, in consultation with the State Historic Preservation Officer (SHPO).
Compliance with Section 106 of the National Historic Preservation Act (NHPA) of 1966 has been completed by the Maine Historic Preservation Commission.
No Action Alternative: The No Action alternative would have no current or cumulative impact on Historical/Archaeological Sites or National Landmarks.
Consolidation of Otter Creek/Seal Harbor Wastewater Treatment Plants Alternative: Under this alternative, the force main will need to cross the bridge on Route 3 which passes over the Park Loop Road near Hunter's Brook.
The bridge is considered a contributing element to the Park Loop Road.
The sewer main will be placed between the bridge deck and the surface pavement, resulting in no long-term impact to the bridge.
This alternative will have no adverse effect upon historic resources pursuant to Section 106 of the NHPA.
Improvements to Otter Creek Wastewater Treatment Plant Alternative: This alternative is not expected to impact on Historical/Archaeological Sites or National Landmarks. vii.
Endangered Species
Section 7 of the Endangered Species Act (ESA) requires that a federal agency consult with the U.S. Fish 
None of the alternatives are expected to have adverse, beneficial or cumulative impacts on threatened, endangered or special species.
Consultation with DIF
22
listed threatened, rare or endangered species in the vicinity of the preferred alternative location.
viii.
Coastal Zone Management and CBRS Units
The Mandatory Shoreland Zoning Act, which is administered at the local level, was enacted in the early 1970's in order to prevent water pollution and damage shorelines and riparian habitat.
The ordinance applies to all areas within 250 feet of lakes, ponds, rivers, tidal areas (coastal wetlands) and freshwater wetlands, and at least 75 feet from certain streams, including Hunters Brook.
Coordination with the Town of Mount Desert is ongoing to ensure compliance with this ordinance.
ix. Wild and Scenic Rivers
There are no wild and scenic rivers in the project area for any of the alternatives discussed.
x. Transportation
No Action Alternative: The current use of Grover Street would remain unchanged under this alternative.
As a result, there are no impacts to transportation.
Consolidation of Otter Creek/Seal Harbor Wastewater Treatment Plants Alternative: The demolition of the Otter Creek Treatment Plant, construction of the pump house, installation of the forcemain and gravity main and upgrades to the Seal Harbor plant would result in a short term minor adverse impact to area residents and motorists that frequently travel Grover Street and Route 3.
The traffic and human activity would be increased during the project and result in a minor adverse short-term impact.
The construction schedule however, would be spread over a 1.5-year period between November 2003 to June 2005 and restricted to avoid work on Route 3 between Memorial Day and Labor Day.
This should minimize adverse impacts on traffic during the Summer season.
Completion of the preferred alternative could result in a decrease in traffic on Grover Street since the proposed pump station would require less operation and maintenance than the existing treatment facility.
This would provide a beneficial long-term effect on the Otter Creek site.
There are no permanent structures of any height that would affect air transportation.
As well, there are no above ground structures proposed for any transportation routes.
These issues, if presented, are expected 23
to be construction related only and temporary in nature.
It is anticipated that these impacts will be minimal in nature.
Improvements to Otter Creek Wastewater Treatment Plant Alternative: Roadway traffic on Grover Street and other roads within the Village of Otter Creek would be increased during the project schedule.
This may have a short-term minor adverse impact on local motorists that frequently travel these roads.
Present traffic volumes on Grover Street would not decrease after the completion of the upgrades because the Town would still have to operate and maintain the treatment plant.
There are no permanent structures of any height that would affect air transportation.
As well, there are no above ground structures proposed for any transportation routes.
These issues, if presented, are expected to be construction related only and temporary in nature.
It is anticipated that these impacts will be minimal in nature.
xi. Park Resources the NPS the management discretion to park unit, that discretion is limited by the agency must leave park resources and particular law directly and specifically Park Service, USDOI.
Management
Although Congress has given allow certain impacts within a statutory requirement that the values unimpaired, unless a provides otherwise (National policies 2001).
No impairment to park resources would result from any of the action alternatives, because most of the impacts are either negligible or minor.
B. Indirect Impacts No Action Alternative: The No Action alternative would result in a minor to moderate, long-term adverse impact to Otter Cove and the present land use.
The present Otter Creek Treatment Plant is sited on lands owned by the National Park Service.
The Park Service has expressed an interest in restoring this site to its original, natural condition to allow future public access.
The No Action alternative would result in no change to the current condition of the site.
The treatment plant currently uses almost all of the 1.33 acres of the property.
It is anticipated that the No Action alternative would indirectly result in an adverse impact to future land use of Otter Cove and/or the causeway.
24
Consolidation of Otter Creek/Seal Harbor Wastewater Treatment Plants Alternative: The preferred alternative would have a minor to moderate beneficial effect on the aesthetics of the Otter Creek site.
The proposed pump house would use only 0.39 acres of the property as opposed to the 1.33 acres presently used.
The proposed pump house would also be constructed to resemble a Park Service comfort station.
After completion of the pump house, natural vegetation would be restored to the area.
This is expected to increase the aesthetic value of the Otter Creek site.
The preferred alternative would have no impact on the present use of the causeway.
Any adverse impact on the present use of Otter Cove would be short-term and negligible.
The preferred alternative proposes abandonment in place of the outfall pipe and structures and would not require direct disturbance to Otter Cove.
This alternative includes the construction of a combination forcemain/gravity main along Route 3, which could create development opportunities to those able to "tie in" to this line.
A portion of this line is on National Park Service lands and any potential development on those lands would ultimately be determined by the NPS.
However, any development along the forcemain portion of the pipeline is unlikely due to the technical problems of tying into a pressurized main.
Development or potential users along the gravity sewer portion of the line (approximately 1400 linear feet) could connect to this line.
The gravity sewer would be located entirely within Town limits.
Improvements to Otter Creek Wastewater Treatment Plant Alternative: Roadway traffic on Grover Street and other roads within the Village of Otter Creek would be increased during the project schedule.
This may have a short-term minor adverse impact on local motorists that frequently travel these roads.
The construction activities at the Otter Creek Treatment Plant would result in a short-term minor adverse impact to area residents.
The traffic and human activity on Grover Street would be increased during the project.
Any use of this street would be adversely impacted but would be short-term.
This alternative may have a minor beneficial effect on the visual appearance of the Otter Creek site.
After completion of the project, natural vegetation would be restored to the area.
This may increase the aesthetic value of the site however, the treatment plant would continue to use the existing 1.33 acres of land presently used.
This alternative would indirectly result in an adverse impact to future landuse of Otter Cove and the causeway.
The Town would still require an extension of the outfall in to the open ocean side of the causeway.
This construction activity could temporarily disrupt the present use of the area.
25
5.
Mitigation of Environmental Impacts The proposed project will implement an Erosion and Sediment Control Plan using standard erosion and sediment control measures (siltation fencing, straw bales, etc.) throughout the construction process to mitigate the discharge of sediment to down-slope areas and minimize potential impacts to water quality.
The project will utilize best management practices to protect water quality in Otter Creek and other water bodies during construction.
Following construction, temporary erosion control measures will be removed and proper surface restoration will be performed to restore disturbed areas.
As a result, the potential for future erosion into nearby water bodies will be minimal.
The preferred project would improve the water quality in Otter Cove with the elimination of the effluent.
The upgrades at Seal Harbor are expected to also improve the effluent at Seal Harbor.
It is anticipated that any construction near wetlands will require an NRPA PermitBy-Rule for soil disturbance and fill placement adjacent to, but not in, a freshwater wetland.
No mitigation of socio-economic/environmental justice issues is required for this project since there will be no adverse human health or environmental effects to the population of Mount Desert.
6.
Summary of Agency and Public Consultation A.
Public Participation Efforts: A number of public information meetings including formal presentations, Selectman meetings, and two public votes were conducted in order to include public participation in the planning process.
Both votes were in favor of the consolidation of the Otter Creek and Seal Harbor facilities.
The dates associated with these activities are summarized in Table 5.
26
Table 5 Public Participation Efforts Public Involvement Activity Selectman Meetings 2001 August 6 October 15 2002 February 19 March 18 August 19 September 16 October 7 February 25 February 27 March 4 2003 January 6 January 13 March 24
Public Information Meetings Public Votes
October 6 October 20
February 18 February 24 March 3
B. Significant Public Objections: One resident prepared ten written reasons to discontinue the Otter Creek/Seal Harbor Treatment Plant consolidation and obtained 115 valid signatures from residents on a petition.
The Town's Consulting Engineer provided responses to the questions raised.
The second public vote was conducted after the petition was submitted to the Town to ensure the residents still approved the proposed project.
The second vote was in favor of the consolidation of the Otter Creek and Seal Harbor facilities.
C. State 
During the numerous project meetings, both Maine DEP and NPS have expressed support for the proposed consolidation project.
During the Environmental Information Document preparation process by CES, Inc., the following agencies were contacted for comment: US Department of Interior, Fish and Wildlife Division US Department of Interior, National Park Service Maine Department of Environmental Protection State Historic Preservation Commission Passamaquoddy Tribe of American Indians State of Maine Coastal Program Town of Mount Desert State Planning Office, Flood Insurance Coordinator Maine Department of Inland Fisheries and Wildlife National Park Service Olver Associates CES, Inc.
Maine Department of Transportation
27
7.
Distribution list of the Environmental Assessment The attached Table 6: DEP Distribution List provides the list of agencies that will receive a copy of the Environmental Assessment.
_______________________
__________________ Date
Tim MacMillan, P.E. Division of Engineering, Compliance 
28
