Skip common site navigation and headers United States Environmental Protection Agency Federal Register Environmental Documents Recent Additions | Contact Us | Print Version Search: __________ Run Search Begin Hierarchical Links EPA Home 
ACTION: Supplemental notice of proposed rulemaking.
-----------------------------------------------------------------------
SUMMARY: The Coast Guard proposes to change the regulations governing the operation of the Flagler Memorial, Royal Park, and Southern Boulevard drawbridges at Palm Beach.
The Coast Guard has reconsidered its original proposal in the NPRM published on August 12, 1997, to change both the seasonal weekday and weekend operating imstructions for the bridges, and now is proposing to change only the seasonal weekday opening instructions, including eliminating the existing weekday openings at 8 a.m. on the Flagler Memorial bridge and at 8 a.m. and 5 p.m. on the Royal Park bridge, while retaining the other provisions in the original NPRM extending the seasonal opening period by one month and establishing a 30 minutes opening schedule for the Southern Boulevard Bridge during seasonal weekdays.
DATES: Comments must be received on or before August 31, 1998.
ADDRESSES: Comments may be mailed to Commander (oan) Seventh Coast Guard District, 909 SE 1st Avenue, Miami, Florida 33131-3050, or may be delivered to room 406 at the above address between 7:30 a.m. and 4 p.m. Monday through Friday, except federal holidays.
The telephone number is (305) 536-6546.
The Commander, Seventh Coast Guard District maintains the public docket for this rulemaking.
Comments will become part of this docket and will be available for
[[Page 35553]]
inspection or copying at the above address.
FOR FURTHER INFORMATION CONTACT: Ms. Evelyn Smart, Project Manager, Bridge Section, (305) 536-6546.
SUPPLEMENTARY INFORMATION:
Requests for Comments
The Coast Guard encourages interested persons to participate in this rulemaking by submitting written data, views or arguments.
Persons submitting comments should include their names and addresses, identify the rulemaking [CGD07-97-020] and the specific section of this revised proposal to which each comment applies, and give the reason for each comment.
The Coast Guard requests that all comments and attachments be submitted in any unbound format suitable for copying.
If not practical, a second copy of any bound material is requested.
Persons wanting acknowledgment of receipt of comments should enclose a stamped, self- addressed postcard or envelope.
The Coast Guard will consider all comments received during the comment period.
If may change this proposal in view of the comments received.
The Coast Guard plans no public hearing.
Persons may request a public hearing by writing to Ms. Evelyn Smart at the address under ADDRESSES.
The request should include the reasons why a hearing would be beneficial.
If it determines that the opportunity for oral presentations will aid this rulemaking, the Coast Guard will hold a public hearing at a time and place announced by a later notice in the Federal Register.
Regulatory History
On August 12, 1997, the Coast Guard published a Notice of Proposed Rulemaking (NPRM) in the Federal Register (62 FR 43132).
The NPRM proposed to change the regulations governing the operation of the Flagler Memorial, Royal Park, and Southern Boulevard drawbridges in Palm Beach, Florida.
In response to the NPRM, the Coast Guard received objections from the Florida Inland Navigation District, the Marine Industries of Palm Beach and several local residents, expressing their concern about seasonal weekend openings being limited to set times vice opening on signal.
Background and Purpose
The Coast Guard's original proposal included commencing the seasonal opening schedules for all three bridges a month earlier on 1 October to help reduce traffic congestion and proposed seasonal 30 minute weekend and holiday opening schedules for all three bridges.
It also proposed creating a 30 minute opening schedule for the Southern Boulevard Bridge during seasonal weekdays.
Discussion of Comments
Four comments were received on the original NPRM stating that the proposed weekend opening schedules during the winter season would place an undue burden on the boating public, and that the local community benefited from an increase in boater traffic.
The Coast Guard agreed, and has eliminated the proposed seasonal weekend opening schedules from this revised proposal.
Therefore, all three bridge will still operate on signal on the weekends.
One comment was received requesting that the seasonal 8 a.m. opening on the Flagler Memorial bridge and the 8 a.m. and 5 p.m. openings on the Royal Park bridge be removed because of their effect upon commuter rush hour traffic.
The Coast Guard agreed that there is a significant increase in commuter traffic during this period, and is eliminating those rush hour openings in this revised proposal.
Two comments were received requesting the Coast Guard to extend the winter operating schedule year round.
The Coast Guard disagreed, as there is a not a present need to restrict openings during the off season because of the decrease in commuter traffic during that time.
Discussion of the Revised Proposal
The Coast Guard reviewed its original proposal and determined that the significant increase in vessel traffic on weekends was beneficial to the local community and should not be unreasonably impacted by bridge opening instructions which did not provide clearly offsetting benefits to the seasonal traffic across the bridge.
Therefore, the proposed changes to the weekend opening schedules have been removed from this revised proposal and the weekend opening schedules have been modified to remove the existing 8 a.m. opening on the Flagler Memorial bridge and the 8 a.m. and 5 p.m. openings on the Royal Park Bridge, which have significantly impacted the flow of highway commuter traffic.
These revised regulations would maintain the existing seasonal weekday 30 minute opening schedule for Flagler Memorial and Royal Park Bridges, and add the seasonal weekday 30 minute opening schedule to the Southern Boulevard Bridge which now operates on signal.
The seasonal restrictions for all three bridges would start one month earlier on 1 October to help reduce traffic congestion created by earlier arrival of seasonal visitors to the Palm Beach areas.
This changes is intended to relieve seasonal highway congestion while still meeting the reasonable needs of navigation.
The amended regulations still provide an exception to the opening schedules for public vessels of the United States, tug vessels with tows, and vessels in situations where a delay would endanger life or property.
Regulatory Evaluation
This revised proposal is not a significant regulatory action under section 3(f) of Executive Order 12866 and does not require an assessment of potential costs and benefits under section 6(a)(3) of that order.
It has been exempted from review by the Office of Management and Budget under that order.
It is not a significant under the regulatory policies and procedures of the Department of Transportation.
(DOT) (44 FR 11040, February 26, 1979).
The Coast Guard expects the economic impact of this proposal to be so minimal that a full Regulatory Evaluation under paragraph 10e of the regulatory policies and procedures of DOT is unnecessary.
We conclude this because this revised proposal does not effect the exemptions for tugs with tows and emergency situations already contained in the regulations.
Small Entities
Under the Regulatory Flexibility Act (5 U.S.C. 601 et seq.), the Coast Guard must consider whether this revised proposal will have a significant economic impact on a substantial number of small entities.
``Small entities'' include small businesses and not-for-profit organizations that are independently owned and operated and are not dominant in their field, and governmental jurisdictions with populations of less than 50,000.
Because it expects the impact of this revised proposal to be minimal, the Coast Guard certifies under 5 U.S.C. 605(b) that this proposed rule will not have a significant economic impact on a substantial number of small entities because of the exemption for tugs with tows.
If however, you think that your business or organization qualifies as a small entity and that this revised proposal will have a significant economic impact on your business or organization, please submit a comment (see ADDRESSES) explaining why you think you qualify and in what way and to what degree this proposed rule will economically affect you.
Collection of Information
This revised proposal contains no collection of information requirements
[[Page 35554]]
under the Paperwork Reduction Act.
(44 U.S.C. 3501 et seq.).
Federalism
The Coast Guard has analyzed this revised proposal under the principles and criteria contained in Executive Order 12612, and has determined that this proposal does not have sufficient federalism implications to warrant the preparation of a Federalism Assessment.
Environmental Assessment
The Coast Guard considered the environmental impact of this revised proposal and has determined pursuant to section 2.B.2.a (CE #32(e)) of Commandant Instruction M16475.1C, that this action is categorically excluded from further environmental documentation.
A categorical exclusion determination for this rulemaking is available in the public docket for inspection and copying.
List of Subjects in 33 CFR Part 117
Bridges.
In consideration of the foregoing, the Coast Guard proposes to amend 33 CFR part 117 as follows:
PART 117--[AMENDED]
1.
The authority citation for part 117 continues to read as follows:
Authority: 33 U.S.C. 499; 49 CFR 1.46; 33 CFR 1.05-1(g); section 117.255 also issued under the authority of Pub. L. 102-587, 106 Stat. 5039.
2.
In Sec. 117.261 revised paragraphs (u), (v) and (w) to read as follows:
Sec. 117.261 Atlantic Intracoastal Waterway from St. Mary's River to Key Largo.
* * * * * (u) Flagler Memorial (SR A1A) bridge, mile 1021.9 at Palm Beach.
The draw shall open on signal; except that from October 1 to May 31, Monday through Friday except Federal holidays, from 7:30 a.m. to 9:30 a.m. and from 4 p.m. to 5:45 p.m., the draw need open only at 8:30 a.m. and 4:45 p.m.
From 9:30 a.m. to 4 p.m., the draw need open only on the hour and half-hour.
(v) Royal Park (SR 704) bridge, mile 1022.6 at Palm Beach.
The draw shall open on signal; except that from October 1 through May 31, Monday through Friday except Federal holidays, from 7:45 a.m. to 9:45 a.m. and from 3:30 p.m., to 5:45 p.m., the draw need open only at 8:45 a.m., 4:30 p.m., and 5:15 p.m.
From 9:30 a.m. to 3:30 p.m., the draw need open only on the quarter-hour and three-quarter hour.
(w) Southern boulevard (SR 700/80) bridge, mile 1024.7 at Palm Beach.
The draw shall open on signal; except that, from October 1 through May 31, Monday through Friday except Federal holidays, from 7:30 a.m. to 9:15 a.m. and from 4:30 p.m. to 6:30 p.m., the draw need open only at 8:15 a.m. and 5:30 p.m.
From 9:15 a.m. to 4:30 p.m., the draw need open only on the quarter-hour and three-quarter hour.
* * * * * Dated: June 23, 1998.
Norman T. Saunders, Rear Admiral, U.S. Coast Guard Commander, Seventh Coast Guard District.
[FR Doc.
98-17370 Filed 6-29-98; 8:45 am] BILLING CODE 4910-15-M
Begin Site Footer
EPA Home | Privacy and Security Notice | Contact Us
