Print this page.
Contact the CIP CLICK TO RETURN TO THE 1999 ARCHIVE OF CLIMATE-WEATHER IMPACTS
CLIMATE INFORMATION PROJECT: UPDATE OF CLIMATE-WEATHER IMPACTS REPORTED 01.16.99-01.19.99
(01.19.99)
JORDAN, LAOS, MOZAMBIQUE, SOMALIA, UNITED STATES
JORDAN (drought) The GOJ approved aid packages to help its farmers affected by the current drought.
Rainfall during December and January was reportedly well below normal -- some reports of only 2% in parts of the country.
LAOS (drought) As reported by the European Community Humanitarian Office (ECHO), the country of Laos recently suffered crop damage of nearly 70% in certain provinces.
Delayed rains have led to a drought that has crippled the main rice crop for this season.
In Sayaboury province an estimated 20,000 people are in need of assistance.
MOZAMBIQUE (flooding) Heavy rains caused flooding in central and southern Mozambique.
Fatalities numbered 3.
People have also been displaced and cropland inundated, but the exact extent of the damage has not been reported.
The road connecting Beira to Zimbabwe may be cut off by floodwaters.
The GOM has reportedly expressed concern about flooding along the Pungue.
SOMALIA (drought, famine threat, disease) The UN has warned that 300,000 people are at a very high risk of starvation.
The harvest of food this coming month has already been viewed with pessimism as late rains and drought conditions weakened this season's crop.
Last year's harvests were destroyed by El Nino related flooding.
Doctors Without Borders (Medecins Sans Frontiers) confirmed that water shortages have led to outbreaks of disease in southern regions of Somalia -- in particular cholera.
UNITED STATES (tornadoes/severe storms)(Tennessee) Severe storms and tornadoes affected parts of Tennessee during the evening of the seventeenth.
Fatalities have been tallied at eight while ~100 people were reportedly injured.
Damage from the storms included two UH-60 helicopters at the McKeller-Sipes Airport as well as damage to an estimated 600 homes throughout the state.
*The information provided in the RRP updates is gathered from a variety of wire and news sources as well as country and international agency reports.
It does not necessarily reflect the focus or interest of NOAA's Office of Global Programs and is meant only as source of condensed information.
This and other updates are not designed to be used in scientific or professional decisions.
Names of geographic locations do not infer political or economic recognition.
All reports of the RRP are archived at http://www.cip.ogp.noaa.gov
The RRP can be contacted at 301.427.2089x194 or Kelly.Sponberg@noaa.gov
