[congrec.jpg] Senate Floor Speech given by Senator Kay Bailey Hutchison September 8, 1999 -- Page: S10558 AMENDMENT NO. 1603 TO H.R. 2466, THE INTERIOR APPROPRIATIONS BILL FOR FY2000
(PURPOSE: TO PROHIBIT THE USE OF FUNDS FOR THE PURPOSE OF ISSUING A NOTICE OF RULEMAKING WITH RESPECT TO THE VALUATION OF CRUDE OIL FOR ROYALTY PURPOSES UNTIL SEPTEMBER 30, 2000)
Mrs. HUTCHISON.
Mr. President, I offer this amendment on my behalf, and in addition to Senator Shelby, Senators Domenici, Lott, Nickles, Breaux, Murkowski, and Landrieu.
This amendment will continue an existing provision that will prevent the Interior Department's Minerals Management Service, MMS, from implementing an overreaching and unwise new oil royalty valuation system.
This moratorium was adopted by the Senate Appropriations Committee and continues the same restrictions that have been passed by the Senate and the House and signed by the President three times previously.
I add that it has been bipartisan, and the initial moratorium and its subsequent extensions have been supported by Senators on both sides of the aisle, and the same is true on the House side.
This will be the fourth time that Congress will have to act to stop this action by the Minerals Management Service.
I regret that, and I wish there did not have to be a first time.
But this moratorium is absolutely necessary in order to stop the MMS from overriding its regulatory authority by imposing a backdoor tax on the production of oil from Federal leases.
We have heard about judges legislating from the bench.
This is, I think, legislating from the cubicle.
This new rule violates both the language and the intent of Federal law governing the assessment and collection of Federal royalties from oil and gas drawn from Federal lands in the Outer Continental Shelf.
Everyone agrees the existing rules are too complex and burdensome, and Congress and the industry groups had welcomed a revision of the rules.
But the proposed rule 3 years ago which MMS announced without prior notice to Congress could impose even more costly regulations on oil producers and effectively enact a royalty rate hike or tax increase which the agency simply does not have the authority to do.
While the larger oil companies might be able to absorb these costs, hundreds of small independent producers probably will not.
This new rule hits them at a time when they are still reeling from the historically low oil prices we have seen lately.
Anyone who has any kind of oil production in their States knows that hundreds of thousands of oil -related jobs in our country have gone out of existence in the last 6 months.
We all know that oil prices went down to $10 a barrel.
We have not seen that in this country for 40 years.
We know that small independent producers had to go out of business, thus throwing hundreds of thousands of people off the payroll.
In addition, there are two recent developments that justify more than ever before the extension of the moratorium.
First, the MMS itself says it needs more time to review its rule; second, a serious ethical and legal question has recently been raised about the rulemaking process.
Earlier this year, the Minerals Management Service did reopen the comment period for their rule for 30 days.
During that period of time, they received extensive comments dealing with the many facets of this issue, and they have not yet finished reviewing and considering those comments.
Because they have held workshops and various oil industry representatives and others interested in this issue have been able to meet together, it is going to take time for the agency to digest the input they have.
I hope there is a window in which the Minerals Management Service will be able to sit down and come up with something that is fair and will not put more of our oil industry jobs off the books and into foreign countries.
Remember, today we import more than 50 percent of the oil needs of our country.
We are certainly not doing anything to help our own oil industry keep oil jobs in America, and it is a security risk to any country that cannot produce 50 percent of its energy needs.
I think everything we can do to keep this industry strong is a security issue for our country, and it is certainly a jobs issue.
Unfortunately, extending the moratorium through the next fiscal year is the only way we are going to be able to get this agency to produce a workable rule that stays within the bounds of the law.
That is what we are trying to do.
In fact, I want our oil industry to pay its fair share of royalties to the people of our country.
Our taxpayers deserve that.
That is exactly what we are trying to do with the MMS.
But the MMS has been very heavy handed, and they act as if businesses going out of existence is preferable to having a fair royalty rate in which the industry would pay its fair share and we would keep jobs in America.
Several of my colleagues and I strongly urged MMS to sit down with Members of Congress and industry representatives to discuss these issues.
It did so last year.
Some progress was made, and I thought we were coming toward a compromise.
Unfortunately, the Department of the Interior brought the progress to an abrupt halt.
The only way we will be able to sit down with the agency is if there is a moratorium until there is a satisfactory resolution of this issue by the MMS and the Members of Congress who are interested in keeping oil jobs in America.
In addition, I and other Members of Congress only recently became aware of a situation that, frankly, calls the entire rulemaking process into serious question.
This spring it was revealed that a self-proclaimed government watchdog group called Project on Government Oversight, or POGO, gave $350,000 each to two Federal officials: One at the Department of the Interior and the other at the Department of Energy, apparently in connection with their work on the royalty valuation issue.
This matter is presently under criminal investigation at the Department of Justice, and it is the subject of an investigation by the Department of the Interior's inspector general.
Until these investigations are complete, the prudent course would be for the Interior Department to take a voluntary action to suspend its plan to finalize the new royalty valuation rule.
Unfortunately, the Department has indicated it is not willing to do this.
I can't imagine an agency that has admitted or at least acknowledged that one of its employees in this rulemaking process took $350,000 as part of a payment in a lawsuit from this government watchdog organization, and the agency is not even willing to say we should call a moratorium on this whole process until we get to the bottom of this.
That is why, when things such as this happen, people don't trust their Government.
I can't imagine the Interior Department not volunteering to take this action and sit down with us and make sure that this rulemaking process has integrity.
The Interior Department's proposed rule defies the law and the intent of Congress.
This disregard for the law is what is at the heart of our objection to the proposed new rule, not the $11 million the Congressional Budget Office estimates the proposed rule will generate in new income for the agency.
Federal law requires for purposes of royalty payments the value of oil drawn from Federal land is to be assessed at the wellhead; that is, when the oil is drawn from the ground.
The MMS, however, continues to try to assess the value of the oil away from the wellhead, after the oil has been transported, processed, and marketed, each of which must occur before the oil can be sold.
In effect, the MMS is trying to get a free ride on these costs rather than allowing companies to deduct them from the price they ultimately receive for the oil .
So you are asking people to pay a tax on their cost of doing business.
That does not make economic sense.
It certainly doesn't pass the fairness question.
There isn't any question that the existing system of computing Federal oil royalties is overly complex.
No one disputes that.
Under the current system, oil producers are often unclear as to what their royalty payments are supposed to be, and even the MMS is often at a loss as to what they are owed.
But rather than propose a simpler method of ascertaining royalty payments, the MMS has proposed an even more complex and protracted litigation over just what the new rule requires.
While the proposed rule could bring in increased Federal revenues, the increased payments could also be eaten up by the need to hire an army of new Federal auditors to ensure compliance with the complex new system.
Furthermore, if companies decide not to go forward with their drilling because they can't make any kind of profit, there will be no revenue to the schoolchildren in our country because there will be no oil royalty extracted from those companies.
So the new rule is going to be a regulatory thicket that really is not going to help the situation, which is the problem of a too complex regulation today.
Let me also emphasize this amendment has nothing to do with the entirely separate issue of whether or not any particular oil company has paid the royalties it owes under the existing system.
I have heard a lot of rhetoric on this issue.
I have heard my colleagues talk about the lawsuits and the settlements and companies that haven't paid their fair share.
If any oil company has not paid its fair share under the existing regulation, I want it to be prosecuted.
I want it to have to pay.
That is not an issue in this regulation.
The only issue before us today is what is going to be the oil royalty valuation process and is Congress going to have the right to raise taxes or is an unelected bureaucrat who is not accountable going to have that right.
Federal land and the mineral resources within that land belong to us all.
Proper royalties must be paid for the right to extract those resources.
Since 1953, those payments have totaled over $58 billion.
That is what we have collected in oil royalties .
But enforcement of the law and writing the law are two separate things.
The MMS seems to have forgotten that it is the responsibility of Congress, not the government bureaucrats, to determine what the royalty is.
That is why we must continue this moratorium until Congress says this is the right approach.
The new rule imposes upon Federal lease producers a duty to market their oil without allowing the cost to be deducted.
Oil does not sell itself.
There are overhead costs associated with listing the oil for sale, locating buyers, facilitating the sale, and then ensuring that the oil is delivered to that buyer.
Federal law and existing regulations only require that the lessee place the oil in marketable condition; that is, that the oil is ready to be sold by removing water and other impurities from it.
But lessees are allowed, under current law, to deduct the costs associated with transporting and marketing the oil.
The new rule, as contained in the MMS' own explanation, states that the producers must market the oil for the mutual benefit of the lessee and the lessor.
This, then, would mean producers would no longer be allowed to deduct these costs in order to arrive at true wellhead value, as called for by Federal law.
There is no other way to slice it.
This constitutes a backdoor royalty rate hike; in effect, a tax increase on Federal lands producers.
Secondly, the MMS rule would not allow for the proper deduction of transportation costs.
Oil producers typically have to bear the cost of transporting the oil to the buyer, either by pipeline or truck.
Presently, those costs are determined by using a methodology recognized by the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, which has regulatory authority over interstate oil pipelines.
So the new MMS rule would actually reject the Federal Government's own cost guidelines and impose a new, untested system for determining transportation costs.
So it comes down to a simple decision: Do we want unelected bureaucrats enacting policy with regard to our Federal lands, or do we want Congress to establish these policies? There have been other bills introduced that would deal with this issue.
I hope we can come to an agreement.
But I don't think we can forget what has happened to the oil industry over the last 2 years.
In fact, this is coming at a time when oil and gas production in our country is at an all-time low.
In March of this year, we saw oil prices in parts of our country going down to even $7 or $8 a barrel.
While the price of oil has since begun to come back up--and today stands at about $20 a barrel--the impacts of a year and a half price crash are reverberating throughout the United States.
Since the price of oil first fell in late 1997, over 200,000 oil and gas wells have been shut down.
Most of these, of course, were the low-yield marginal or 'stripper' wells that will never again be opened because it is not economically feasible to do it.
In March of this year, crude oil production in the lower 48 States fell to 4.8 million barrels per day, the lowest level in 50 years.
The number of oil rigs in service in the United States fell to just over 100 for the last week in July, the lowest number in service since records have ever been kept.
During this time, foreign oil imports rose steadily and now account for 57 percent of consumption, well above the 36 percent import level we saw during the 1974 oil embargo that nearly shut down the American economy.
The oil crisis has also had a devastating impact on American jobs.
Since November 1997, we have lost over 67,000 jobs just in the exploration and production sectors of this industry, which represents 20 percent of the total number of jobs in this field.
In January 1999 alone, 11,500 oil and gas jobs were lost.
If one looks back to 1981, the numbers are even more alarming: Over half a million good-paying American jobs have been lost in the oil and gas industry.
There are those who would say this is going to hurt our schoolchildren, that they are not going to get the revenues from our public lands.
This is very important in my home State.
There are dozens of school districts that rely heavily on oil production; property taxes fall with the price of oil .
Statewide school districts will collect an estimated $154 million less in revenues this year than last.
That is $154 million worth of teachers' salaries, books, computers, you name it.
That is what we are talking about in Texas when we talk about the impact of oil on education.
So if we are going to hit the oil business again, what is it going to do to the schoolchildren of our country? Is it going to take another $154 million hit in my State? Do you know that they had to let teachers off in midyear in many counties in Texas because they didn't have the money because of oil companies going out of business and having no income whatsoever?
So when my colleagues say the schoolchildren are going to lose $60 million, perhaps, in California alone, I point my colleagues' attention to the fact that we have lost $154 million this year in Texas, and we are cutting teachers off in midyear and shutting down schools because our oil industry is on its knees.
During 1998, while the average yield for stocks in the Dow Jones Industrial Average was a positive 18 percent, the yield for oil and gas stocks was a negative 36 percent.
So what does that do to the elderly investor, or the person who is investing in mutual funds? What does that do to an industry that is very important for the retirement security of millions of our citizens?
For companies inclined toward exploration and production, earnings and stock values have fared even worse.
The yield on independent refiner stocks, down 40 percent.
The yield on exploration and production stocks, down 63 percent.
The yield on drilling stock, down 64 percent.
These stock values reflect huge losses by oil companies over the past year and a half.
Corporate earnings of the 17 major U.S. petroleum companies fell 41 percent between the first quarter of 1998 and the first quarter of 1999.
Fourth quarter losses for 1998 and the first quarter of 1999 were some of the largest witnessed in industry history.
Some companies have lost over $1 billion during each of these quarters.
So we are not just talking about the loss of revenue to our schoolchildren.
We are not just talking about the stability of the retirement pension plans of millions of Americans.
We are talking about flat bad policy.
We are talking about cutting off an industry that is essential to our security, essential to the retirement security of individuals in this country, essential to job security for thousands of workers; and we are talking about blithely saying let the bureaucrats who aren't accountable increase the taxes without congressional responsibility.
Congress didn't say that last year, they didn't say it the year before, and they didn't say it the year before that.
They said: No, you will be accountable because we do care about the schoolchildren of this country, we do care about the people living on retirement incomes in this country, and we do care about those who have mutual funds that include oil industry stocks; we want them to be stable, we want them to pay their fair share, and we believe their fair share includes not paying taxes on their expenses.
It is economics 101.
So I am asking my colleagues, for the fourth straight time, to come forward and vote to keep this moratorium so Congress can exercise its full responsibility, so that we will not put people out of business because the margins are so low and because they have been hit so hard over the last year and a half.
We are joined by many groups who care about the economic viability of our country: Frontiers of Freedom, the National Taxpayers Union, Americans for Tax Reform, Citizens Against Government Waste, Citizens for a Sound Economy, the Alliance for America, People for the USA, Sixty-Plus, the Blue Ribbon Coalition, the American Land Rights Association, the Competitive Enterprise Institute, the National Center for Public Policy Research, Rio Grande Valley Partnership.
The moratorium that I am proposing to extend will force the Department to take the time to craft a rule that works and accurately reflects the will of Congress--a rule that will be fair to the schoolchildren of our country, a rule that will be fair to the taxpayers of our country, a rule that will make the oil industry pay its fair share, but a rule that will not make the oil industry pay an increased tax on their expenses.
That is unheard of in economics in our country, nor good business sense.
It is confiscatory taxation, and we will not stand for our retirees having their investments obliterated by taxes that are unfair.
The buck stops here.
It does not stop on the bureaucrat's desk; it stops here, because we are responsible for keeping the jobs in this country.
We are responsible for fair taxation policy.
We are responsible for the schoolchildren of our country.
And the way to keep these companies paying their fair share, creating the jobs, and creating safe retirement systems for the people of our country is to keep the moratorium on and force the Department of the Interior to do the will of Congress, which is what it is supposed to do.
If we don't stand up for our responsibility, who will? Who will stand up for Congress' responsibility if the Senate doesn't?
I urge the adoption of the amendment which has been adopted three times before, and which I hope will be adopted again, so that we will keep the oil jobs in our country, so that we will keep the retirement security of the mutual funds that depend on oil companies being stable, so that we will keep the schoolchildren of our country having the ability to get revenue that is fair, and to make the oil industry pay its fair share.
That is what this amendment does.
I yield the floor.
