Text: Ashcroft on Sentencing of Terrorists Convicted in U.S. Embassy Bombings
(Says "America won a battle today" in putting them behind bars for life) _________________________________________________________________
October 20, 2001
"In the war against terrorism, America won a battle today," Attorney General John Ashcroft said in a statement prepared for a October 18 Justice Department news conference on a Manhattan federal court's sentencing of four terrorists to life in prison without the possibility of parole for their participation in the August 1998 bombings of the American embassies in Nairobi, Kenya, and Dar es Salaam, Tanzania.
In his prepared remarks, Ashcroft also discussed anti-terrorism legislation moving rapidly through the U.S. Congress and the seriousness with which the Department of Justice regards terrorist hoaxes such as false anthrax threats.
"Making a terrorist threat is a federal offense -- even if the person making the threat does not have the intention or the ability to carry out the threat," he said.
"Individuals who threaten the use of a biological toxin can receive up to life in prison.
The law provides for up to five years in prison for mailing communications that contain any threat to injure the addressee or any other person.
Those who lie to law enforcement officials about terrorist hoaxes can also receive up to five years in prison."
Following is the Attorney General's statement as prepared for delivery:
(begin text)
Attorney General John Ashcroft Press Conference Prepared Remarks
October 18, 2001
This afternoon, I have several announcements on the steps the Justice Department has taken -- and the assistance we continue to need from Congress -- in the war against terrorism.
In the war against terrorism, America won a battle today.
A Manhattan federal court sentenced four terrorists to life in prison without the possibility of parole for their participation in the August 1998 bombings of the American embassies in Nairobi, Kenya and Dar es Salaam, Tanzania.
Mohamed Sadeek Odeh [O-DAY], Mohamed Rashed Doud Al-Owhali [AL-O-WALLY]
Odeh, Al-Owhali and Mohammed also received additional life sentences for their participation in several conspiracies to murder United States nationals and U.S. government employees, as well as conspiracies to use weapons of mass destruction against U.S. persons and property.
An additional terrorist, Wadih [WADDY] El Hage [Haj]
On May 29, 2001, a jury found these four defendants guilty on all 302 counts against them for their involvement in a global plot, led by Usama bin Laden and his terrorist network al Qaeda, to kill United States nationals anywhere they could be found.
Evidence presented at trial documented that Al-Owhali received terrorist training in al Qaeda camps in Afghanistan.
Mohamed and Odeh, who has been a sworn member of al Qaeda since 1992, also received terrorist training in Afghanistan.
In addition, the trial evidence showed that El Hage, despite being a United States citizen, was a central facilitator in the bombing plot, serving as a leader of the al Qaeda cell in Nairobi and at one time as a personal assistant to bin Laden.
Al Qaeda stands charged, tried, convicted and sentenced for terrorism.
To date, the total number of persons charged in connection with the U.S. embassy bombings is 22, six of whom are in custody in the United States and three of whom are in custody in the United Kingdom.
There is a reward of up to $5 million each for information leading to the apprehension and prosecution of any of the remaining 13 fugitives -- which include Usama bin Laden -- all of whom have been named to the 22 most-wanted terrorists list.
While the fight against terrorism demands that American justice focus on the prevention of future terrorist acts in addition to the prosecution of past acts, today's sentence sends a message: the United States will hunt terrorists down and make them pay the price for their evil.
I want to congratulate U.S. Attorney Mary Jo White and her team for these successful prosecutions.
I also want to commend the FBI for their excellent work in this case.
Most of the evidence was international and difficult to assemble.
As a result of the exemplary work of prosecutors and investigators, Americans have four fewer combatants to face in the global war against terrorism.
The second issue I would like to cover is the anti-terrorism legislation requested by the administration that is currently working its way through Congress.
I am extremely gratified by the expeditious, bi-partisan, bi-cameral attention this anti-terrorism legislation has received.
Over the last month, the Administration and Congress have worked together to update and strengthen our laws to combat terrorism.
By overwhelming, bi-partisan majorities, both the House and the Senate have acted to make terrorism the priority in our laws that it now must be; and they have acted to update our antiquated statutes to take into account the new technologies terrorists today employ.
Yesterday, the leadership of the House and Senate, in addition to the Judiciary Committee Chairmen and ranking members, came to a final agreement on the anti-terrorism legislation.
And I am gratified that I can state, unequivocally, that this legislation, once passed and signed into law, will immediately increase our capacity to detect, disrupt and prevent acts of terrorism.
The Department of Justice is already working to ensure the immediate implementation of these measures.
I understand it is likely that Congress will pass this legislation upon its return next Tuesday.
Let me identify a few specific tools of intelligence gathering that we requested, and that Congress has agreed to:
First, better anti-terrorism coordination.
The legislation will allow FISA (Foreign Intelligence Surveillance Act) wiretaps -- a crucial investigative technique in terrorism cases -- when the gathering of foreign intelligence is a significant purpose of the investigation, rather than permitting them only when gathering foreign intelligence is the primary purpose.
This makes the utilization of wiretaps against terrorists much more workable, and will facilitate greater coordination between the law enforcement side and the intelligence side of our investigation.
Such coordination is at the heart of our ability to prevent future attacks.
Second, airtight surveillance of terrorists.
The legislation permits multi-point wiretaps in FISA cases, as we currently have in criminal cases.
This allows the court to authorize taps of any phones which the suspect may use when it is shown that the suspect is changing phones to thwart surveillance efforts.
This authority will allow us to be more effective in surveilling terrorists and their associates, and increases our chances of learning ahead of time about their plans.
Third, better intelligence about terrorists' activities.
The legislation also permits foreign intelligence information obtained through a federal grand jury to be shared with other federal law enforcement or intelligence agencies, and with national defense and national security officials.
This will allow, for the first time, information that might be relevant to preventing a terrorist attack to be shared with those officials in a position to take preventive action.
Tearing down the wall between intelligence and criminal information is one of the single most important steps we will take.
Finally, I would like to reiterate, for those who may doubt our resolve, the seriousness with which the Department of Justice regards terrorist hoaxes such as false anthrax threats.
Making a terrorist threat is a federal offense -- even if the person making the threat does not have the intention or the ability to carry out the threat.
Individuals who threaten the use of a biological toxin can receive up to life in prison.
The law provides for up to five years in prison for mailing communications that contain any threat to injure the addressee or any other person.
Those who lie to law enforcement officials about terrorist hoaxes can also receive up to five years in prison.
Already, a number of individuals have been charged with serious crimes in connection with terrorist hoaxes:
-- Fred Forcellina of Fairfield County, Connecticut, faces up to life imprisonment for threatening the use of weapons of mass destruction.
Forcellina is charged with dialing 911 to threaten that court houses, schools and railroad stations would be quote "dusted."
-- Joseph Faryniarz (FAIR-in-yars) of Coventry, Connecticut, faces up to five years in prison and serious fines for making false statements to federal agents in connection with a terrorist hoax that shut down the Connecticut Department of Environmental Protection for two days at a cost of $1.5 million to taxpayers.
-- Terry Olson of Price, Utah, faces up to five years and fines for making false statements to the FBI about his knowledge of an anthrax hoax.
-- And William Sylvia of Portsmouth, Rhode Island, could receive five years in prison and a $250,000 fine for mailing a letter purported to contain anthrax.
The Department of Justice is currently working with state and local officials to prosecute additional cases of false terrorist threats and anthrax hoaxes.
In the meantime, the serious charges and substantial penalties faced by these four individuals should eliminate any remaining doubt in the minds of those who would perpetrate terrorist hoaxes: you will be caught, you will be prosecuted and you will pay a high price for your crimes.
Thank you.
(end text)
Return to U.S. Embassy Releases | U.S. Embassy Islamabad Home Page Sorry, you need a JavaScript capable browser to get the best from this page
