International Information Programs East Asia-Pacific Issues | Chinese Human Smuggling IN THE NEWS FOR 2003* July Briefs from selected newspaper, magazine and journal articles as well as other sources discussing topics relevant to illegal immigration.
Chinese Police Net 71 in Major People-Smuggling Case Agence France-Presse, July 31, 2003 Chinese border police detained 2 people-smugglers and 69 of their "clients" on a ship intercepted near Laopian Island, off Dalian.
Chinese state media called it a "major people-smuggling case," according to this report.
Most of the detainees were from northeast China and the southeastern province of Fujian who were seeking jobs abroad.
People Smuggling Appointment The Daily Telegraph, July 31, 2003 Foreign Minister Alexander Downer announced on July 30 the appointment of Caroline Millar as Australia's new ambassador for people smuggling and trafficking issues.
She replaces John Buckley who held the position since April 2003.
Number of Deaths on Rise, Despite Media and Security Effort Associated Press Newswires, Dateline Phoenix, Arizona, July 30, 2003 Despite a highly publicized campaign - "Operation Desert Safeguard" -- to inform and dissuade illegal immigrants from attempting dangerous crossings of the U.S-Mexico border, this year's death toll nearly matches that of last year.
Fifty illegal immigrants have died along the Arizona-Mexico border so far this month.
In this fiscal year (which began in October 2002), 120 illegal immigrants have died in Arizona; last fiscal year it was 145.
Yet according to Rob Bellavia, commander of the U.S. Border Patrol's 43-member Search Trauma and Rescue Squad, for every death along the border, his squad saves at least four lives.
In an attempt to evade the increased border patrols, illegal immigrants have been attempting ever more dangerous routes to enter the United States.
Law Enforcement: Immigrant Extortion Growing Problem Associated Press Newswires, Dateline Phoenix, Arizona, July 29, 2003 There is a growing problem in the Phoenix area of immigrants being held against their will in "drop houses" until their families pay the smuggling fee.
"But increasingly," according to this article, "the immigrants are being held at gunpoint by smugglers until family members come up with money beyond the agreed-upon price."
Rudy Bustamante, a community relations officer for the Bureau of Immigration and Customs Enforcement, is quoted as saying: "The coyotes (people smugglers) are getting greedy."
According to U.S. Attorney Paul Charlton, the lucrative crime of people smuggling is attracting narcotics traffickers and their intimidation tactics.
Charlton is quoted as saying: "It's part of the epic of narcotics smuggling invading the world of immigrant smuggling where people are held against their will and treated as products."
Australia, Vietnam Agree To Stop Boatpeople By Ben Rowse, Agence France-Presse, July 29, 2003 Australian Foreign Minister Alexander Downer says Australia and Vietnam have agreed to find a common solution to prevent any further illegal migration to Australia from Vietnam.
Speaking to reporters shortly after arriving in Hanoi, Downer is quoted as saying: "The Vietnamese have agreed to talk with us and work with us on ideas for how to stop people leaving in the first place...to make sure people in villages understand precisely what they are getting themselves into....
There is no point in trying to get into Australia just as an illegal immigrant, because if you do, you'll be sent back and you'll be sent back quickly."
In Australia, asylum seekers who do enter the country illegally are kept in detention until their cases can be resolved; convicted people smugglers face 20 year prison terms.
A few weeks ago, a boat containing 53 Vietnamese illegal immigrants was intercepted just a few miles from Australia's northwestern coastal town of Port Hedland.
The group is now being held in a detention facility on Christmas Island, some 1,100 miles from the mainland for processing.
Seventeen Chinese Men Charged with Hiding in U.S.-Bound South Korean Ship Associated Press Newswires, Dateline Hong Kong, July 28, 2003 Seventeen Chinese men were jailed when they were found by crew members aboard the South Korean ship Hyundai Kingdom which was docked in Hong Kong and said to be headed for Long Beach, California.
The Chinese had entered Hong Kong legally from Fujian province.
The 17 are accused of trying to board the vessel without the owner's consent.
They face nine months in jail and a fine of up to 1,000 Hong Kong dollars (U.S. $128) if found guilty.
Cyprus and France To Sign Immigrant "Send Back" Agreement Soon Agence France-Presse, July 28, 2003 Cyprus and France will soon sign a bilateral agreement in which Cyprus agrees take back illegal immigrants if it can be proven they departed from Cyprus.
The agreement is similar to those Nicosia has signed with Italy, Syria and Lebanon.
Cyprus, which is scheduled to join the European Union next may, is viewed as Europe's furthermost outpost in the battle against smugglers bringing in illegal immigrants from the Middle East.
Australia Closes Another Detention Centre as Flow of Illegals Dries Up Agence France-Presse, July 28, 2003 The Australian government said it is closing its offshore immigration detention center on Manus Island in Papua New Guinea but will maintain the facility so that it could be reopened at any time.
Manus Island was one of several detention centers used in Australia's two-year-old "Pacific solution" policy which requires mandatory detention of all asylum seekers who arrive illegally in Australia.
Those detained remain so until their often lengthy appeals for asylum are resolved.
In the last year, no illegal immigrants, who often travel by boat from southeast Asia, have landed on Australian shores.
One Killed, 27 Injured When Vehicles Carrying Immigrants Collide Associated Press Newswires, Dateline Blythe, California, July 28, 2003 A van and sport utility vehicle carrying a total of 38 illegal aliens collided and killed one person and injured 27 others on Chuckwalla Valley Road, about 20 miles west of Blythe, California.
&
According to this article, U.S. Border Patrol statistics show that at least 147 immigrants have died in motor vehicle accidents while crossing the U.S.-Mexico border since October 1997.
South Korean Ship's Crew Nabbed Over People Smuggling Kyodo News, July 27, 2003 Japanese police arrested the captain and eight crew members of a South Korean freighter for people smuggling.
Captain Kim Yong Chon and his crew are suspected of assisting 11 people from China, South Korea, Thailand, Bangladesh and Nauru to enter Japan illegally aboard the Janwon-1.
Passport Forger Jailed The Express, July 26, 2003 Shafiq Mumtaz was jailed for five years for operating a 1.5 million pound (U.S. $2,376,012) fake passport factory from a one-bedroom flat in London.
Hundreds of high-quality forged passports were found that could command up to 4,500 pounds (U.S. $7,128) each.
Prosecutor Ian Winter is quoted as saying: "This was a highly professional and skilled operation, making it possible for illegal immigrants, terrorists and criminals to enter and leave Britain whenever they wanted to on what appeared to be genuine British passports."
The 12-Million People Smuggler Daily Mail (London), July 25, 2003 Police have broken up one of the largest people smuggling operations yet uncovered in Belgium.
Mhill Sokoli, an Albanian living in Brussels, and his 24-strong gang are believed to have earned more than 12 million pounds (U.S. $19 million) in less than two years by smuggling up to 12,000 Albanians into Britain.
He reportedly lived modestly in Belgium and invested his profits from the smuggling operation in blocks of flats and businesses in the area of his home in northern Albania.
According to this article, the illegal immigrants were taken by fast motorboat from Albania to Italy.
They then traveled by lorry or train to Brussels, where they were hidden in safehouses until they could be placed on lorries aboard ferries crossing the Channel to England.
Blair Urges China To Curb Trafficking of Illegal Immigrants AFX News, Dateline London, July 25, 2003 Britain's Prime Minister Tony Blair, during his recent talks with Premier Wen Jiaboa in Beijing, urged China to make greater efforts to curb people trafficking.
The United Kingdom would like greater cooperation from China in repatriating illegal workers and providing travel papers.
Cultural Revolution in Norfolk as Chinese Move In To Make a Legal -- or Illegal -- Living By John Vidal, The Guardian (London), July 24, 2003 King's Lynn in England is emerging as a Chinese human smuggling center, according to this article.
It is estimated that last year alone, some 2,000 mainland Chinese appeared in the town and surrounding area.
Authorities believe that most of them are illegal immigrants and most are working as farm laborers.
Britain's Home Office is said to suspect that the Chinese illegal immigrants are being filtered into King's Lynn, Boston, Downham Market, Wisbech and other small towns by London crime syndicates, including Chinese triads and K14s.
The Chinese are then picked up by disreputable local "gangmasters" -- people who employ cheap labor to hire out at a profit -- to do casual labor in the fields or factories.
The Chinese workers are joining those from Lithuania, Russia, Portugal, Mecedonia, Latvia, Poland, Ukraine, and Bulgaria.
When the European Union is enlarged next year, the United Kingdom "expects to be overwhelmed by east Europeans looking for better pay in British agribusiness," the author writes.
An unnamed immigration officer is quoted as saying: "The scale of the problem is one where we have a number of people working for gangmasters, number unknown, who are themselves engaged in illegality of a variety of forms.
Some of it is tax evasion, some of it is benefits, some of it is illegal working through those who are not entitled to work in the UK, some of it is criminality."
CD Melton 
Stuart Melton is quoted as saying 95 percent of British horticulture is dependent on foreign labor and that Chinese workers are "pleasant, polite, obliging and helpful....
They'll keep going all hours if you let them."
Chinese Gangs Get Rich Harvest from Illegal Labourers By Valerie Elliott and Adam Fresco, The Times (London), July 24, 2003 Chinese people smugglers have saturated the market in Britain's urban restaurants, takeaways and rag trade, so they are moving into the countryside to supply cheap labor to farms and foodpacking factories.
According to this article, local farmers are afraid that gangs might take over their businesses.
Stuart Melton, a farmer who uses Chinese workers, is quoted as saying: "We are worried that we are in the firing line of the triads."
According to this article, laborers are paid Pounds 7 (U.S. $11.37) per day.
Most workers are left with only Pounds 2 (U.S. $3.25) per day, because they must pay for board and lodging and a "tax" to the gangsters.
"Gangs have also brought protection rackets to the fields of East Anglia," the authors write, "threatening legal strawberry-pickers with violence unless they pay Pounds 40 (U.S. $65) a week, a large slice of their earnings."
The problem is especially acute in King's Lynn, where the Chinese population has jumped in just a few months from 300 to 5,000.
Gangsters are trying to take over legitimate Chinese businesses there to "launder" their cash.
Death Toll for Migrants Crossing Arizona Desert on Track To Break Records By Anabelle Garay, Associated Press Newswires, Dateline Phoenix, Arizona, July 24, 2003 The scorching temperatures in Arizona's deserts are killing more illegal immigrants this year than last, although the number of attempted border crossings remain about the same - 269,705 this year versus 269,949 during the same time period last year.
In this fiscal year, which began October 1, 2002, at least 123 illegal immigrants have died in Arizona, compared to a total of 145 in all of the previous fiscal year.
The U.S. Border Patrol's Tucson sector has added five rescue towers and increased the number of its medically trained agents.
But illegal border crossers, to evade detection, appear to have shifted their routes into southeast Arizona, where water and shade are scarce.
Garay quotes Frank Amarillas, a spokesman for the Border Patrol's Tucson sector, as saying that people smugglers sometimes lead their clients into desolate areas on the Mexican side before crossing and require them to use caffeine-based drugs so they can walk father faster, but this further dehydrates them.
Chinese Gangs Providing Illegal Immigrant Farm Workers By James Lyons, The Press Association Limited, July 22, 2003 Chinese people smugglers, or "snakeheads, "are developing a lucrative new market providing cheap labour for British agriculture," Lyons writes.
According to his report, several thousand illegal Chinese are working as pickers and packers for as little as 2 pounds (U.S. $3.17) per hour.
Ukraine Detained 3,500 Illegal Immigrants in the First Half of 2003 Agence France-Presse, July 22, 2003 Ukraine officials caught more than 3,500 illegal immigrants in the first half of this year -- 1.7 times more than for the same period last year.
About 85 percent entered through neighboring Russia and most were from China (1,400) and India (698).
The problem of illegal immigration has worsened, according to this article, as Hungary, Poland and Slovakia are due to join the European Union in May 2004.
People Smugglers Inc.; Organized Coyote Mafias Want to Dominate the Transport of Illegal Immigrants to the U.S.
By Tim Padgett (Minatitlan, Mexico), reporting by Hilary Hylton (Auston, Texas) and Dolly Mascarenas (Mexico City) Time International (Canada), July 21, 2003 Mexican people smuggling rings are growing more organized, sophisticated, and violent in defying law enforcement, according to this report.
"In the past, coyote rings tended to be obscure, unorganized and amateurish mom-and-pop operations," according to the authors of this article.
"Today they're acquiring 'all the indicia of more corporate, organized crime,' says Michael Shelby, the U.S. Attorney in Houston, who is prosecuting 14 alleged coyotes in the case of 19 illegal immigrants found dead in a tractor trailer in May in Victoria, Texas."
According to Douglas Massey, a University of Pennsylvania sociologist and immigration expert, the Mexican people-smuggling industry grosses more than $5 billion per year, compared with about $20 billion for Mexico's drug cartels.
Narco-traffickers often force illegal immigrants to carry drugs.
Massey estimates that the increasingly efficient Mexican people smugglers have moved 3.5 million illegal immigrants into the United States last year, compared with about 2.5 million per year for most of the 1990s.
The authors write: "The larger numbers mean that when things go wrong, more migrants are left to die on Texas highways and in Arizona deserts.
In each of the past two years, more than 400 migrants perished along both sides of the border, double the rate in the 1990s....
What's more, fights between rival smuggling cells over turf and clientele have added a layer of violent crime that Mexico and the border region, a critical corridor for U.S. homeland security, can ill afford....
"Arrests of U.S.-Mexico border smugglers are up some 40 percent this year, but prosecutors concede they are still looking for the big bosses," the authors say.
Italy Calls for EU Policy To Fight Illegal Immigration Dow Jones International News, Dateline Rome, July 21, 2003 Italy, which hold the European Union rotating presidency, is pushing for an EU-wide immigration policy.
The Italian proposal calls for a multinational patrol force along Mediterranean coasts.
It also calls for two command centers to be established: One in Spain to coordinate operations in Western Europe; the other in Cyprus for the Eastern part of the continent.
The costs would be shared by all EU members.
Thousands of illegal immigrants flood Italy each year; most, however, continue on for Western Europe.
Undermining American Workers: Record Numbers of Illegal Immigrants Are Pulling Wages Down for the Poor and Pushing Taxes Higher By Fred Dickey, Los Angeles Times Magazine, July 20, 2003 This long feature story argues that the growing number of illegal immigrants is making America's own poor more destitute.
Dickey writes: "The only leverage unskilled workers have is scarcity of labor."
But the estimated 8 million illegal immigrants (half are thought to be Mexican) in the United States are preventing unskilled citizens from working their way up the economic ladder, he says.
Illegal immigrants have no bargaining power with their employers, so wages get driven down, he writes.
Dickey acknowledges that many illegal immigrants are hard workers, but he disputes the perception that they do work most Americans refuse to do themselves.
He quotes Roy Beck, executive director of Numbers USA Education and Research Foundation, a Washington, D.C. organization devoted to immigration control, as saying: "Americans won't work like slaves, like serfs.
Americans want to be paid and treated fairly."
According to Dickey: "Illegal labor has led to other illegalities.
The most pervasive is the untaxed cash transaction."
This "underground economy," he says, pushes some businesses to compete by also cutting legal corners and increases the tax burden on honest taxpayers.
Immigration Fraud Witnesses Tell of Fake Romance By Carol D. Leoning, The Washington Post, July 18, 2003 Two brothers have been accused of paying young people $8,000 each to sign immigration papers saying they intended to sponsor their Chinese bride or groom to come to the United States.
Federal prosecutors say David and Michael Cheng charged families in China $20,000 to $60,000 each to line up phony fianc�s in the United States so that their sons or daughters could get visas.
The two operated out of restaurant kitchens located in the District of Colombia, Silver Spring, Maryland and Chesapeake Beach, Virginia.
They allegedly smuggled more than two dozen Chinese young people into the country during the 1990s.
Among those who testified against the brothers were several Chinese-born U.S. citizens; some were students at the University of Maryland.
After signing the immigration papers, they were given tickets to Fujian Province in China.
Once in China, they had romantic pictures taken with their "intended spouses" and learned about the families.
One of the witnesses, Chung-Ping Chen, told the court: "None of us knew the girls.
We were just told to act happy for the pictures."
Back in the United States, they were required to write love letters and make phone calls to their prospective "spouses."
The phone bills for the calls were turned over to the Cheng brothers as proof of the "romance."
If convicted, the brothers could face between five and 25 years in prison.
Six Desert Migrant Deaths Push Sector Total Past Last Year's Rate Associated Press Newswires, Dateline Tucson, Arizona, July 14, 2003 The bodies of six illegal immigrants were found in different parts of the southern Arizona desert over the past weekend, bringing the total for the U.S. Border Patrol's Tucson sector to 82 for this fiscal year.
Seventy-eight had died in the same time frame last year.
The Tucson Sector includes most of the Arizona-Mexico border.
Sex for Sale: Russian Mafia Muscles in on Ireland's Red Light Industry Irish Independent, July 12, 2003 The greater integration of Europe has made things easier for criminals, according to this article.
Case in point: The Russian Mafia has moved into Ireland.
"Russian Mafia," however, is a catch-all term that includes Lithuanians, Estonians, Poles, Georgians, Romanians, Russians and others.
They are now fueling the sex industry in Ireland.
Few of the women, according to this article, are forcibly trafficked into Ireland; most are "free agents" who are in the business for the money.
The Russian Mafia has taken its lead from Chinese gangs, according to this article.
An unidentified "insider" is quoted as saying: "The Chinese set up a system of smuggling heroin into Ireland through British airports, especially Liverpool.
They would use Irish down-and-outs.
They'd clean-up the Irish couriers, dress them in new clothes and send them through.
Though observation and tip-offs, they knew which flights out of Liverpool and which arrivals in Dublin would have the least security and customs."
Wave of Immigrants Breaks Against Italian Island's Shore By Frank Bruni, The New York Times, Dateline Lampedusa, Italy, July 11, 2003 Lampedusa is a tiny Italian island just 12 miles square located 70 miles north east from Africa.
Its resident population is just 6,000, but in 2002, the island was flooded with some 6,350 illegal immigrants from Africa.
So far this year, 4,200 illegal immigrants have reached its shores.
This story describes how the islanders try to deal with the human deluge, which begins as soon as the weather seems conducive to the hundreds of tiny boats carrying desperate illegal immigrants trying to reach Italy and the other developed countries of the European Union.
Italian authorities say hundreds die in the crossing attempt, but only a small fraction of the bodies are recovered.
"I Am an Activist, Not a Smuggler" By Barclay Crawford, The Australian, July 11, 2003 Van Hoa Nguyen says he is an activist, not a people smuggler.
Nguyen is accused of helping guide a boat carrying 53 Vietnamese asylum-seekers into Port Hedland, Western Australia, last week.
According to Nguyen, who arrived in Australia in 1995 and is now an Australian citizen, the people on the boat were his relatives and others who had been involved in a movement called Luc Luong Doi Khang, or "Opposing Force," which he supervised in eastern Vietnam.
Speaking through his wife Phung Thuy Tran, Nguyen told media that many of the people in the movement have been killed and that "the Vietnamese regime is evil."
Nguyen has been charged by the Australian government with people smuggling; if found guilty he could face 20 years in jail and a $220,000 file.
He is now being held in the maximum-security Hakea Remand Centre in Perth, while the 53 Vietnamese are being processed for their asylum claims on Christmas Island.
Here Comes the Bride.
Again, and Again...
By Susan Saulny, The New York Times, July 10, 2003 and Six Women Charged with Illegally Obtaining Marriage Licenses By Samuel Maull, Associated Press Newswires, Dateline New York, July 10, 2003 Six New York City women were charged with fraudulently obtaining 43 marriage licenses to wed illegal immigrants, thus allowing the men to get green cards and remain in the United States.
The women reportedly received up to $1,000 for each marriage.
One woman -- Dezerrie Cortes, 40 -- received 27 marriage licenses between 1984 and 2002.
The men she married were from Ecuador, the Dominican Republic, Peru, Pakistan, Colombia, Mexico, as well as other countries.
Municipal and county databases on marriage in New York State are not linked, nor are the computerized records connected state to state.
Robert M. Morgenthau, the Manhattan district attorney, is quoted as saying: "This opens the door to a lot of other fraud and expense for the U.S. taxpayer."
Border Patrol Reaches Farther in Search of Immigration Violations Associated Press Newswires, Dateline Lebanon, New Hampshire, July 9, 2003 U.S. Border Patrol agents are now setting up check points farther from the Canadian border.
The hope is to catch people who successfully slipped over the border and are attempting to travel farther into the United States.
People who are stopped and are not U.S. citizens will be required to show immigration papers.
Three Suspected Illegal Immigrants Die this Weekend; Deaths Up to 69 Associated Press Newswires, Dateline Tucson, Arizona, July 8, 2003 Three suspected illegal immigrants were found dead of heat exposure in the Tucson sector, which includes most of the Arizona-Mexico border.
The recent deaths bring the total to 69 since October 1, 2002.
In the same time period, Border Patrol agents rescued 238 people from life-threatening situations.
Border Agents Report Success with Giant Scanners Associated Press Newswires, Dateline Falfurrias, Texas, July 8, 2003 Two $500,000 giant gamma ray scanners are proving their worth at inland highway checkpoints north of the Mexican border.
Since their placement at the end of May, the drive-through machines detected 20 illegal immigrants, 812 pounds of marijuana and 56 pounds of cocaine valued at $2.4 million.
British FBI May Be Set Up to Fight Organised Crime By Richard Ford, The Times, July 8, 2003 The British government is considering the establishment of an agency that would be similar to the United State's Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI).
The proposed British agency would be dedicated to dealing with organised crime, especially that which deals with illegal immigration and smuggling.
Prime Minister Tony Blair is quoted as saying: "Some have argued that the time has come to bring together some or all of the national law enforcement agencies which currently investigate serious organised crime and create a new dedicated national agency which could share intelligence, expertise and investigative talents.
We are currently looking at this idea...."
Gangmasters Who Reap the Human Harvest By Valerie Elliott, The Times (London), July 8, 2003 This story discusses the "murky world" of "gangmasters" who supply labor to Britain's farms and packing houses.
At least 2,000 gangmasters operate in the United Kingdom.
Some operate legally, but others are involved in the smuggling of illegal immigrants, the forgery of passports and documents, and the arranging of false benefit claims.
Most of the United Kingdom's legal guest farm workers come from Eastern Europe, India and China and stay for six months.
But there are an estimated 75,000 illegal workers in the country, and many are exploited by their gangmasters who pack them into neglected properties and take a cut of the workers' wages.
Immigrant Workers: Facts and Figures Bangkok Post, July 8, 2003 In Thailand, there are at least two million immigrant workers from Burma, Laos and Cambodia.
Of the total, about 89 percent are from Burma.
Only a small fraction of immigrant workers are registered with the government, and that number is declining: 568,249 registered workers in 2001; 353,274 in 2002.
The number of registered workers, according to this article, is declining, because most immigrant workers feel registration does not protect them from abuse and exploitation, nor does it provide them with better work conditions and welfare.
Thailand's worker registration fee is 4,450 baht (U.S. $106).
Of this the worker must pay 1,200 baht (U.S. $29) per year to be under the 30-baht (U.S. 72 cents) health program.
But most registered workers don't use the program because of communications problems.
Chinese People Smuggler Sentenced to Life in Prison Associated Press Newswires, Dateline Beijing, July 8, 2003 Song Yuanri, the Chinese leader of a people-smuggling attempt that lead to the deaths of 25 people, was sentenced to life in prison by a court in the eastern port city of Ningbo, south of Shanghai.
Between May and October 2001, Song arranged to smuggle 180 Chinese illegal immigrants from Ningbo to South Korea.
On October 6, 2001, an attempt to move 60 illegal immigrants ended in disaster when at least 25 suffocated while hiding inside the hull of a South Korean fishing boat.
According to South Korean police reports, the crew dumped the bodies at sea.
South Korean police detained and returned home the surviving illegal immigrants, and eight South Korean fishermen were arrested.
Border Officials Monitor Cabs for Illegal Immigrants Associated Press Newswires, Dateline Yuma, Arizona, July 7, 2003 U.S. Border Patrol officials say that significant numbers of illegal immigrants are using taxicabs to travel north after they arrive in San Luis.
Six cab drivers have been prosecuted on smuggling charges since October 1, 2002.
Hungary Breaks Up Chinese People-Smuggling Ring Agence France-Presse, July 7, 2003 Hungarian officials have broken up a 21-member people smuggling gang led by Chinese.
Jozsef Tanyik, spokesman for the Nyirbator border patrol on Hungary's northeastern border with the Ukraine, is quoted as saying: "The smuggling ring specialized in transporting Chinese citizens through Hungary and on to Western Europe, especially Germany."
Plight of the Illegal Poles Working on Britain's Farms for Slave Wages By Tasha Kosviner, The Evening Standard, July 7, 2003 This feature story focuses on Poles (but includes mention of people from the Baltic states, Ukraine, Russia, Nepal, Tibet and China) who are lured to England with the promise of good-paying jobs only to find themselves exploited by criminal gangs and working -- if they are even lucky enough to get jobs -- in slave-like conditions on farms and at food packing houses.
One young Polish woman called Krystyna, for example, after answering a newspaper advertisement simply saying "Work in England," paid more than U.S. $300 to middlemen to be put into a filthy house with other migrant workers.
She was required to pay for her own food and charged U.S. $50 per week for rent.
Each day, a boss would pick out a few people for farm work; the others just waited, trying to meet their expenses.
Krystyna, who originally had been promised work at an Oxford flower farm and wages of up to U.S. $116 per day, found herself forced into harvesting herbs on a Norfolk farm for less than U.S. $30 per day
.
Dr. Jan Mokrzycki, president of the Federation of Poles in Great Britain, is quoted as saying that his organization is approached daily by young Poles who have lost everything to gangs promising them work.
Most won't go to the police for fear of being deported.
In 2001, police and immigration authorities removed 49,000 illegal workers from the United Kingdom; most were caught trying to enter the country.
Snakehead Empress Who Made Millions Trafficking in Misery: Sister Ping, the Most Ruthless People-Smuggler in Europe, Is Behind Bars -- But Her Violent, Lucrative Trade in Human Cargo Thrives By Tony Thompson, The Observer, July 6, 2006 This feature story discusses Jing Ping Chen (also known as "Sister Ping"), who is believed to have smuggled more than 200,000 Chinese into the United Kingdom.
Her operation is believed to have been linked to the deaths of 58 Chinese found in an air-tight truck at Dover in June 2000.
The National Crime Intelligence Service says organized immigration crime is one of the fastest-growing areas of the underworld.
An estimated 600,000 people enter the European Union illegally each year and about 80 percent are brought in by criminal gangs, according to this article.
See full text of this story on the Guardian Unlimited web site.
Libya, Italy Agree on Steps to Combat Illegal Immigration AFX International Focus, Dateline Tripoli, July 4, 2003 Italian Interior Minister Giuseppe Pisanu and Libya's Justice Minister Mohammed Mosrati signed an agreement for greater cooperation in dealing with people smuggling.
The accord says "Italy commits itself to grant the Libyan authorities every possible assistance" to fight people smuggling and provides for "joint investigations between the specialised agencies of the two countries to fight against criminal organisations."
Police Charge Australian Man with Smuggling Vietnamese on Boat Agence France-Presse, July 3, 2003 Australian police have charged an Australian man of Vietnamese descent with people smuggling in the incident that brought a boatload of 53 Vietnamese to the waters near Australia's west coast.
Australian officials are investigating how close the boat came to the Australian shore to determine how the applications for asylum will be processed.
People who land outside the "migration zone" are not allowed to appeal their cases in Australian courts.
But according to Immigration Minister Philip Ruddock, the group may have reached the migration zone.
Ruddock is quoted as saying: "If they are within the migration zone, then the more complex, time-consuming and expensive arrangements will be engaged in which people will be able to appeal decisions to the Refugee Review Tribunal and probably to the courts if they wish."
The Vietnamese have been moved for processing to Christmas Island, which is 1,100 miles from the Australian mainland..
The boat was the first to nearly reach Australian shores since 2001.
Some Australian officials are blaming a lack of resources and manpower for the boat's having evaded air and sea patrols before it was finally stopped just a few miles off the northwestern coastal town of Port Hedland.
Smuggling Gang Transported Hundreds of Asians Westward CTK (Ceska Tiskova Kancelar) Business News, Dateline Karlovy Vary, West Bohemia, July 3, 2003 Ten members -- eight Czechs and two Indians -- of an international human smuggling gang were put on trail July 2 at Cheb, west Bohemia.
They are accused criminal conspiracy and illegal border crossing and could face up to ten years in prison if found guilty.
The gang allegedly handled 67 cases of people-smuggling involving over 500 illegal immigrants from Asia, most from India and Sri Lanka.
The illegal aliens were put in vans at the main rail station in Prague and driven to the border with Germany and Austria.
Many of the gang's clients, however, ended up in the hands of the police and sent back.
Border Patrol Installs Rescue Beacons Associated Press Newswires, Dateline Tucson, Arizona, July 2, 2003 A new beacon system the U.S. Border Patrol is installing has already saved three lives.
Illegal immigrants lost in the dessert in Arizona will be able to activate the beacons to bring help.
So far, 3 of 20 beacons have been installed and have been used by dehydrated illegals who were given water and food and returned to Mexico.
Border Patrol to Increase Presence Along Canadian Border by Half Associated Press Newswires, Dateline Washington, July 2, 2003 The U.S. Border Patrol will increase to 1,000 the number of agents patrolling the U.S.-Canada border.
Most of the veteran agents will be shifted voluntarily from current assignments along the southwestern border.
Robert Bonner, commissioner for the Bureau of Customs and Border Protection, is quoted as saying: "This is an important step in increasing security along our northern border and is necessary given the continuing threat of terrorism."
Australia Says Refugee Boat Does Not Indicate Resumption of People Smuggling Associated Press Newswires, Dateline Canberra, Australia, July 2, 2003 Australian authorities say the boat of 54 Vietnamese asylum seekers they intercepted this week does not signal a resumption of people smuggling between Indonesia and Australia.
The Vietnamese are said to have embarked for their journey to Australia from Java.
The group will be sent to a detention camp on Christmas Island while their applications for refugee status are processed by international authorities.
This boat was the first to get near the Australian coast in the last 18 months.
In the past two years, Australia and Indonesia have stopped 3,000 asylum seekers from reaching Australian shores.
Accused Alien Smuggling Kingpin and Financier Faces U.S. Prosecution Press release from the U.S. Department of Homeland Security, July 1, 2003 Chui Ping Cheng, a Chinese woman accused of having smuggled thousands of Chinese into the United States, has been extradited from Hong Kong to face justice in the United States.
See the full text of the DHS news release.
Australia Intercepts 54 Vietnamese Boat People Reuters News, Dateline Canberra, July 1, 2003 Australian officials intercepted a boat carrying 54 Vietnamese.
Found off Australia's remote west coast, the asylum seekers will be taken to a refugee camp on Christmas Island, 1,450 miles west of Darwin.
The Vietnamese are the first arrivals since late 2001, when Australia tightened up its already tough border controls.
Illegal arrivals are sent to remote camps, often for years, while their claims for asylum are processed.
Just Whose Problems Are They? By Dana Wilkie, California Journal, July 1, 2003 This story is a long feature discussing the fate of SCAAP -- the State Criminal Alien Assistance Program, passed in 1994 by the U.S. Congress to provide federal funds to help pay state and local costs for incarcerating criminal aliens.
According to this article, the Bush administration is hoping to reduce or eliminate the program.
Some interesting statistics cited in this piece: Nationally, illegal aliens make up 12.4 percent of the inmates in state prisons; nationwide, states, counties and cities pay an estimated $1.5 billion to $2.5 billion each year to incarcerate illegal immigrants; states with the largest illegal immigrant populations are California, New York, Texas, Florida, Arizona and New Jersey; California is home to some 2.3 million of the nation's estimated 5.8 million illegal immigrants; California expects to spend $574 million this year to incarcerate 14,492 illegal alien criminals; in Los Angeles County, nearly one out of every four prisoners is an illegal immigrant; Los Angeles County spent $90 million last year to incarcerate 4,000 criminal aliens.
Sri Lankan Police Arrest 254 Pakistani Would-Be Illegal Immigrants Associated Press Newswires, Dateline Colombo, Sri Lanka, July 1, 2003 In its biggest ever crackdown, Sri Lankan police arrested 254 Pakistanis who were allegedly preparing to illegally migrate to Italy.
If found guilty of violating Sri Lanka's immigration laws, those arrested could be sentenced to five years in prison and fined 200,000 rupees (U.S. $2,080).
Lately, illegal immigrants from Pakistan and Bangladesh have been using Sri Lanka as a transit country in their effort to reach the West.
Every year hundreds of Sri Lankans try to reach Europe and the United States in search of jobs.
Suspected People Smuggler Jailed Until Swedish Supreme Court Hears Extradition Associated Press Newswires, Dateline Stockholm, Sweden, July 1, 2003 Swedish authorities have decided to keep Khaleed Shnayf Daoed in jail until a decision is made as to whether to extradite him to Australia.
Daoed was arrested in Sweden in May at the request of the Australian government.
Australian officials want Daoed to face charges in their country of people smuggling.
He is believed to have been a part of an operation that led to the October 2001 drowning deaths of an estimated 374 asylum seekers crammed in a boat that sank as it headed to Australia from Indonesia.
If found guilty, Daoed could be sentenced to as many as 20 years in prison.
_________________________________________________________________
*See: IN THE NEWS - most recent articles for 2003 _________________________________________________________________
Journal Articles and Book Excerpts _________________________________________________________________ _________________________________________________________________
This site is produced and maintained by the U.S. Department of State's Bureau of International Information Programs (usinfo.state.gov).
Links to other Internet sites should not be construed as an endorsement of the views contained therein.
Back To Top blue rule IIP Home | Index to This Site | Webmaster | Search This Site | Archives | U.S. Department of State
Sorry, you need a JavaScript capable browser to get the best from this page
