Statement of Jack Ryan, Senior Research Associate National Treasury Employees Union Testimony Before the Subcommittee on Social Security of the House Committee on Ways and Means Hearing on "The Future of Social Security for this Generation and the Next" - the Findings of the 1997 Board of Trustees and Different Generational Perspectives on Social Security Reform May 22, 1997 Mr. Chairman, on behalf of the National Taxpayers Union Foundation and all other organizations who have struggled over the years to put Social Security reform on the national agenda, thank you for holding these hearings and inviting recommendations for review.
The financial status of the Social Security program reveals that absent any major reform, the aging of our society is likely to have catastrophic consequences on the after-tax living standard for future generations.
When one considers the looming debt of $5.3 trillion and the surge in mandatory spending, from 33% of all federal spending in 1963 to 66% in 1993, it is evident that major reform is necessary, sooner rather than later.
Despite the overwhelming evidence that the costs of Social Security will expand to unsustainable levels with the retirement of the baby-boom generation, the notion still persists that Social Security is sustainable with only minor reforms.
In 1996, the Trustees reported that there is ample time to address projected funding shortfalls in the Social Security system.
I disagree with this notion and testify to the fact that the longer reform is put off the larger the sacrifices will be for our children.
From the competing alternatives suggested by the Advisory Council on Social Security reform the Personal Security Accounts Plan is the most intriguing.
According to the Council, this plan "...envisions a smaller public system in which workers would rely more on private pensions, individual retirement accounts, and other savings."
Mr. Chairman, aging societies should save more, not less.
For this is the best way to increase the size of the economy and hence to ensure that future retirement claims do not come at the expense of the living standards of future workers.
With this in mind, the National Taxpayers Union Foundation developed the National Thrift Plan with the goal of demonstrating the feasibility of gradually shifting Social Security to a funded system of privately owned and managed savings accounts.
This will increase retirement security and reduce pressure on spending and taxes.
It will also stimulate the economy by raising the savings rate, while retaining and building upon the popular features of the existing Social Security system.
The National Thrift Plan contains a requirement that every worker set aside five percent of his or her earnings into a personal savings account.
Unlike Social Security, workers would own this money.
Since the money remains in control of the worker, it can be placed in a wide variety of investments and even passed on to heirs at death.
Initially, workers would continue to pay Social Security taxes to maintain the commitment to current retirees.
Over time, however, tax-funded Social Security benefits would phase out, and taxes would be cut accordingly.
To minimize hardship on the working poor, the government would help with dollar-for-dollar matching contributions.
Thus, the National Thrift Plan would, once implemented, offer a five percent contribution instead of a projected Social Security tax rate of 20 percent or more if the system is allowed to continue unreformed.
Equally important, workers would own and control personal savings account contributions, whereas under an unreformed Social Security system, proceeds would be left to the uncontrollable whims of politicians.
We conservatively project that this plan will boost savings by 1.2 percent of GDP by the year 2001; by 2.6 percent of GDP by 2010; and by 5.9 percent of GDP by 2065.
Within 25 years there will be a pool of savings growing tax-free in individually directed Personal Savings Account equivalent to 50% of GDP.
We estimate by 2050 productivity will be 26 percent higher than it would be otherwise.
No less important, every worker at every income level will retire with substantially more income than would be the case under the current Social Security system.
And by the 2030s, when you would be sharply raising payroll taxes under Social Security today, we would be cutting them under the National Thrift Plan.
One key point to remember is that every worker at every income level would retire with substantially more income than would be the case under Social Security--two to three times greater over a lifetime.
the entire transition would be achieved without adding to total federal debt obligations in any year, a key test that many other reform plans fail to meet.
This plan would also restore the actuarial balance of the trust funds over the 75 year period ending in 2070.
In contrast, the Advisory Commissions Maintain Benefits Plan recommendation, which continues the same Social Security system, does not restore the trust fund balance.
The subcommittee should consider the following facts and fundamental flaws associated with the current Social Security system.
The World Bank concludes that the current pay-as-you-go system "... inevitably produces low costs and large positive transfers to the first covered generations and produces negative transfers for later cohorts because of system maturation, population aging, increased labor market distortions and incentives to evade."
In my opinion, the current Social Security system is not capable of equitably meeting the future demands of beneficiaries and providing relief from pending tax hikes.
The Maintain Benefits Plan would continue this inequitable method of financing, whereas, the Personal Security Accounts plan would attempt to reduce these inequities by taking advantage of a better rate of return in the private market.
The compelling reasons why Social Security should be reformed are as follows: First, the current Social Security system will impose an extremely heavy tax burden on future generations.
According to the most plausible Trustees estimates, the cost to future workers to fund social programs as a percent of taxable payroll will rise by 6 to 9 percentage points over the next thirty-five years, or by 50 to 80 percent.
When the employer match is taken into account, the Trustees project that "the current 15.3% payroll tax will probably require doubling or tripling to 30-40% by the time todays young workers retire."
This undoubtedly would crush our economy.
Of special note is that 16 out of the past 20 Congresses have implemented a payroll tax increase for social programs and have raised the payroll tax 261% over this time period.
Second, there is a growing imbalance in the returns from the Social Security system.
Social Securitys popularity traditionally stemmed from its generous rate of return.
But now, for the first time, large numbers of future beneficiaries will have to pay more into the system than they will get back.
Unfortunately, the federal government has promised to todays adults $8.3 trillion in Social Security benefits beyond the value of taxes they are expected to pay into the system.
This translates into the largest inter-generational transfer of wealth in American history.
Currently, Social Securitys rate of return is only 2.9 percent, compared to 9.3 percent in the private market.
Simplified, this means a 50-year-old person must pay $1,000 to get $1,900 worth of benefits at age 75.
In a private market, that person would only have had to pay $206 to get the same benefits.
Similarly, consider the following rate of return facts from Eugene Steuerle of the Urban Institute: "Even [when] assuming a moderate 6 percent real rate of return (and there has not been a single 30-year period since 1926 in which the stock market rose less than 6 percent after inflation), a married earner born in 1955 making $60,000 in 1993 dollars would get $750,000 less from Social Security than he or she paid in.
Under the current system, a $25,000-a-year worker loses more than $260,000."
Economists realize that this lack of investment earnings is substantially contributing to the demise of the Social Security system.
In essence, the lack of investment earnings that could be experienced in the private market is fueling the need for more taxes and the reduction in future benefits.
This leads to a final concern about Social Security.
There is now an emerging consensus that in order to remain competitive in the future, America needs to raise its savings rate.
It is widely believed by economists that the payroll taxes along with the "pay-as-you-go" benefit structure, discourages thrift.
In conclusion, when determining the need for Social Security reform, I recommend that the subcommittee fully consider the issues of taxation, transfer of wealth, thrift and the contribution rate of return.
Future generations can not afford the status quo.
Reforms must be implemented today to ensure an adequate retirement policy for tomorrows beneficiaries.
In my opinion, the Social Security reform debate should focus on the principles behind the Personal Security Accounts plan, which if implemented, would establish a system that instills the value of thrift, limits taxation and provides a better rate of return for future generations.
Any reform plan must honor current Social Security obligations while providing a sound retirement policy for younger Americans.
Mr. Chairman, thank you for holding this hearing and for the opportunity to testify on the National Thrift Plan and Social Security reform.
___________________________________
NATIONAL THRIFT PLAN PROJECT
REVISED FINAL REPORT
by Neil Howe and Richard Jackson
NATIONAL TAXPAYERS UNION FOUNDATION
CENTER FOR PUBLIC POLICY AND CONTEMPORARY ISSUES
November 15, 1996
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY
On June 21, 1996, the National Taxpayers Union Foundation and the Center for Public Policy and Contemporary Issues at the University of Denver released a detailed "National Thrift Plan" to transition from the current Social Security system to a fully funded system of individually owned and privately invested Personal Thrift Accounts (or PTAs).
If implemented, this plan would:
Restore confidence in the Social Security system by giving all workers personal ownership and management control of their own private accounts while also affording more generous protection against poverty in old age than the current system provides.
Eliminate Social Security's projected cash deficits without raising general purpose taxes and without adding to total federal debt obligations in any year.
Raise net national savings by 1.2 percent of GDP by the year 2000--an increase that will double to 2.6 percent of GDP by 2010 and quintuple to 5.9 percent by 2065.
Raise productivity and average wages by 13 to 26 percent over official Social Security projections by 2050--with even the upper-estimate being conservative.
Pay much greater benefits to workers at all income levels.
By the end of the projection period, lifetime benefits will be two to three times greater than under baseline.
Improve the rate of return on contributions.
From 2005 on, newly retiring workers will be receiving a higher payback ratio than under current law.
By 2037, new average-earning retirees will be better off by even the strictest measure of the benefits they are receiving in return for the total contributions they have made.
The National Thrift Plan differs from many other proposals to reform Social Security in the following crucial respects.
First, it is not "privatization."
PTAs will be personally owned--but they will also be mandatory and subject to use restrictions.
Second, it does not abandon Social Security's commitment to providing a floor of poverty protection.
Finally, it fully pays for the transition cost to a funded system without accounting gimmicks and without raising general purpose taxes or adding to total federal debt obligations.
All of the plan's savings will come from reform of the Social Security system itself.
Specifically, the National Thrift Plan would:
Require every worker to contribute 5 percent of payroll to his or her PTA.
Phase out FICA-funded Social Security benefits for future beneficiaries.
Require modest sacrifices from current beneficiaries by increasing benefit taxation, freezing COLAs for one year, and cutting future COLAs by 0.5 percentage points.
Abolish the Social Security trust fund.
All annual cash surpluses of Social Security revenues over benefit outlays will be refunded to workers' PTAs.
Once the total PTA contribution rate reaches 8 percent of payroll, the current FICA tax will be cut.
Provide a generous government savings match to the PTAs of low-income workers.
Reinforce the social safety net by guaranteeing every American aged 62 and over an income equal to 100 percent of the poverty line.
___________________________________
NATIONAL THRIFT PLAN PROJECT
REVISED FINAL REPORT
by Neil Howe and Richard Jackson
November 15, 1996
In the fall of 1995, the Center for Public Policy and Contemporary Issues at the University of Denver and the National Taxpayers Union Foundation initiated a major Social Security reform project.
Its purpose is to develop a viable plan to transition from the current pay-as-you-go Social Security system to a fully-funded system of individually owned and privately invested Personal Thrift Accounts (PTAs).
This final report explains the rationale for this reform, describes the main features of our proposed "National Thrift Plan," and summarizes the plan's quantitative effects on public-sector budgets, on the national economy, and on individual workers in different cohorts and income groups.
The final report is organized as follows: I.
The Problem; II.
The Solution; III.
The Plan; IV. Model and Assumptions; and V.
The Results.
I. THE PROBLEM
Just a few years ago, major restructuring of Social Security was practically unmentionable.
Today, a rapidly growing number of voices--from federal commissions, public-interest lobbies, private research institutes, universities, and even the mainstream media--are openly weighing radical reform proposals.
Meanwhile, opinion surveys show low and falling levels of public trust in Social Security as it now stands.
Three-quarters of all Americans doubt that Social Security will be able to fulfill its promises to new retirees within twenty years--and about two-thirds agree that Social Security "is in need of major reform now."
Why is this happening? And why now? There are four important reasons:
First, there is the mounting concern that the current Social Security system will impose a very heavy burden on tomorrow's workforce.
According to the most plausible 1995 Trustees' estimates (the "intermediate" and "high-cost" projections), the cost of Social Security as a percent of taxable payroll will rise by 6 to 9 percentage points over the next thirty-five years--or by 50 to 80 percent.
Second, there is growing worry that the current system--if it doesn't crush future workers--will betray tomorrow's retirees.
To keep Social Security outlays from exceeding earmarked tax revenues in 2030, we would, in that year, have to enact a roughly one-quarter to one-third across-the-board benefit cut.
Most Americans are not prepared for large cuts in Social Security.
Under half of the private-sector labor force participates in an employer pension plan.
In 1993, according to a Merrill Lynch analysis of Census data, half of all U.S. families had less than $1,000 in net financial assets; even among adults in their late fifties, the age workers are staring directly at retirement, median savings are still shy of $10,000.
This leads to a third concern about Social Security.
There is now a growing consensus that America needs to raise its savings rate.
More than two-thirds of Americans agree strongly that "government should provide more incentives to save for retirement"; among adults in their forties, the share is four-fifths.
Yet economists widely believe that Social Security's pay-as-you-go benefit structure (entirely aside from its impact on the federal budget) discourages thrift.
Nor is this just a U.S. worry.
Reformers worldwide are turning away from unfunded retirement systems precisely because of their tendency to undermine private savings rates.
Finally, there is the widespread disappointment about Social Security's declining rate of return on contributions.
Today, for the first time in the history of Social Security, large categories of newly retiring workers are due to get back less than the market value of prior contributions, even when that value is computed at the lowest plausible interest rate.
Everybody is beginning to understand that in future years these "market losers" will comprise a steadily growing share of all beneficiaries.
Reforms that merely make adjustments to the current Social Security system cannot address these concerns.
Yes, future hikes in payroll taxes or future cuts in promised benefits might narrow or even close Social Security's funding gap.
But the public rightly perceives the prospect of large tax hikes or benefit cuts as part of the problem, not the solution.
Conventional reforms, moreover, cannot alter Social Security's built-in bias against thrift--and they would actually worsen the cascading pattern of generational inequity that destines each new cohort of participants to receive lower returns than the last.
This is bad news for a program predicated on the chain-letter notion that everyone can be a winner.
Many critics used to think that Social Security's windfall paybacks were a good argument for reform: Why not cut benefits and still leave everyone a winner? That argument fell on deaf ears.
Ironically, the opposite argument may now turn out to be more persuasive: Why not rethink a system that cannot possibly offer the same personal retirement security and the same long-term rate of return as genuine economic savings?
It is this logic that is leading many to advocate a radical solution: transforming Social Security into a funded system of personally owned defined contribution accounts.
Such a system would differ from today's in two fundamental respects.
Social Security is now a pay-as-you-go program, meaning that current payroll contributions, after a brief stop at the U.S. Treasury, go directly to pay current benefits.
In a funded system, payroll contributions would be invested, create net new wealth, and thus generate an economic return over time.
Popular mythology to the contrary, Social Security is a tax and transfer program in which participants earn no contractual claim to future benefits.
In a system of personally owned accounts, all contributions would remain the property of participants.
One obvious advantage of such a system is that it would allow higher benefit levels and rates of return.
While the long-term rate of return in a pay-as-you-go Social Security system is limited to population growth plus productivity growth, the rate of return in a funded system is equal to the marginal product of capital, which (even when adjusted for risk) is typically much higher.
Another obvious advantage is the higher rate of national savings--and thus ultimately higher rates of productivity and living standard growth.
A funded system benefits workers not only as future retirees, but also as wage earners.
Any economic income generated by savings that is not captured by the return to capital must show up (to the extent the savings are invested domestically) as higher labor earnings
There are other benefits as well.
By requiring that individuals save for their own retirement, a system of personally owned accounts would institutionalize the habit of thrift, and this might create an accelerator effect that further boosts national savings.
Most economists agree that the FICA is a tax--and that taxes distort labor markets.
By reducing (or eliminating) this tax, this reform would increase labor supply and hence economic growth.
Finally, there is the issue of retirement security.
Ironically, Social Security was originally set up because people trusted the government more than financial markets.
Today, most Americans under fifty feel just the opposite.
They know that Congress will necessarily renege on unsustainable pay-as-you-go benefit promises--but that no politician can take away personally owned assets invested in the real economy.
The two principles underlying this reform--funding and personal ownership--are equally important.
There are some who suggest that we move toward a more funded system without giving participants personal ownership of their savings.
This approach, which calls for investing part or all of the current Social Security surplus outside of government, does nothing to guarantee personal retirement security: What Congress promises it can still take away.
It is also questionable whether it would amount to genuine funding--that is, the creation of net new economic wealth.
Since reformers don't specify how government would make up for lost FICA revenue, privately invested Social Security surpluses may simply be canceled out dollar for dollar by a larger federal deficit.
More generally, there is no institutional means to prevent Congress from diverting FICA taxes to current consumption at some future date.
Only personal ownership of contributions can do that.
Another school of thought advocates personal ownership, but not necessarily funding.
These reformers would allow workers to invest some or all of current FICA contributions in personal retirement accounts; meanwhile, implicit Social Security benefit liabilities for past FICA contributions would be translated into individual property rights by issuing beneficiaries "recognition" bonds--that is, formal Treasury debt.
While this approach protects beneficiaries from the risk that government will default on its benefit promises, it only does so by shifting the current system's cost to the general taxpayer.
It is sometimes said that a system of personally owned Social Security accounts would shift unacceptable risks to individuals--in other words, that it amounts to totally "privatized" retirement.
But personal ownership is consistent with any degree of government paternalism.
It need not allow people to recklessly overconsume during their working years.
Contributions can be made mandatory and restrictions can be placed on the use of retirement savings.
It need not strip people of the disability and survivors insurance protection that Social Security now provides.
These elements of the current system can be preserved or duplicated.
Nor need it put the low-income (or simply unlucky) worker at greater risk of poverty and hardship in old age.
Government can subsidize the savings contributions of low-earning workers and provide a guaranteed floor of old-age income protection.
Other critics question whether funding Social Security is really worth the effort.
Since all income which is consumed tomorrow must be produced tomorrow, some say that it doesn't matter if retirees exercise claims on tomorrow's production by selling a stock or cashing a government check: The working population will have to support the retired population in both cases.
This argument misunderstands the purpose of funding.
By raising national savings, a funded Social Security system will increase the nation's capital stock and raise the productivity of tomorrow's workforce, thus making future retirement claims more affordable regardless of how they are paid.
A pay-as-you-go system will not.
It has also been argued that the long-term rate of return to capital cannot exceed the long-term growth rate of the economy, and that workers can therefore do no better under a funded system than under a pay-as-you-go system.
While this claim may have had some passing plausibility when both the population and productivity were growing rapidly (Paul A. Samuelson offered his classic formulation of this hypothesis in 1958), today almost all economists agree that in fact the rate of return to capital far exceeds the rate of economic growth.
There is, however, one drawback that no honest plan to fund Social Security can avoid: the large transition cost.
Since moving to a funded system means that society must begin to save at a higher rate, society will necessarily have to consume at a lower rate--at least until the productivity advantages of higher savings kick in.
Or, to put the transition problem in layman's terms, current workers must pay for two retirements: their own (which now must be prefunded) and that of current beneficiaries (who will continue to rely on pay-as-you-go benefits).
To finance the transition, current workers will thus have to save more, current beneficiaries will have to receive less, or some combination of the two.
This challenge is compounded by the massive future deficits currently projected by the OASI trustees.
As it now stands, benefits must be deeply cut (or taxes steeply raised) simply to keep the current system in balance--even apart from paying the extra cost of transitioning toward a funded system.
Most reform proposals downplay or deny the need for sacrifice--and so veer off course.
One common strategy is to argue that merely by investing some or all of workers' current FICA contributions in private capital markets (either through personal accounts or in one big government pool), everybody ipso facto will better off in the long run.
Yes, reformers know that Treasury will have to borrow to make up for the missing revenue.
But apparently they believe that Treasury (or each worker's account) can indefinitely earn greater returns (with no greater risks) on the new equity assets than would be lost on the new debt liabilities.
Ironically, the premise behind this "free lunch" assumption, made by many libertarians, is that current financial markets are massively inefficient allocators of capital.
The truth is that any plan which relies on the spread between stocks and bonds is a dicey and perhaps even dangerous proposition.
If the federal government starts buying stocks and selling fixed-interest debt on a large scale, the yield on bonds will rise and the yield on stocks will fall--narrowing the favorable spread the plan depends on.
Moreover, the very fact that government is betting on the stock market to defray the cost of future benefit payments will raise the risk (and hence the interest cost) of government debt.
This narrows the spread even more, perhaps to the vanishing point.
No major country engages in this sort of arbitrage--not just because of the negative (fiscal) effect on interest rates, but because of the corrosive (political) effect on the "full faith and credit" of government itself.
On the other hand, if FICA contributions are put into individual accounts, the extra interest payable to new government debt holders will largely cancel out the (risk-adjusted) return to account holders.
In the long run, this revolving door is just as unlikely to leave society better off.
Another way to make the transition cost appear small is to concede that there must be some new net national savings, but to minimize what is needed by assuming that each new savings dollar will earn a huge return.
Indeed, if the total real rate of return on business equity is assumed to be high enough (say 15 percent before corporate taxes, a common if outlandish assumption), and if it is further supposed that workers' portfolios will be invested entirely in equities (another common if outlandish assumption), the transition problem all but vanishes.
On the one hand, workers could finance generous retirement annuities by saving a mere one percent of payroll.
On the other hand, the huge increase in private savings in the form of corporate equity would generate huge additions to federal, state, and local revenues via corporate income and property taxes.
Some of this revenue could then be cycled back into Social Security, thus obviating the need for most (or all) sacrifice on the part of current or soon-to-retire beneficiaries.
A few plans acknowledge the cost of transitioning to a funded system, but try to design the reform so that the sacrifice is hidden from the public.
To this end, they too mostly or completely exempt current and soon-to-retire beneficiaries from programmatic sacrifice--thus shifting the transition cost entirely to younger workers.
But since they don't want to advertise this sacrifice either, they are reluctant to require that workers make new payroll contributions.
Instead, they resort to some combination of two strategies: issuing government debt and raising net taxes outside the Social Security system.
The problem with financing the transition by running-up the national debt is not just that it undermines the purpose of reform by neutralizing much of the private savings boost.
It would wreak havoc with the nation's popular, procedural, and constitutional firewall against excessive indebtedness.
If we can borrow trillions to finance the Social Security transition, why can't we borrow trillions for any purpose at all? Those plans which issue "recognition" bonds directly to beneficiaries also raise an additional concern.
By translating existing implicit Social Security liabilities (which have no constitutional protection) into formal debt, they would in effect render these benefits unreformable.
The economy might collapse or the nation go to war.
But short of default on the national debt, Congress would still have to pay every penny of today's Social Security liabilities.
The problem with the general tax hike strategy is that it hopelessly obscures the rationale for sacrifice.
If we pay for the transition by imposing (say) a new national sales tax, the public is likely to view this new tax as a substitute for existing taxes and demand an offsetting tax cut.
If it does, the result will be a larger federal deficit--which, once again, would undo some (or all) of the effect of higher private savings.
On the other hand, if we pay for the transition by raising savings contributions within the Social Security system itself, the rationale for the sacrifice is clear.
Moreover, if we make these contributions the personal property of workers, the benefits will accrue directly to those making the sacrifice.
No one is going to say: Congress is requiring me to save more, so it had better cut my income taxes.
Many, if not most, Americans will welcome the opportunity to do something--save for their future--that the vast majority confess they should be doing anyway.
II.
THE SOLUTION
Whatever happened to the idea that entitlement reform requires sacrifice? What happened is that reformers were so dazzled by the long-term benefits of a funded Social Security system that they succumbed to the temptation of a free lunch.
Our plan--a National Thrift Plan--is different.
It fully pays for the transition to a funded system--without shell games, without adding to total federal debt, and without new general purpose taxes.
To begin with, it takes the essential step of reducing benefits under the current Social Security system.
Today's retirees would face reduced COLAs and full taxation of benefits.
Future retirees would in addition face a gradual phase-out of new benefit awards.
At the same time, it would require all workers to make a mandatory 5 percent of payroll savings contribution, which, initially, would come on top of current FICA taxes.
This is the transition cost of escaping from the chain letter on which we have thus far been depending.
Plans that pretend to manage the transition with less sacrifice are engaging in false advertising.
To the extent that they actually fund Social Security, the sacrifice will be just as real.
More likely, future generations will be saddled with a permanent debt service charge that requires them to pay back (under the table) much of what we claim to be giving them.
The National Thrift Plan will deliver what it advertises.
At the national level, it will substantially boost net savings in each and every year.
At the individual level, it will greatly increase retirement incomes and retirement security.
Within a few years of the plan's implementation, all cohorts of new retirees (at all income levels) will be receiving total benefits that exceed (and eventually far exceed) current-law Social Security benefits.
As the new system matures, the rate of return that beneficiaries can expect on total lifetime contributions will also rise steadily relative to current law.
This improvement, moreover, will be proportional for all income groups--meaning that the new system would continue to offer low-earning workers the same relative deal that the current Social Security system does.
The National Thrift Plan also provides for a transition that is inherently stable.
The best that most plans can promise is that at some distant date future generations will come out better off--if everything works out as planned.
Our plan recognizes that the future is by definition uncertain.
It thus insists that net savings must be positive throughout the transition--and it builds in the flexibility to ensure that we remain on this sustainable economic path.
Where many other plans would tie Congress's hands by converting current Social Security liabilities into formal debt, we ensure that Congress can respond to tomorrow's unknowable challenges by making additional adjustments in benefits.
What the National Thrift Plan would not do is "privatize" Social Security.
Rather, it would allow us to transition to a new Social Security system--one that continues to provide universal old-age and survivors insurance, but that does so in a way that is both beneficial for own personal futures and constructive for the nation's collective future.
III.
THE PLAN
The National Thrift Plan would gradually phase out Social Security Old-Age and Survivors Insurance (OASI) "elder benefits" and replace them with a system of mandatory Personal Thrift Accounts (PTAs).
These elder benefits--that is, retired-worker benefits, benefits for spouses aged 62 or older, and benefits for widows and widowers aged 60 and over--comprise 95 percent of current OASI benefit dollars.
The other 5 percent--primarily benefits to children, widowed mothers and fathers, and nonaged disabled widows and widowers--would remain in place, as would all Social Security Disability Insurance (DI) benefits.^(1)
The PTA accounts are thus designed to serve a single function: providing for the retirement income of workers and their aged survivors.
In addition to the PTAs and small nonaged benefit components, the new system will include a means-tested benefit that guarantees all elders an income equal to 100 percent of the poverty line.
As now designed, the National Thrift Plan will cover workers currently covered by OASDI (about 95 percent of all U.S. workers), but it could be expanded to cover the entire labor force.^(2)
The plan would be implemented starting in 1998, when PTA payroll deductions would begin.
The following outline describes the major components of the National Thrift Plan:
1.
Trust-Fund Reform
(A) Abolish the OASI Trust Fund.
The plan would formally abolish the OASI trust fund, thus acknowledging what's always been true in fact: that today's Social Security system is a pay-as-you-go program, and that its surpluses are not translated into genuine economic savings.
The current OASI trust fund balance, consisting of some $500 billion in Treasury IOUs that can only be redeemed by raising taxes or borrowing from the public, will thus be erased.
Any perceived loss on the part of workers who have contributed toward this paper surplus will be more than compensated by the certainty that future Social Security surpluses really will benefit their economic future.
Initially, any cash surplus of OASI tax revenues over outlays will be used to offset the cost to the rest of the federal budget of implementing the National Thrift Plan.
As described below, once the OASI system is determined to be in permanent cash balance the surpluses will be refunded to workers' PTAs.^(3)
2.
Benefit Reform
(A) Expand Taxation of Social Security Benefits.^(4)
Starting in 1998, taxation of Social Security benefits will be expanded so that 85 percent of all OASDI benefits are subject to personal income taxes.^(5)
In effect, this reform takes the new 85 percent taxability rule that now applies to beneficiaries with incomes over high thresholds and applies it to all beneficiaries.
Since the change will affect only those households with enough earnings to pay income taxes, it will affect no beneficiaries beneath or near the poverty line.
At higher income levels, beneficiaries would pay some tax.
Small or large, the tax on their OASDI benefits would be at the same rate that all Americans in the same tax bracket pay taxes on their incomes--and at the same rate that future retirees will be paying taxes on their PTA withdrawals.
It's worth noting that because current-law does not index the income thresholds at which benefit taxation applies, a rising share of total OASDI benefits are now becoming taxable--and eventually 85 percent of all OASDI benefits will be taxable.
The principle of full benefit taxation is therefore already accepted by the current Social Security system.
What our reform does is to apply that principle immediately in order to gain the crucial near-term savings that any transition plan needs.
(B) Reduce Social Security COLAs.
Current law provides that all OASDI benefits are upwardly adjusted in December of each year by the annual growth in the Consumer Price Index (CPI).
The plan provides for a one-year COLA freeze to be enacted in 1998 (thus going into effect with the benefit checks received on January 3 and 4, 1999).
Thereafter, the annual COLA will be pegged to the CPI minus 1/2 percentage point.
This permanent adjustment recognizes the growing consensus among economists that the CPI may overstate inflation (1/2 of a percentage point is a typical estimate)--as well as the increasing likelihood that Congress, entirely apart from broader issues of Social Security reform, will enact a COLA cut.
Like expanded taxation of Social Security benefits, these provisions produce critical near-term savings.
(C) Phase-Out New OASI Elder Benefits.
Social Security benefits are computed on the basis of annual "wage credits" earned during years of covered employment.
Starting in 1999, the National Thrift Plan would gradually reduce the credits used in computing all new OASI elder benefits.
Specifically, newly earned wage credits will be reduced by a factor of 5 percent per year until they reach zero after 20 years.
Thus, workers retiring in the year 2000 will receive 95 percent of their current-law wage credit for the year 1999 and 100 percent for all earlier years.
The benefit formula for each successive cohort will include an additional year of reduced credits.
For example, workers retiring in 2001 will receive 90 percent of their current-law wage credit for the year 2000, 95 percent of their wage credit for 1999, and 100 percent for all earlier years.
This phase-out of OASI elder benefits will already be generating large savings by the time Baby Boomers start retiring en masse in the 2010s.
However, it will take years longer before the phase out is entirely complete.
The last partial wage credit for OASI elder benefits would be earned in 2017; the first cohort to receive no OASI elder benefits would begin retiring in the 2050s; and the last OASI elder benefit check would be mailed out sometime around the year 2100.
While this reform operates through a complex change in Social Security's benefit formula, it in effect amounts to a pro rata cohort reduction in benefits where the amount of the reduction depends on the year beneficiaries were born (or turn age 62).^(6)
Initial retirement awards would be unaffected for workers born before 1938; as a percent of current-law awards, they would be reduced about 25 percent for workers born in 1954, about 50 percent for workers born in 1964, and about 75 percent for workers born in 1973.
(D) Phase-Out New OASI Spousal Benefits.
Current law guarantees that the aged spouse of a retired worker receive a benefit equal to at least one-half of the retired worker's benefit.
If a spouse does not qualify for a benefit of this size on the basis of his or her own earnings history, a special "spousal benefit" fills in the difference.
This 50 percent benefit supplement for retired workers with nonworking spouses, designed for another era, is a capricious windfall that has long outlived its social usefulness.
Moreover, it benefits a declining number of new retiring couples--and those whom it does benefit are typically the ones least likely to need the extra income.
The National Thrift Plan includes a special provision for the phase-out of all new spousal benefit awards.
Effective for workers reaching age 62 in the year 2000, new awards would be reduced by 10 percent; awards for each successive cohort would be reduced by an additional 10 percent until spousal benefits are entirely phased out for workers reaching age 62 in 2009 and later.
Because these reduction percentages are applied directly to new benefit awards (rather than to annual wage credits), the spousal benefit is phased out more rapidly than other OASI elder benefits.
Spouses of workers born before 1938 would be unaffected; spouses of workers born in or after 1947 would receive no spousal benefit.
(E) Guarantee a Floor of Old-Age Income Protection.
The plan will provide for a means-tested floor of protection, to be phased in from 1998 to 2002, that guarantees all Americans aged 62 and over a total household income equal to 100 percent of the poverty line.
This benefit will replace the current means-tested Supplemental Security Income (SSI) benefit for the elderly.
(Nonaged disabled beneficiaries will remain under the SSI program.)
SSI now guarantees a floor of elder income protection that averages just 70 percent of the poverty line for single beneficiaries and 90 percent for couples.
Eligibility, moreover, starts at age 65.
The National Thrift Plan will thus provide more generous poverty protection than current law.
3.
Mandatory PTAs
(A) Require Mandatory PTA Contributions.
Every covered worker will be required to contribute 5 percent of earnings (up to the current year Social Security taxable maximum) to a PTA established in that worker's name.
Contributions will start in 1998 at 1 percent of payroll and be phased in over 5 years.
All contributions will be personal; there will be no employer contribution.
The government, however, will make payments to the PTAs of all disabled workers and all young and disabled widow(er) beneficiaries.^(7)
Workers could satisfy part (or all) of the 5 percent payroll deduction requirement by reallocating current deductions under defined contribution pension plans.
Above and beyond the mandatory 5 percent payroll deduction, all workers would have the option of making additional voluntary contributions up to a dollar cap set at 5 percent of maximum taxable earnings.^(8)
All PTA contributions and capital appreciation will be exempt from personal income taxation; PTA funds will only be taxed on withdrawal.
(B) Provide for PTA Matches for Low-Earners.
The government will match, dollar for dollar, the mandatory PTA contributions of all single workers aged 20 to 62 who earn up to 45 percent of the average wage.
Above this level, the subsidy will be reduced by half the mandatory contribution rate times each additional dollar of earnings so that it falls to zero at three times the low wage threshold.
The wage thresholds for married workers will be 50 percent higher.
(C) Establish PTA Investment Rules.
Mandatory deductions will be made automatically by employers; voluntary deductions at a higher rate will be made at the request of employees.
The self-employed will be responsible for making at least the minimum contribution to their own PTAs.
Workers may choose their own certified financial manager and invest funds as they wish within certain regulatory guidelines.^(9)
The federal government will establish an oversight board, with public and private trustees, whose functions will include establishing these guidelines and maintaining a "switchboard" to ensure that PTA deductions are made and that all contributions (even for part-time and migrant workers) are routed to the right PTA.
This oversight board will also serve as the default financial manager of PTA funds: Anyone who is unable or unwilling to deal with a private manager will have his or her PTA managed by this federal agency.^(10)
(D) Establish Rules on Use of PTA Funds.
Unlike current Social Security benefits, to which workers only have a statutory right that is subject to revision or revocation by Congress, PTA funds will be common law personal property.
However (just as can legally occur in certain trusts), PTA funds will be subject to use restrictions.
In the event a couple divorces, PTA assets attributable to wages earned during the marriage will be evenly divided.
If the PTA owner dies, the assets will be routed tax-free into the PTA of the spouse; if the owner is unmarried, the assets become part of the owner's estate.
Until age 62, no worker will be allowed to withdraw PTA funds unless he or she purchases an indexed annuity (a requirement now made feasible by the Treasury's recent decision to issue indexed bonds).
This annuity, together with the spouse's own PTA annuity and any future OASI benefits, must ensure that the worker and spouse possess an income for life equal to the higher of (a) a fixed-dollar low-income threshold set at 120 percent of the poverty line or (b) 30 percent of the worker's preretirement wage.
(This second test is only slightly below the current Social Security replacement rate for average-earning workers retiring at age 62.)
Couples would not only have to provide for joint income, but for the survivorship of the spouse.^(11)
Workers aged 62 and over will be allowed to withdraw PTA funds at any time, but all funds must be invested in an indexed annuity until the above conditions are met.^(12)
Fund balances in excess of those required to purchase the minimum annuity will be subject to no use restrictions and may be consumed, reinvested, or passed on to heirs.
4.
FICA Reform
(A) Credit OASI Cash Surpluses to Worker PTAs.
As soon as the OASI system (including the cost of the new means-tested safety net and the PTA subsidies) is determined to be in permanent cash balance, any annual surplus of tax revenues over current year outlays will be automatically credited (pro-rated to covered wages) to worker PTAs.
Thus, to the extent that benefits decline as a share of taxable payroll, the PTA contribution rate will rise above 5 percent.
This provision gives younger workers a direct stake in any reforms that restrain the future cost of OASI benefits.
(B) Provide for an Eventual Phase-Out of Payroll taxes.
Once the PTA contribution rate reaches 8 percent of payroll, OASI FICA (and SECA) taxes will be progressively reduced.
This reduction will continue until OASI revenues (excluding the 3 percent PTA refund) fall to the ultimate level (about 2 percent of payroll) that is needed to pay for: (1) all OASI child and nonaged survivor benefits; (2) the means-tested floor of protection for the low-income elderly; and (3) the PTA savings subsidies.
Thus, when the transition is complete, the total contribution rate under the new Social Security system (about 10 percent) will be somewhat less than the current-law OASI payroll tax rate--and no more than two-thirds of the tax rate that would eventually be required to pay for OASI's ever-deteriorating current-law deal.
IV.
MODEL AND ASSUMPTIONS
The National Thrift Plan Project required the development of interlinked macro and micro models that quantify the affects of the plan on the federal budget, the national balance sheet, and individual cohorts of beneficiaries.
Except for unavoidable exceptions, our macro model precisely follows the official 1995 "intermediate" scenario prepared by the Social Security Administration's (SSA) Office of the Actuary for all future years through 2070.
Wherever we needed to add assumptions, we have, in the interest of prudence, tried to lean in the direction of prudence.
The following outline describes our model and our principal assumptions:
MODEL
(1) Macro Module.
The macro module calculates OASI benefits, the OASI balance, PTA refunds, changes in other government outlays and revenues, and changes in net national savings.
It also includes a productivity feedback equation.
In calculating yearly outlay changes due to our OASI reforms, we tried to ensure the highest possible degree of accuracy for retired worker benefits by using actual SSA projection matrices that specify benefits and beneficiaries by year, by age, and by age of entitlement.
(At 75 percent of total benefits, these constitute far and away the largest category.)
Savings in other OASI benefit categories were estimated using the results for retired worker benefits and adjusting them as necessary.
Revenues from benefit taxation were calculated using data from the SSA and the Office of Tax Analysis.
Our calculations of the cost of the PTA savings match used SSA data on covered earnings; our calculations of the poverty benefit's cost are based on data published by the Urban Institute.
(2) PTA Module.
The PTA module tracks PTA assets owned by workers at every age in every year.
Specifically, it takes total yearly PTA contributions from the macro model, calculates the build up of worker assets by age and by year, and then subtracts assets that leave the system due to death or retirement.
The module also adjusts portfolio composition by age.
In order to accurately distribute assets, we assumed that workers' earnings vary by their age.
The relationship between age and earnings was estimated using Census and SSA data and then normalized so that total yearly average earnings conform to yearly average earnings in the SSA scenario.
(3) Micro Module.
The micro module takes the results from the macro and PTA modules and uses them to calculate total contributions and total benefits for every cohort, over its entire working life and retirement, for the following three ideal worker types: average-earners (that is, workers whose wages in every year are equal to the average U.S. wage); low-earners (whose wages are equal to 45 percent of the average wage); and maximum-earners (whose wages are equal to the taxable maximum).
For each of these types, the model then generates replacement rates, present values of lifetime benefits and taxes, payback ratios, net present values of lifetime benefits, and wage-adjusted net present values of lifetime benefits.^(13)
All life expectancies are weighted male-female averages.
ASSUMPTIONS
OASI Baseline.
To calculate a baseline scenario, we needed to make some assumption about what will happen to OASI after its trust fund's (1995) projected bankruptcy in 2031.
Our assumption is that, upon bankruptcy, an immediate across-the-board benefit cut will be enacted that returns the system to cash balance.
Thereafter, benefits will be adjusted annually to maintain cash balance.
If Congress literally takes no action, OASI's legal appropriations would run dry and SSA would have no other choice but to enact some such measure.
One could of course argue that Congress will someday correct the imbalance partially or entirely through payroll tax hikes.
But while this action would have the effect of improving the baseline deal for today's cohorts of workers, it would result in an even worse deal for future cohorts of workers.
The reader should keep this trade-off in mind while assessing our results.
Financial Rates of Return.
We assumed two basic types of financial instruments: (a) relatively risk-free public debt, whose real rate of return to investors is assumed to be identical to the projected average rate for OASI trust fund assets (2.3% after 2010); and (b) corporate equity, whose real rate of return to investors is assumed to be 6.7% in every future year.
The latter figure is the average compound rate for total real returns in U.S. stock markets over 190 years, from 1802 to 1992, as computed by Jeremy J. Siegel at the Wharton School.
This is slightly lower than most estimates of the rate since 1946 and substantially lower than most estimates of the rate since 1982.
According to Ibbotson Associates, the total real return on large company equity from 1925 to 1995 was 7.2%.
As elsewhere, we wish to resolve any uncertainty on the side of prudence.
Portfolio Composition.
Our calculation of the internal return to PTAs assumes a conservative mix of equity and debt.
This mix varies by age (whether because of regulation or individual preference), with the share of assets in equity trending linearly downward from two-thirds at age 30 to one-third at age 60, then dropping to 10 percent at age 61.
All assumptions about portfolio composition were suggested by survey data on how households of different ages voluntarily allocate assets.
Management Fees.
Annual management fees for equity are assumed to average 0.5 percent of assets.
We consider this to be a generous assumption, first, because management fees for many popular no-load index funds are today less than 0.2 percent of assets, and second, because the universal availability of a low-cost default investment option will tend to keep fees down.
On the other hand, PTA managers will have to acquire certification and assume special fiduciary responsibilities.
This will add to cost.
Management fees for debt are assumed to be negligible.
Voluntary PTA Contributions.
We assume that voluntary PTA contributions will be equal to 10 percent of mandatory contributions (including both personal and government contributions).
Since the vast majority of workers will be able to contribute at least 10 percent more with full tax deductibility, this assumption may be conservative.
Savings Offset.
We assume that 30 percent of all new personal contributions to PTAs will be offset by reductions in non-PTA savings.
This assumption seems generous for three reasons: (1) PTAs will be subject to strict rules limiting preretirement withdrawals; to the extent that households prefer the greater flexibility of 401ks and other savings vehicles, this will limit the offset.
(2) Since there will be a relatively low dollar cap on contributions, the average PTA savings dollar will reflect a much lower household income and asset profile than the average U.S. savings dollar.
In other words, the majority of PTA contributors now save little (or nothing), and so will not be able to offset PTA contributions at the 30 percent rate we assume.
(3) The National Thrift Plan will simultaneously reduce unfunded Social Security benefit liabilities.
To the extent that households view these liabilities as assets, a large share of PTA contributions will be regarded as substitutions for (not additions to) existing household wealth.
PTA Withdrawals.
Our model assumes that every worker retires and translates his or her entire PTA into an inflation-adjusted annuity at age 62.
All PTA accumulations at age 62 or older are ignored.
These are of course simplifying assumptions.
On the one hand, some PTA assets will be immediately consumed upon retirement.
On the other, some people will continue to work and build up PTAs well after age 62--and others will want to preserve assets and bequest some of them to heirs.
Our model also assumes that withdrawals are annuitized to a unisex life expectancy at age 62.
This assumption too understates savings since joint annuities (which would be mandatory under our plan) would in reality be annuitized to joint life expectancy, which is longer.
Upon the death of never married or widowed workers (at any age), assets are assumed to be withdrawn from the PTA system.
Taxes.
In calculating changes in personal income taxes, we assume, for workers, that the mean marginal personal income tax rate on PTA covered earnings is 16 percent for the federal government and 3 percent for state and local governments; for retirees, we assume that marginal personal income tax rates are two-thirds of the above.
Half of the savings offset to PTA contributions is deemed to occur in savings vehicles where both the contributions and the internal return are already tax exempt--an assumption that reflects the large share of current savings that takes place in tax-exempt vehicles like 401ks, Keoghs, and IRAs.
In calculating changes in corporate taxes, we assume (conservatively) that corporations pay total taxes equal to 45 percent of corporate earnings after taxes and after adjustment for inflation.
These taxes are assumed to flow two-thirds to the federal government and one-third to state and local governments.
We further assume that the corporate equity share of the savings offset will be equal to the corporate equity share of all PTA assets.
Administrative Cost.
We assume that the additional cost of administering the PTA oversight board, the PTA matches and refunds, and the expanded means-tested safety net will entail a doubling of projected current-law OASI administrative costs.
Productivity.
In order to account for the impact of higher savings and investment rates on GDP and wages, we developed two productivity scenarios: a main scenario and a low-response scenario.
Both scenarios assume that the productivity growth rate will begin rising in the year 2000 by 0.05 percentage points per year over baseline.
Under the low-response scenario, its rise stops at 0.25 percentage points over baseline in the year 2004.
Under the main scenario, it stops at 0.5 percentage points over baseline in the year 2009.
Even a conservative neoclassical production function suggests that in today's economy each 1 percentage point increase in investment rates will lead to a one-eighth of a percentage point increase in the productivity growth rate.
By and large, our main scenario follows this 8-to-1 response rule.
Combining this productivity response with our other assumptions about rates of return, it was reassuring to find that our results for net savings were consistent with a steady and plausible share (20-30%) of additional capital income to additional GDP.
However, in the interest of extreme prudence, we also developed our low-response scenario in which the productivity improvement is just half as large.
In all cases, our model assumes that increases in wages will be proportional to increases in GDP.
Fiscal Dividend.
Because most tax revenues (but not most public outlays) increase automatically in line with real economic growth, economists generally assume that higher productivity, in and of itself, will improve public-sector balances.
The National Thrift Plan is thus almost certain to have a positive fiscal impact above and beyond that due to specific reform measures.
Our model makes the extremely conservative assumption that there will be no such fiscal dividend: The dollar balance of outlays and revenues not directly affected by reforms is assumed to remain unchanged in all years.
Labor Market Response.
Most economists also believe that payroll taxes reduce the supply of labor, and hence shrink tax revenues.
Since our mandatory contributions would not be regarded as a "tax" by most households (after all, households will continue to own each of these PTA dollars as they are earned and invested), we do not make any downward adjustment in the labor supply.
Since the plan will eventually reduce the OASI payroll tax rate far beneath current projections, a more plausible case can be made for a later upward labor supply adjustment.
In the interest of prudence (and to avoid problematic deviations from the official OASDI projection scenario), we chose to make no adjustment in any year.
Poverty Guarantee.
The higher retirement benefits which low-income workers would earn under the National Thrift Plan would almost certainly do something to reduce poverty rates among future elderly cohorts.
In projecting the cost of the plan's means-tested safety net, however, we did not account for this feedback.
Benefit costs assume both a constant poverty rate and a high participation rate (75 percent of eligible beneficiaries versus about 60 percent under the current SSI system).
IV.
THE RESULTS
We summarize the quantitative results of the National Thrift Plan in the two appendices following this section.
The first, the "Economy Appendix," shows the impact of the plan on national savings, public-sector revenues and outlays, OASI revenues and outlays, and OASI benefits.
The second, the "Payback Appendix," shows how the plan will affect workers in different cohorts and income groups.
Under each heading, we tabulate the results for two productivity scenarios: our "main" scenario, in which the annual productivity growth rate improves by 0.5 percentage points, and our "low-response" scenario, in which it improves by 0.25 percentage points.
All results highlighted below refer to our main scenario.
The findings are slightly less favorable for the low-response scenario, but the same basic conclusions hold.
In any case, the most significant differences are in the distant future when the superior outcomes of the National Thrift Plan would be manifest under any plausible productivity scenario.
As can be seen, the National Thrift Plan accomplishes its objectives:
ECONOMY
In each and every future year, the impact on net national savings is positive.
Already by the year 2000, net savings is up by 1.2 percent of GDP; by 2010, when the Baby Boom begins retiring, it is up by 2.6 percent of GDP; by 2065, it is up by 5.9 percent of GDP.
Initially, the increase in net national savings is due entirely to new private savings in PTAs; relative to baseline, the public sector runs a small deficit.
This deficit, however, is never more than 0.4 percent of GDP and disappears entirely by 2014.
Thereafter, the impact of the National Thrift Plan on the public-sector balance is hugely positive.
By 2020, relative to baseline, the federal budget alone is running a surplus of 0.5 percent of GDP; by 2025, the surplus doubles to 1.2 percent of GDP; by 2030, it nearly doubles again to 2.1 percent of GDP.
Although the small near-term deficits imply that net borrowing from the public will temporarily increase, this borrowing will be dwarfed by the contemporaneous increase in private savings.
Even at its dollar peak in 2006, the negative federal deficit impact (at $45 billion) will amount to just 11 percent of net PTA savings (at $416 billion).
Given any plausible assumption about portfolio composition, bond purchases by PTA accounts will be more than sufficient to absorb this new debt.
Or, to look at it another way, the PTA system and the rest of government combined will be buying back debt from other bond holders.
Total Treasury debt--that is, publicly held debt plus Treasury borrowing from the OASI trust fund--decreases in each and every year relative to the current-law baseline.
Trust-fund IOUs represent obligations that (absent a change in current law) future taxpayers will be required to pay, and which our baseline assumes that future taxpayers will indeed pay.
From year one, the National Thrift Plan thus reduces the total formal obligations of government.
By 2015, total OASI outlays (which now include an OASI-funded poverty floor and PTA savings subsidies) are cut beneath baseline.
By the 2030s, the OASI system begins to register large cash surpluses and PTA refunds begin.
By the 2040s, PTA refunds climb to 3 percent of taxable payroll and FICA taxes are cut.
By 2065, the total cost of the OASI system--including the expanded poverty floor and the PTA subsidies--falls to 2.4 percent of taxable payroll, less than one-quarter today's rate.
The transition to a fully funded Social Security system is thus successfully completed.
PAYBACK
By the year 2005, newly retiring workers will be receiving greater benefits under the National Thrift Plan than under current law.
Within a few decades, they will be receiving much greater benefits.
This is true for workers at all income levels, no matter what the measure of benefit adequacy.
It would also be true if full current law benefits were paid after Social Security's bankruptcy and not cut as our baseline assumes.
By 2015, the average-earning worker retiring at age 65 will be receiving $20,400 more in present value (PV) lifetime benefits under the National Thrift Plan than under baseline; by 2045, that worker will be receiving $156,000 more; by 2065, he or she will be receiving $278,000 more.
The share of preretirement earnings that benefits replace will also be higher--in fact, nearly twice as high by the 2060s.
Although current retirees are asked to sacrifice, viewed in perspective that sacrifice is tiny: just $733 for an average earning worker who retired in 1986, or less than 1 percent of lifetime benefits.
The relative improvement in benefits over baseline will be roughly the same at all income levels.
By 2065, low- and average-earning workers will be receiving lifetime benefits that are 2.5 times higher than baseline, and high-earning workers benefits that are 2.9 times higher.
The National Thrift Plan thus retains the relatively favorable deal Social Security now offers low-earners.
Along with benefit adequacy, payback ratios also improve.
In fact, the payback ratio on contributions rises steadily for all cohorts retiring from 2005 on, with low-earning workers doing best of all.
By 2065, the PV ratio of lifetime benefits to lifetime contributions for average-earning and high-earning workers will be roughly 30 percent higher than under baseline; for low-earning workers, the ratio will be roughly 45 percent higher.
It is true that net benefits (that is, the PV of lifetime benefits minus the PV of lifetime contributions) will remain negative under both systems--and indeed, that despite the better rate of return, average-earners under the National Thrift Plan will initially have a larger net loss.
This is the unavoidable cost of transitioning to a funded system.
Net benefits earned by PTA contributions alone are positive in all years (because our discount rate, the interest rate on Treasury debt, is lower than the return to PTAs).
But this effect is long overwhelmed by the cost of paying off unfunded benefit promises to older retirees: for average-earning workers, the net benefit does not exceed the baseline until 2044 and for maximum-earning workers not until 2059.
Low-earning workers are an exception.
Since their PV ratios are positive both under baseline and under reform, the larger dollar contributions give low-earners an immediate net gain.
Their net benefit improves with reform in every year from 2004 on.
These net benefit measures, however, do not take into account the fact that improvements in productivity will make each dollar of contributions easier to earn.
We have therefore also calculated net benefits adjusting contributions for the hours of work they reflect.
According to this "wage-adjusted" net benefit measure, average-earning workers will be doing better than baseline by 2037 and high-earning workers will be doing better by 2043.
Moreover, for average earners, the net benefit loss relative to baseline is never greater than $11,000.
By 2050, average earners will be coming out $48,000 ahead of baseline; by 2060, they will be coming out $116,000 ahead.
Workers born in 1972 (and reaching age 65 in 2037) are thus the first cohort of Americans who will emerge unambiguously better off because of the National Thrift Plan, not just in terms of the lifetime benefits they will receive or the rates of return they will earn, but according to the harshest measure of all: their absolute dollar gain.
Thereafter, with the transition now fully paid for, all younger Americans are free and clear.
All of this, moreover, overlooks another vast benefit of the National Thrift Plan: the impact that higher productivity growth will have on the living standards of future American workers before their retirement.
By the year today's newborns are due to retire at age 65, the average U.S. wage will, under our "main" productivity scenario, be nearly a third higher (in inflation-adjusted dollars) than it would be under baseline.
1.
Nonaged OASI benefits could perhaps be phased out as part of a thrift plan that offered convenient and efficient life insurance requirements, but in view of their relatively small cost we decided to retain them; reform of DI benefits is a complex issue in its own right and lies beyond the scope of this project.
2.
Expanding coverage would ease the transition cost (or increase the transition savings), since it would increase FICA tax revenue far more and much earlier than it would raise eventual benefit outlays.
3.
Our results show that the National Thrift Plan will probably not produce a permanent OASI operating surplus until the early 2030s.
Until then, though benefit outlays will be greatly reduced from current projections, the reductions will simply serve to prevent future benefits from exceeding future tax revenue.
Once this initial "Boomer" cost wave is past, however, the size of the surplus (and thus the refund to worker PTAs) will grow very rapidly.
4.
Means-testing was considered as an alternative to full benefit taxation.
However, we concluded that a stand-alone means-test for Social Security (as opposed to a comprehensive means-test for all federal entitlements) would be both needlessly arbitrary and expensive to administer.
In any case, the progressive income tax code constitutes an implicit means-test--and is, moreover, the same "means-test" that will be applied to all PTA withdrawals under the National Thrift Plan.
5.
The 15 percent exemption reflects a generous estimate of the dollar value of most beneficiaries' prior FICA contributions that have already been subject to personal taxation, and hence brings the tax treatment of Social Security in line with the tax treatment of private pension benefits.
All new revenue from the taxation of OASDI benefits will be credited, pro rata, to the OASI and DI systems.
The Medicare Hospital Insurance program, however, will continue to be credited with its current-law revenue from OASDI benefit taxation, and will thus be held harmless under our plan.
6.
So-called "drop out" years will not affect this benefit reduction.
If a wage year excluded from the Social Security benefit calculation is a year affected by the wage-credit phase-out, the appropriate reduction factor will be applied to the earlier replacement year.
The benefit reduction will also be invariant with respect to retirement age--and thus will not penalize continued employment.
The reduction factor applied to wage years after age 61 will be fixed at the average reduction factor for all prior wage years.
7.
Specifically, the PTAs of nonelderly adults who qualify for OASDI benefits because they are not expected to work--that is, disabled workers, widowed mothers and fathers, and disabled widow(er)s--would receive monthly government contributions on the basis of the disabled or deceased worker's former wages.
This ensures that the PTAs of these individuals continue to be funded--an important provision in view of the fact that our plan would phase-out all OASI elder benefits, including benefits to elderly widows and former disabled worker beneficiaries.
8.
A higher dollar cap (perhaps 10 percent of maximum taxable earnings) could be a logical component of an overall national thrift plan.
However, since a higher cap would increase the cost of the tax expenditure--and might not produce a commensurate increase in net savings--we felt it required further study.
9.
Clearly, investment choices must be limited and regulated.
Yet to the extent possible, we just as clearly want to maximize individual choice.
At a minimum, there will need to be a requirement that some percentage of assets (adjusted for age) be invested in risk-free or near risk-free debt.
(As explained in the next section, our model implicitly assumes such a requirement.)
Other issues to be studied include the types of investments that will be allowable and, among allowable investments, the extent to which workers will be required to diversify by investing in indexes.
10.
The government would invest all default funds according to some relatively low-risk formula (there would be two or three standard options) that includes indexed Treasury bonds and stock market indexes.
The level of risk in default portfolios would also automatically be adjusted to the worker's age.
Although some critics raise concerns about how financially unsophisticated workers would fare under a PTA system, most economists believe that this approach would ensure those workers a rate of return comparable to (or even better than) that of workers who enjoy sophisticated financial advice.
11.
The relatively rare event of the survivorship of the dependent child of a retired worker is not an issue here, since the National Thrift Plan would retain all current-law OASI child benefits.
12.
Alternatively, workers could be allowed to make annual withdrawals from their PTAs, with the amount not to exceed the account balance divided by the average remaining years of life expectancy.
13.
The replacement rate is the first year of retirement benefits divided by the last year of earnings.
All present values (PVs) are discounted at the OASI trust fund interest rate to the year of retirement.
The payback ratio is the PV of benefits divided by the PV of taxes (plus PTA contributions).
The net PV of lifetime benefits is the PV of benefits minus the PV of taxes.
Wage adjusting the latter means using baseline taxes in all PV calculations--so that tax payments reflect only the "hourly" cost of benefits and do not reflect the productivity gains implicit in the reform scenario.
[ADDITIONAL TABLES SUBMITTED HERE ARE BEING RETAINED IN THE COMMITTEE FILES.]
___________________________________
[chart1.gif] ___________________________________
[chart2.gif] ___________________________________
[chart3.gif] ___________________________________
[chart4.gif] ___________________________________
[chart5.gif] ___________________________________
[chart6.gif] ___________________________________
[chart7.gif] ___________________________________
[chart8.gif] ___________________________________
[chart9.gif] ___________________________________
[chart10.gif] ___________________________________
[chart11.gif] ___________________________________
[chart12.gif] ___________________________________
[chart13.gif] ___________________________________
[chart14.gif] ___________________________________
[chart15.gif] ___________________________________
[chart16.gif]
[ADDITIONAL ATTACHMENTS SUBMITTED HERE ARE BEING RETAINED IN THE COMMITTEE FILES.]
__________________________________________________________________
