[USEMAP:gspt_topnav.gif] __________________ submit search GSPT Title Bar [gspt_home.gif]
We have more roads per square mile and more cars per lane mile than any other state, except for the island state of Hawaii.
[pg49_sadc%20parisi%20farm.jpg] New Jersey lost more than half of its farmland since the early 1950's.
Shopping centers, houses and roads have also replaced hundreds of thousands of acres of forest, wetlands and meadows.
The negative effects of these changes -- impacts to water quality and wildlife habitat, loss of recreational open space and dramatic increases in traffic congestion -- are felt not only in the suburbs and rural areas, but also in our cities where sprawl has drained financial and community resources from these urban centers.
In order to protect our natural and historic resources and promote growth in the places with existing infrastructure to support it, land and historic preservation must be coupled with effective "smart growth" policies.
While the Garden State Preservation Trust concerns itself primarily with land and historic preservation, it recognizes that promoting growth in places that can sustain it and discouraging growth in places that cannot is a necessary complement to our land preservation efforts.
Smart growth initiatives help ensure that the investments we make in preserving historic treasures, open space and farmland are not subsequently undermined by poorly planned development that is insensitive to preservation values.
top
New Jersey's Special Features While New Jersey is the fifth smallest state in the nation, it is home to an impressive array of unique natural, agricultural and historic features.
New Jersey has no less than 2,000 species of native plants and at least 800 species of native wildlife; 6,760 river miles; 1,871 square miles of freshwater and coastal wetlands, bays, estuaries and freshwater lakes; and 127 miles of beaches.
[s8_redknots.jpg] In the southern part of our state is located the New Jersey Pinelands, a one million acre national reserve, internationally significant for its unique animal and plant species and ecological systems.
It is the largest body of open space on the Mid-Atlantic seaboard between Richmond and Boston, and its aquifers contain some 17 trillion gallons of pure water.
Along the Delaware Bay shore exists one of the top 10 birding spots in North America, where approximately 1.5 million shorebirds and up to 80,000 raptors pass through New Jersey on their migratory routes.
The number of shorebirds that visit the Delaware Bay each spring is the second largest in the Western Hemisphere.
Many of these weary travelers are completely dependent on the natural ecosystems of this region to rest and forage for food so they may continue with their migrations.
The mountainous areas of the northern part of our state, known as the Highlands and Skylands regions, provide scenic vistas and include much of the state's drinking water supply reservoirs.
In addition, there still remains extensive habitat for wildlife populations, including beaver, black bear, bobcat, native trout, raptors, river otter and nearly 100 species of migratory songbirds.
Productive farmland accounts for more than half the remaining open land in the Garden State.
A wide variety of vegetables, fruits, grains, nursery, dairy and livestock farm operations maintain an aesthetically pleasing pastoral scenery.
Flowers and bedding plants are beautiful sights both on the farms and when they find their way to our homes and businesses.
Farms mean farm stands, pumpkin patches, barns, and grazing horses, cows and sheep, all of which are valued by the New Jersey public.
New Jersey is also home to one of richest collections of historic sites in the United States.
As one of the 13 original colonies, New Jersey boasts many significant historic battlefields, homes, churches, cities and villages, representative of all periods of United States history.
George Washington, Thomas Edison and Albert Einstein, among other prominent historical figures, made history here.
New Jersey's natural, historic and agricultural features provide preservation opportunities which, once secured, will ensure into the future a landscape the citizens of New Jersey want to call home.
top
Benefits of Preservation Preserved lands and historic sites provide sustainable economic, aesthetic, environmental and recreational benefits.
The benefits conferred contribute to a high quality of life for residents in our state -- indeed, they are key among the factors that inspire people to both visit our state and to live, work and play here.
[delaware%20bay.jpg] Tourism is a critical component of our state's economy; it depends upon the preservation of our state's special environmental, scenic and historic resources.
People visit our beaches, parks, cultural centers and historic sites in greater numbers than ever before.
In fact, travel and tourism accounted for more than 800,000 jobs and $31 billion in revenues in 2001.
The $62.5 billion food and agriculture industry is extremely important to New Jersey's economy, ranking just after the pharmaceutical industry and tourism in the economic benefits it brings to the state.
Retaining productive, taxpaying farmland is critical to New Jersey residents for other reasons as well: it not only provides pleasing vistas of scenic working landscapes in our state but also generates an impressive variety of more than 100 kinds of Jersey fresh grown fruits and vegetables for residents and visitors to enjoy.
New Jersey farms are major producers of, for example, cranberries, blueberries, peaches, tomatoes, spinach and potatoes.
Garden State farms are very diverse -- raising livestock, poultry and produce, and yielding dairy products, field crops, sod, nursery stock and many specialty items.
Vineyards develop wines unique to our state.
The state's horse farms give an important boost to our agriculture industry as well as afford equine enthusiasts hours of enjoyment.
And the fruit and vegetable pick-your-own operations are ever-popular.
Some of the most valuable economic benefits of preservation are realized in the form of avoided costs.
Water cleansed by natural lands costs less than water that needs to be purified by expensive treatment plants after being polluted by point and nonpoint sources.
Wetlands act as a sponge, absorbing floodwaters for free, in contrast to expensive flood control projects.
Preserved lands require little or no local government services and therefore do not drive up property taxes in the way that poorly planned developments do, and as many Cost of Community Services studies throughout the country have now shown.
For example, studies conducted by the American Farmland Trust have concluded that, on average, for every property tax dollar raised from residential development, $1.15 in government services is required to support that development.
In contrast, for every dollar of property tax raised from farms, only $0.37 in services is required.
[cover%20-%20bikers.jpg] The environmental benefits of land preservation include the conservation of biological diversity and of clean water that nourishes entire ecosystems.
The preservation of greenway corridors, i.e., an interconnected system of open spaces, allows wildlife to migrate and to navigate between nesting and foraging areas.
Greenways also allow people to walk, hike and bike between connected open spaces, thus enhancing their recreational experience.
The provision of an ample amount and variety of recreational opportunities throughout our state -- quiet open spaces, hiking trails, athletic fields, swimming spots, playgrounds, campgrounds, bike paths -- all of these and more -- are seen by the public and businesses as necessary to a high quality of life.
New Jersey has some of the most important historic sites in the United States.
Historic preservation fosters increased tourism, provides unique educational opportunities, and plays a significant role in downtown and neighborhood revitalization.
The open space, farmland and historic preservation programs benefit all New Jerseyans, as well as visitors to our state.
Whether enjoying a game of ball in a city park, driving by bucolic farmland, hiking in a state park, touring a historic home, dining on locally grown fruits or vegetables, or just drinking a glass of pure water kept clean by protected watershed lands, there is something for everyone in these popular programs.
top
New Jersey's Preservation Ethic "In wildness is the preservation of the world."
--Henry David Thoreau "In human culture is the preservation of wildness."
--Wendell Berry
When polled periodically over the past few decades, New Jerseyans have consistently expressed their desire for land preservation and smart growth.
In 2000, a poll commissioned by the nonprofit group New Jersey Future and conducted by Belden, Russonello 
76% said New Jersey can't afford to lose more farmland to new housing developments.
Through the GSPT Act's land and historic preservation funding provisions and its goal to preserve an additional one million acres of land in the state, New Jersey commits itself to permanently preserving 40% of its land mass, a goal unprecedented in this country.
The preservation objectives include protecting our most important ecological systems, working agricultural landscapes, lands which protect the purity of our water supplies, historic resources and recreational lands.
In so doing, we embrace an ethic-one that fully recognizes our dependence on open space and farmland to sustain both ourselves and the natural world and its ecological systems -- places to play, clean water resources, wildlife habitat and farm fresh food to eat.
It is an ethic that also recognizes the importance of our past and ensures that the best of that past continues to play a role in our future.
All levels of government have partnered together to commit substantial resources to redirect the state's pattern of growth and development in a way that ensures both a healthy environment and economy.
[delwatergapsun.jpg] New Jersey's commitment to achieving its land preservation goals has attracted national attention, and our example is being replicated.
Other states turn to ours as a model of how to address the vexing problems associated with unplanned growth, such as the loss of open space and farmland, disinvestment in urban areas and historic resources, and traffic congestion that threatens to choke off economic growth.
The citizens of New Jersey, the Governor and the Legislature can not only be proud of the progress being made here at home, but also for the recognition our programs and policies have received by other states across the nation.
As they have in New Jersey, policies that recognize the imperative of preserving land and historic resources both for their own inherent values as well as for our quality of life are starting to take hold elsewhere.
top Preservation Actions Prior to a Stable Source of Funding Since 1961 New Jersey voters have approved nine bond issues providing funds for open space, farmland or historic preservation.
Collectively, these bond issues have provided $1.39 billion for the Green Acres program, $30 million for the Blue Acres program (floodplain preservation), $200 million for the Farmland Preservation program, and $60 million for Historic Preservation.
These funding efforts, coupled with efforts on the part of nonprofits, municipalities, counties and the federal government resulted in the preservation of approximately 903,000 acres of land in our state, a notable accomplishment.
However, a problem with past statewide funding efforts was that they weren't stable -- weren't predictable -- no one knew when the next bond issue might be approved.
It was therefore not possible to do long range planning, or to reliably have the resources necessary to act quickly when necessary to preserve properties important to protecting water quality, critical wildlife habitat and valuable recreational opportunities.
top
Genesis of a Stable Source of Funding Recognizing that the rapid loss of open space was threatening both the quality of the environment and the quality of life in New Jersey, Governor Christine Todd Whitman in her 1998 second inaugural speech pledged to work to secure a stable source of funding for land preservation that year.
She also endorsed the Governor's Council on New Jersey Outdoors recommendation to preserve an additional one million acres of open space and farmland in New Jersey.
The Legislature concurred and in July 1998 passed Senate Concurrent Resolution 66 and Assembly Concurrent Resolution 109, sponsored by Senate President DiFrancesco and Senator Martin, and Assemblymen Lance and Corodemus, respectively.
These resolutions placed on the ballot a constitutional amendment creating a stable source of funding for land and historic preservation.
The voters enthusiastically supported the amendment, approving the measure by a 2 to 1 margin.
The amendment sets aside $98 million of State sales tax revenues for the first 10 years, up to $98 million for the next 20 years for debt service, and also allows the allocation of up to $1 billion in bond proceeds.
top
Garden State Preservation Trust Act In June 1999 legislation providing program details regarding the stable source of funding became law.
Known as the Garden State Preservation Trust Act, S-9 and A-1000 (known as A-1,000,000 for the one million acre goal) were sponsored by Senate President DiFrancesco and Senator McNamara and Assembly Speaker Collins and Assemblyman Corodemus, respectively.
The Legislature made the following finding in the body of the GSPT Act:
The Legislature therefore determines that it is in the public interest to preserve as much open space and farmland, and as many historic properties, as possible within the means provided by the 1998 constitutional amendment; that, in recognition of the recommendations of the Governor's Council on New Jersey Outdoors, it is a worthy goal to preserve one million more acres of open space and farmland in the Garden State in the next decade to protect the quality of life for New Jersey residents....
The legislation also created the Garden State Preservation Trust to coordinate land and historic preservation efforts and to oversee the million acre program.
The GSPT consists of a nine-member, bipartisan board comprised of four cabinet officials, one public member appointed by the Governor, two public members chosen by the Senate President, and two public members chosen by the Assembly Speaker.
The GSPT first convened in October 1999 and subsequently adopted its mission statement.
The GSPT Act also provides direction on how the $98 million in constitutionally dedicated funds should be spent.
Of the total, $6 million will be reserved annually for historic preservation purposes, and the remainder will be split 60/40 between the Green Acres and farmland preservation programs, respectively.
The Green Acres portion is further allocated as follows: 50% for State acquisition and development, 40% for grants and loans to local governments for acquisition and development, and 10% for grants to nonprofit organizations for land acquisition and development.
It is anticipated that approximately one-half of the land preserved under the GSPT program will be farmland and one-half will be conservation and recreational open space.
(Information current as of January 2003.)
top
[spacer.gif] [spacer.gif]
[spacer.gif] [spacer.gif]
[spacer.gif] [spacer.gif]
