[House Seal] [Main Page]
How many times can you say Puerto Rico? The name of this Caribbean island is rolling off the tongues of just about everyone these days - politicians, journalists, national television and radio commentators, syndicated columnists, mainland and island residents.
In fact, we cant seem to stop discussing Puerto Rico lately.
Just pick up any major newspaper or magazine, or peruse the countless number of English and Spanish-language television and radio news programs, or surf Internet outlets.
Youre likely to find out something new about Puerto Rico.
Take for example an Orlando Sentinel headline: Judge: Let Puerto Rico Have the Vote; A Federal Judge Sided With 11 Puerto Rican Residents Who Sued For The Right to Vote in the Presidential Elections, (By Iván Román, July 22, 2000); or PR VP, a headline in National Reviews July 14, 2000 issue referring to Vice President Al Gores consideration of Pedro Rosselló as a vice-presidential candidate.
These are just two of the many examples of news stories from or about Puerto Rico that have dominated the headlines this year.
Theres more where that came from - the Vieques issue, the islands political status, FBI files and the independence movement, and the release of Puerto Rican political prisoners.
More recently, federal judges in Puerto Rico ruled in two separate court cases that Puerto Ricans should have the right to vote in presidential elections and that the federal death penalty does not apply on the island.
Each time one of these issues makes the pages of the New York Times, The Washington Post, or the endless number of media outlets across the country, in Puerto Rico, and abroad, something happens.
Slowly but surely, Puerto Rico is becoming part of the national consciousness.
For years, political leaders on both the island and the mainland have argued that the general public, including the media and federal officials, fail to understand the island of Puerto Rico.
George McDougall, former special assistant to a former Puerto Rican Governor said in 1986, Not only does the general public fail to comprehend what Puerto Rico is, but there are many instances in which officials of the federal government display total ignorance on this subject.
I am sorry to say that the news media are as much to blame as anyone.
Our fascination with Puerto Rico is nothing new, except this time something is different.
People are gaining a broader view about Puerto Rico, its culture, its history, its contributions to this country, and the issues it confronts in the 21st Century.
Sure, Ricky Martin and Jennifer Lopez have had something to do with furthering interest in Puerto Rico.
But public discourse has gone deeper than talk about our favorite celebrities and music.
So why should Americans care about an island in the Caribbean? To many it seems so far away, but is only a three-hour plane ride from the East Coast.
Puerto Ricans are our neighbors, they have fought in our wars, and their contributions to the mainland are endless.
The island is a prime trading spot between the mainland, the Caribbean basin, and Latin America.
Puerto Ricans are an important part of a Latino voting bloc that must increasingly be reckoned with and may determine the outcome of the presidential campaign in many states and of the U.S. Senate race in New York.
They contribute to the United States economy in many ways and the island is home to a large number of mainland pharmaceutical companies.
According to a June 22 editorial in The Hartford Courant, "There is $47 billion in annual trade between the island companies and the 50 states, directly supporting more than 250,000 jobs on the mainland.
Also, Puerto Rico serves as a source of hope for developing countries including Haiti and the Dominican Republic.
The Vieques issue has played an important role in taking the discussion about Puerto Rico to a different level.
The issue has fostered a sense of nationalism on the island.
It has united Puerto Ricans across the political spectrum in calling for the Navy to leave the island.
I continue to support the Navys withdrawal from the island.
I applaud the perseverance, strength, and will of the people of Puerto Rico.
No matter what your position on this issue, it is impressive to see the people of Vieques unite behind a cause and use their right to protest to bring this issue to the attention of the administration in Washington, D.C.
Another issue that took center stage nationally was the FBI files recently released about leaders of the independence movement.
As a result of my inquiries, the Federal Bureau of Investigation released 8,400 pages worth of documents in May (2000) detailing information about COINTELPRO, the FBIs counterintelligence program, designed by the United States Government in 1956 to uncover organizations or individuals who were considered threats to national security.
The independence movement in Puerto Rico was targeted as one of those groups.
The documents are the first installment of 1.8 million documents the FBI plans to release to the public detailing the FBIs alleged involvement in the persecution of leaders of the independence movement and other political parties in Puerto Rico.
The COINTELPRO movement was not isolated to Puerto Rico and targeted people and groups across the country.
The release of Puerto Rican political prisoners last year hit yet another chord in the hearts and minds of people across the country.
On Aug. 11, 1999, President Bill Clinton offered clemency to 11 Puerto Rican political prisoners who were serving prison sentences from 15 to 105 years for crimes linked to the struggle for Puerto Rican independence.
My efforts to release these prisoners were part of an effort to bring to closure a part of the United States relationship with Puerto Rico.
It was an ugly chapter, but it was one that again created a dialogue about the island.
Every time a Puerto Rico issue comes under the national spotlight, the media play a crucial role in bringing it to the attention of politicians and policy-makers.
According to political analyst Juan Manuel Garcia Passalacqua, it was the New York Times in 1977 that first posed the issue of Puerto Ricos economic relationship with the United States.
In 1985, it was NBC News that obtained an on-camera agreement (later rescinded) between (former) Governor Carlos Romero Barceló and opposition leader Rafael Hernández Colón on a yes-or-no referendum on the islands political status.
In the 1960s, it was U.S. News and World Report that touted Puerto Rico as the answer to Castro and called it the troubled island in the 1980s.
But its going to take more than headlines to seriously address the issues Puerto Rico and the United States confront in their relationship in the 21st century.
It will take continued efforts by citizens, policy-makers, and politicians to work together to bring about a solution to the present status by engaging in a fair discourse.
President Clinton is attempting to do so.
He made a strong statement when he called members of different political parties to the White House for a summit on the islands status last month.
The President has said he wants to resolve the islands status before he leaves office in 2001.
As much as we would like to believe that people are all of a sudden becoming enlightened about Puerto Rico, that is not the case in every segment of our society.
Misinformation about Puerto Rico is still plentiful.
Many people still dont know that Puerto Ricans are United States citizens, that the island uses United States money as currency, and that Puerto Rico is a colony of the United States.
These facts must be understood before people can gain a broader understanding of the island and the issues it faces.
Lets keep rolling Puerto Rico off our tongues, in our homes, on the House floor, in classrooms and universities.
More importantly, lets take those discussions a step further and use them as an impetus to resolve the issues facing Puerto Rico and its relationship with the United States.
-0-
Congressman José E. Serrano (D-NY) represents the 16th Congressional District.
Please visit his website for more information: www.house.gov/serrano
Next Previous Press Release Press Release List Press Release
