CRATER LAKE NATIONAL PARK ___________________________________ FIRE MANAGEMENT PLAN Draft Revised APPENDIX Q USFWS BIOLOGICAL OPINION USFWS Logo United States Department of the Interior FISH AND WILDLIFE SERVICE Southwest Oregon Field Office 2900 NW Stewart Parkway Roseburg, OR 97470 541/957-3474 FAX: 541/957-3475 September 23, 1998 In Reply Refer To: 8330.0933 (98) File Name: CLNP-FP.BO Log #: 1-15-98-F-093 Memorandum To: Albert J. Hendricks, Superintendent Crater Lake National Park
From: Craig A. Tuss, Field Supervisor
Subject: Biological Opinion for the Crater Lake National Park Supplemental Environmental/Biological Assessment Fire Plan, May 1998
This letter responds to the National Park Service (NPS), May 11, 1998, request for section 7 consultation on the Revised Fire Management Plan for Crater Lake National Park (Park), Crater Lake, Klamath County, Oregon, pursuant to section 7(a)(2) of the Endangered Species Act of 1973, as amended (Act), (16 U.S.C. 1536 et seq.), and its implementing regulations (50 CFR Part 402).
The consultation request was received in this office on May 13, 1998.
The consultation package requested that the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service (Service) concur with the Park's finding that the pending action "may result in incidental take to listed or endangered species, principally the threatened northern spotted owl, (Strix occidentails caurina) (spotted owl), but is not likely to adversely affect the spotted owl or any other federally listed, or proposed, threatened or endangered species in the long term."
The Service determined that a formal consultation would be required and a biological opinion (opinion) prepared.
A formal consultation is required whenever a proposed action may adversely affect and/or result in the incidental take of a listed species.
Therefore, a "not likely to adversely affect" determination is inappropriate when there is a possible take of a listed species.
The proposed action may adversely affect the spotted owl for the following reasons.
Take of spotted owls may occur as a result of the loss and/or adverse modification of suitable spotted owl habitat due to a fire event as well as the possible adverse effects of fire suppression activities.
Additional take may occur as a result of disturbance associated with such actions.
This document represents the Service's opinion on the effects of the proposed action on listed species, and is being conducted pursuant to section 7 of the Act.
The listed species present in the Park are the threatened spotted owl, the threatened northern bald eagle (Haliaeetus leucocephalus) (bald eagle), the endangered peregrine falcon (Falco peregrinus) (peregrine falcon), and the threatened bull trout (Salvelinus confluentus) (bull trout).
This opinion is based on information obtained from the following documents and sources: Draft Supplemental Environmental/ Biological Assessment Revised Fire Management Plan, (BA) NPS 1998; revised; Fire Management Plan, NPS 1977; Bull Trout Management Plan, NPS 1991; Resource Advisors Guide, NPS 1998; Final Supplemental Environmental Impact Statement on Management of Habitat for Late-Successional and Old Growth Forest Related Species Within the Range of the Northern Spotted Owl (USDA and USDI 1994); Pacific Bald Eagle Recovery Plan (USDI 1986), Peregrine Falcon Pacific Coast Recovery Plan (USDI 1982); informal consultation between Park and Service staff, and Service office files.
CONSULTATION HISTORY
In July of 1987 an Environmental Assessment (EA) on the Fire Management Plan (FMP) for the Park was reviewed by the NPS and a Finding of No Significant Impact (FONSI) was issued.
On August 27, 1996, staff from the Park met with Service biologist, Scott Center and informed him that they were in the process of revising the 1987 Fire Management Plan.
The Park requested technical assistance from the Service in the preparation of the revision, and the Service informed the Park that a section 7 consultation would be required on the finished document.
The Park also informed S. Center at this meeting that the Service had reviewed and commented on the 1987 EA.
On April 2, 1997, staff from the Park and the Service met to discuss how to formulate a combined formal consultation and conference report.
As a result of this meeting on April 29, 1997 the Service provided the Park with a list of information that would be needed for the consultation and bull trout conference report.
The Service acknowledged receipt of nine maps on September 10, 1997 in response to the April 29 information request.
On April 14, 1998, the Service sent a letter to the Park requesting a status update on the FMP and BA. Craig Tuss, supervisor for the Service's Southwest Oregon Field Office (office) expressed our willingness to proceed with consultation on the Park's FMP.
The BA and FMP were provided to this office on May 13, 1998.
During the early stages of the development of the opinion it became evident that much of the information previously requested had not been provided or had not been addressed in an adequate manner and additional information would be required in order to complete the Service's opinion on the FMP.
A memorandum requesting this information was provided to the Park on June 23, 1998.
A Service phone call on July 30 to the Park revealed that the requested information had been mailed on July 14, 1998 but had not been received in our office.
The Park mailed an additional copy of the information, which our office received on August 5, 1998.
BIOLOGICAL OPINION
DESCRIPTION OF THE PROPOSED ACTION
The proposed actions are described in further detail in the BA and FMP, which is incorporated by reference.
The analysis of the impacts from the proposed actions in the FMP is limited to their effects on listed species only.
The Resource Advisor Guide associated with the FMP states that actions taken under the plan will follow "light on the land" (LOTL) techniques (pp 12-14) in order to have minimum adverse effects on the wilderness resources within the Park.
The BA is supplemental to the 1987 EA. Based on the most recent findings of fire effects research, it evaluates only the environmental effects of the Park's revised integrated fire management program on natural resource values including the current status of threatened, endangered and sensitive species and habitats.
The Park's previous FMP, written and approved in 1977, partitioned the Park into three fire management zones which are described in the FMP.
The land along the Park boundary is a full suppression zone; then there is a conditional zone, where a decision will be made on whether to allow the fire to burn or initiate suppression action; and the third zone is a natural fire zone, in which fires would be allowed to burn if the fire met certain prescription parameters.
The natural fire zone dominates the Park area.
This strategy was an effort to close the gap between land management that suppressed all fires and the natural conditions found in areas with a natural fire history.
This revised FMP is part of a larger programmatic Resource Management Plan (RMP) for the Park.
The actions described in the plan are consistent with other actions described in the RMP and contribute to overall natural resource preservation at the Park.
The NPS policy requires that all parks with vegetation capable of sustaining fire develop a wildland fire management plan that will meet the specific resource management objectives for that park.
Scientific evidence indicates that fires have been a part of the Park's environment for thousands of years prior to the arrival of modern man and have played a major role in the formation of soil, vegetation, and wildlife in the Park.
The new FMP proposes to implement current research, NPS policy, and mitigating actions.
This includes the use of prescribed fires (management-ignited and prescribed natural fire) which are designed to attain resource management objectives while protecting public safety, cultural resources, and sensitive habitats for endangered species.
Site-specific prescriptions would be designed to reintroduce fire into fire dependent ecosystems and identify time frames and fire size for introduction of prescribed fire.
Fire management planning is designed to provide adequate suppression capability based on probable wildfire occurrence and complexity while permitting some lightning fires to be managed unsuppressed within specific areas.
Under the FMP, all fires would be monitored for size, location, rate of spread, intensity, and potential threats which might require or affect suppression action.
This type of detailed planning is designed to protect resource values and provide baseline information for future fire management.
FIRE MANAGEMENT AREAS
For management purposes, fire management areas (FMAs) are areas commonly used to accommodate enclaves of natural fire within a much larger geographic area designated for fire suppression.
In the Park, the opposite condition prevails; the entire Park may be considered as a domain for prescribed natural fire with the exception of the Park perimeter, developed sites and other areas of special concern.
In each FMA, a set of management strategies will be followed.
Unwanted fires will be suppressed in all FMAs, but in a manner, which minimizes negative environmental impacts of suppression activities.
Map 3 in the FMP shows the distribution of FMAs throughout the Park.
FIRE MANAGEMENT STRATEGIES
Suppression
This strategy includes all actions initiated to limit the growth of a wildfire.
A "wildfire" is defined as an unwanted fire requiring suppression action.
This type of fire will always be suppressed.
Three suppression options allow the fire manager to suppress wildfires at minimum cost and minimum impact consistent with values at risk.
The definitions of the suppression options are:
Confine
A wildfire that is restricted within predetermined natural boundaries; little or no suppression action is taken; used in areas with extensive natural barriers and negligible values at risk.
'Confined' fires, which exceed these predetermined boundaries, will likely be suppressed utilizing a control strategy.
Contain
A wildfire that is restricted to a defined area, using a combination of natural and constructed barriers.
These barriers are designed to stop the spread of fire under prevailing and forecasted weather conditions until the fire burns itself out.
'Contained' fires which exceed these predetermined boundaries will likely be suppressed utilizing a control strategy.
Control
A wildfire that is aggressively fought with personnel, equipment, and aircraft to halt its spread and to extinguish all hot spots until it is declared out.
The fire management policy of the NPS is intended to be flexible and responsive to the resource management objectives.
Since 1968 the NPS has considered prescribed natural fire as a natural factor that should be allowed to play the role in maintaining natural ecosystems.
The NPS policy states that:
The presence or absence of natural fires within a given ecosystem is recognized as a potent stimulant, retarding or eliminating various components of that ecosystem.
Most natural fires are components of the ecosystem; are lightning caused; and are recognized as natural phenomena which must be permitted to continue to influence the ecosystem if truly natural areas are to be perpetuated.
One method to perpetuate this process is the use of prescribed fires.
Prescribed fires are those which contribute toward attainment of resource management objectives while protecting public safety, cultural resources and other values at risk.
The FMP is guided by the authorizing legislation that established the Park, the Park's General Management Plan, Statement for Management (1992), Resources Management Plan (NPS 1993) and Fire Management Guidelines (NPS 1986).
In an effort to reflect current research, philosophies and interagency cooperative agreements, the FMP has been updated.
The BA examines the alternatives for implementing the new plan for managing fire ecology and the restoration of the vegetative community.
The goal of the FMP is to return the vegetation to a condition that represents primeval wilderness character through preserving terrestrial ecosystems, native species of plants and animals, and natural diversities of their habitat.
The Park's Statement for Management (1986) lists several other resource management objectives, which apply to fire management.
The first objective is to support an active program of research in many disciplines, including fire ecology to assist in guiding management actions and interpretive programs.
A second objective is to cooperate with outside agencies, organizations, and members of the public, in assuring, to the greatest extent possible, that nearby lands are developed and managed in ways that are compatible with the preservation of the Park's ecological communities.
Other objectives include:
* Protect human life and property both within and adjacent to the Park.
* Reduction of fuels that have accumulated as a result of past fire exclusion, thereby reducing the chances of a catastrophic wildfire, which may threaten human life and property.
* Acknowledge the major role fire plays as a natural force in the Park, and thereby maintain fire as an ecosystem process in the biotic communities of the Park to the fullest practical extent.
The following conservation measures are required in the FMP. Bulldozer use (6) was expanded to include all heavy equipment.
1.
Clearing for helispots or clearing of natural openings, will be held to an absolute minimum and will require prior approval from the Superintendent, except in life threatening situations.
2.
Fire suppression activities or prescribed natural fires burning within three miles of known threatened or endangered species locations will be reviewed by the Fire Management Officer prior to aircraft overflights or other activities to identify any concerns or constraints.
3.
When helicopters are used, natural landing sites must be used when available.
However landings will not occur in Research Natural Areas or other sensitive sites identified by the Resource Advisor, except in life threatening situations.
4.
Motor vehicle and heavy equipment use is limited to existing roads.
5.
Water drops will be preferred over fire retardant.
Under no circumstances will retardant be used in the Sun Creek drainage, Lost Creek drainage, or in the caldera.
Crater Lake, Sun Creek and Lost Creek may not be used as a water source for fire suppression.
6.
Heavy equipment, including bulldozers, will not be used except where life and property are clearly threatened.
Heavy Equipment use will be restricted to the Exclusion Fire Management.
The first priority choice for heavy equipment use will be to widen existing dirt or paved roads to use as control lines.
Second choices for heavy equipment use are pre-existing lines where life or property is clearly threatened.
Heavy equipment shall not be used within 100 feet of stream channels except in a dire emergency.
If it is necessary for heavy equipment to cross a stream channel it should be done perpendicular to the waterflow and with as minimum disturbance possible.
A Resource Advisor must be present and consulted whenever heavy equipment use is contemplated.
The Superintendent must approve heavy equipment use.
This opinion covers the expected impacts associated with actions described within the FMP, if activities occur that are not covered or beyond the scope of this FMP, consultation will need to be reinitiated.
DESCRIPTION OF THE ACTION AREA
The action area is defined (50 CFR 402) as, "all areas to be affected directly or indirectly by the Federal action and not merely the immediate area involved in the action."
For purposes of this consultation the action area is defined as the area within the Park boundary.
The Park is located along the crest of the Southern Cascade Mountains in Southwest Oregon.
The Park covers an area of 183,224 acres.
The area has a long geologic history of volcanic and glacial activity.
Crater Lake (13,192 acres) itself lies withing the collapsed volcanic caldera (16,630 acres, includes lake) of Mount Mazama.
The elevation ranges from 8,929 feet at Mt. Scott to approximately 3,900 feet in Red Blanket Canyon.
The Park was established in 1902 to insure the preservation of the caldera lake and its natural surroundings.
The 1974, a Wilderness Designation proposal for 122,400 acres was transmitted to Congress by the Administration.
Several proposed changes to this submittal have been prepared by NPS staff.
Public Law 96-553 (December 9, 1980) added 22,830 acres to the Park from contiguous national forest lands which had previously been evaluated as wilderness study areas under RARE II.
The Park has subsequently prepared several additional proposals.
The latest Park wilderness proposal (January 1994) proposed 179,737 acres to be designated as wilderness.
This proposed area is currently being managed as wilderness.
The Park is virtually surrounded by managed timber lands.
It is bounded on the northeast, south, and east by the Winema National Forest; on the north by the Umpqua National Forest; on the northwest, west, and southwest by the Rogue River National Forest and its Sky Lakes Wilderness Area.
In addition, it also adjoins the Sun Pass State Forest and a 80-acre block of private land at the southeast corner.
The Park is near the midpoint of the Sierra Cascade Mountain province of the Pacific mountain system.
The area is influenced by Pacific Ocean weather patterns.
The majority of storm fronts that pass the north Pacific Coast each winter result in moisture at the Park.
Summer weather is generally mild with clear skies.
Occasional thunderstorms occur, but seldom with enough force or volume to produce damaging rains or hail.
Daytime summer high temperatures usually range from 60°F (15°C) to 70°F (21°C) and seldom exceed 85°F (29.4°C).
ENVIRONMENTAL BASELINE
Regulations implementing the Act (50 CFR 402.02) define the environmental baseline as the past and present impacts of all federal, state, or private actions and other human activities in the action area.
Also included in the environmental baseline are the anticipated impacts of all proposed federal projects in the action area which have undergone section 7 consultation, and the impacts of state and private actions which are contemporaneous with the consultation in progress.
The following summarizes the environmental baseline for this consultation.
STATUS OF THE SPECIES
Spotted owl
Status Range-wide
A detailed account of the taxonomy, ecology and reproductive characteristics of the spotted owl is found in the 1987 and 1990 Fish and Wildlife Service Status Reviews (USDI 1987, 1990a); the 1989 Status Review Supplement (USDI 1989); A Conservation Strategy for the Northern Spotted Owl (ISC Report) (Thomas et al. 1990); and the final rule designating the spotted owl as a threatened species (USDI 1990 b).
There are approximately 5,608 pair of spotted owls and resident singles (activity centers) and approximately 8.1 million acres of suitable habitat currently estimated across the range of the species (L. Reigel, USFWS, pers. comm., 1997).
Recent demography studies (Burnham et al. 1994, Forsman et al. 1996) indicate that the population is declining.
The species decline is expected to continue as spotted owl sites with severely degraded habitat conditions become inactive.
Implementation of the President's NW Forest Plan (NFP) (USDA/USDI 1992a) could eventually slow and abate much of the decline by protecting all spotted owl sites within Late Successional Reserves (LSR) established on federal lands within the range of the spotted owl.
The NFP is expected to provide for the conservation of the species by allowing non-suitable but potential habitat to regenerate within the LSRs, which should allow the population to eventually stabilize across its range.
Past land management activities have degraded spotted owl and murrelet habitat conditions throughout the range of these species; the NFP was developed to address the conservation of these and other species.
Prior to the implementation of the NFP, late-successional forests were increasingly fragmented due to development, timber harvest and stochastic natural and human-induced actions.
The spotted owl was listed as a threatened species in response to widespread habitat loss across its range.
The FEMAT report (USDA et al. 1993), the FSEIS (USDA/USDI 1994a), and the ROD (USDA/USDI 1994b) detail the impacts of these natural and human-induced actions on late-successional forests and related species, such as the spotted owl.
The basic conservation strategy in the NFP builds upon the measures developed by the Interagency Scientific Committee (ISC) (Thomas et al. 1990) and the owl recovery team (USDI 1992).
In developing a conservation strategy for late-successional forest-associated species, the Departments of Interior and Agriculture developed a network of forest reserves across the Pacific Northwest.
This reserve network is designed to protect late-successional forest species where habitat conditions are relatively intact and provide for the regeneration of late-successional forest habitat where habitat is extremely limited and the associated plant and wildlife populations are low.
Populations of late-successional forest species are expected to stabilize within LSRs and eventually increase in response to improving habitat conditions over the next 50-100 years.
Populations of late-successional forest species outside of these reserves are expected to decrease over time and may eventually disappear.
Hence, the NFP is expected to provide for smaller, yet more stable and better distributed populations of late-successional forest species.
When the NFP is implemented as originally designed and intended, federal lands are expected to carry the major burden of conservation and recovery of both the owl and the murrelet.
While contributions from non-federal land remain important in many areas, proper implementation of the NFP would allow greater flexibility in the management of these non-federal lands.
Status in Action Area
The Park is located at the eastern edge of the range of the spotted owl.
Potential suitable habitat is found in patches throughout the Park, with a higher density of patches and larger patch sizes occurring southwest of a diagonal line running from the northwest to the southeast corners of the Park.
There are approximately 32,260 acres of suitable spotted owl habitat in the Park.
All known Park spotted owl activity centers have been found in areas identified as suitable habitat.
Based on the Park's map of suitable habitat and spotted owl activity centers, it appears that approximately 18 different owls or owl pairs have been located from 1994-1996.
Few areas of suitable habitat have been surveyed using acceptable Service protocol.
There are still large areas of suitable habitat that have not been surveyed at all and this opinion is being developed on the assumption that all suitable habit in the park is occupied by spotted owls.
Eight of the 18 activity centers have 40 percent or more acres of suitable habitat within the 1.2 mile diameter provincial home range (2,895 acres).
Six of the 18 activity centers range from 29 to 38 percent of suitable spotted owl habitat and four of the activity centers have less then 15 percent suitable habitat within the provincial home range.
Much of the lack of habitat in the spotted owl's home ranges is due to the large areas of natural occurring habitat types that are not suitable habitat, such as large meadows and lava fields found in this portion of the high Cascade mountain range.
Bald Eagle
Status Range-wide (continental 48 states)
The bald eagle is listed as threatened in the 48 conterminous United States.
Its decline became evident about 30 to 40 years ago and was found to be caused by contamination of its food base by pesticides; destruction of nesting, wintering, and foraging habitat; and illegal killing and disturbance.
An account of the taxonomy, ecology, and reproductive characteristics of the bald eagle is given by Stalmaster (1987).
History and trends in the status of bald eagle nests in Oregon are tracked annually.
With expansions in human populations, the bald eagle in the Pacific Northwest has continued to suffer from destruction of existing and potential nesting habitat, loss of wintering habitat, a declining food base, and increased human disturbance.
In Oregon the protection afforded by the Act and new environmental regulations have helped provide for an increase in the number of territories throughout the state and the overall productivity of the birds is gradually increasing.
The Oregon midwinter count for 1997 was 681 birds, the fourth highest count recorded, and represented an increase of 5 percent over the 1996 total (Isaacs and Anthony 1997).
The 1998 midwinter count results have not yet been released.
Nesting habitat is an essential element for maintenance of this species.
Nesting bald eagles are associated with large bodies of water, with 84 percent of nests within 1.6 kilometers (1 mile) of a permanent water body (Anthony and Isaacs 1989).
Adults tend to use the same breeding area and often the same nest each year, although alternate nests are not uncommon.
Nests are usually constructed in dominant or co-dominant trees affording a clear view of the terrain and a short flight to feeding areas.
A disturbance-free area is crucial to ensure nesting success.
Perch trees are also needed by bald eagles for roosting and foraging.
These trees typically provide an unobstructed view of the surrounding area, are invariably in proximity to feeding areas (Palmer 1988), and bald eagles tend to use the highest perch sites available (USFWS 1986).
The Oregon and Washington area has been important for wintering bald eagles and supports approximately 25 percent of the wintering bald eagles in the conterminous United States.
Wintering sites are typically in the vicinity of concentrated food sources such as anadromous fish runs, high concentrations of waterfowl or mammalian carrion.
Winter roost sites provide protection from inclement weather conditions and are characterized by more favorable microclimate conditions.
These communal winter roosts can be a great distance from foraging areas (USFWS 1986).
Breeding bald eagles in Oregon tend to be year-around residents provided that there is an adequate food sources in their territory throughout the winter.
Adequate forage sources are perhaps the most critical components of bald eagle breeding and wintering habitat (USFWS 1986).
Increased use of closer foraging areas is often noted as food requirements of the young increases.
During the breeding season, bald eagles appear to prefer a few key foraging areas.
Bald eagles are particularly intolerant of human disturbance during the breeding season (i.e., generally January 1 through July 31 in Oregon).
Human activities may cause abandonment of nests or result in reproductive failure from frequent disturbances to the adults.
In some cases, bald eagles may alter their behavior to avoid excessive disturbance, or harassment, by relocating nests or by making temporal changes in their activity patterns, occasionally into marginal habitats.
Many nesting territories are maintained under these less than ideal conditions, resulting in lower fledgling success of young in these territories.
On the other hand, bald eagle tolerance of human activities varies between individual pairs.
In general, adult eagles are more sensitive to disturbance during courtship, egg-laying and incubation, and their site tenacity increases as young develop.
Preferred foraging areas and perch sites tend to be fairly specific even during the nonbreeding season.
The Pacific Bald Eagle Recovery Plan (USFWS 1986) established the goal of 1 young fledged per year per site with a five year average of not less than 65 percent of nesting success.
The recovery goals have been achieved and a draft proposed rule to delist is currently being prepared by the Service.
Status in Action Area
The action area falls within the High Cascades recovery zone.
There is no documented nest area within the action area.
There is unconfirmed historic data that claims eagles once nested in Crater Lake on Wizard Island.
They are commonly seen roosting and foraging on or near the lake and streams in the Park.
Bald eagles are observed in the Park from early spring, April or May, to fall, usually sometime in October.
None are present during the winter months.
Available information indicates that bald eagle populations are increasing range-wide.
The species' status recovered sufficiently to warrant reclassification from endangered to threatened throughout the lower 48 states on July 12, 1995 (USDI 1995a); this action did not change the status of the species for Oregon and Washington where it remains listed as threatened.
In the Pacific Recovery Region, the number of occupied territories has consistently increased since 1986 and exceeded 800 for 5 years beginning in 1990 when 861 territories were reported.
Although productivity objectives have been met and averaged about 1.03 young per occupied territory since 1990, distribution goals and nesting targets in several Recovery Zones within the Recovery Region have not been met (USDI 1995a).
The 1997 bald eagle nest productivity survey was the 20th year that data on nesting bald eagles in Oregon has been recorded.
330 breeding territories were surveyed.
60 previously unknown nests were located.
276 nestlings were observed.
The recovery goal for this area is 218 nesting pairs.
308 breeding territories were occupied in 1997.
Productivity resulted in a 5-year average of 0.92 young per occupied territory.
Several Recovery Zones had productivity averages below 1.00 young per occupied territory in 1997, indicating that localized regions of poorer reproduction still persist within Oregon.
Nesting success resulted in a 5-year average of 59 percent.
Recovery population goals were met or exceeded in 8 of 10 (80 percent) Oregon Recovery Zones (Isaacs et al. 1997).
Peregrine Falcon
Status of North American and Pacific Coast Population
The American peregrine falcon is currently listed as endangered in the western United States.
The recovery plan was developed by the Service in cooperation with the Pacific Coast American Peregrine Falcon Recovery Team (USFWS 1982).
In 1993 an addendum to both the Pacific and the Rocky Mountain/Southwest American Peregrine Falcon Recovery Plans (USFWS 1993) was produced by the Western Peregrine Falcon Recovery Team.
The Western Peregrine Falcon Recovery Team replaced the two previous recovery teams for the Rocky Mountain and Southwest regions.
The number of active peregrine falcon sites continue to increase over North America with a significant number of new nest sites discovered each year.
The addendum stated that historically there were approximately 540 pairs known in the 12 Western states and by 1991 there were an estimated 720 pairs present.
Recent data indicate that the number or pairs continues to increase each year (R. Mesta, USFWS, pers. com., 1998).
Productivity at a few nest sites in southwestern Oregon is still being hampered by eggshell thinning induced by chronic levels of organochlorines ( J. Pagel,USFS, pers. com.,1996).
However, the number of active nest sites in Oregon in 1997 (53) has increased almost fourfold from the 14 sites known in 1990.
A Peregrine Falcon Recovery Plan for the species was approved in 1982 for the Pacific States population covering Oregon, California, Washington and Nevada (USFWS 1982).
Within the Peregrine Falcon Recovery Plan, management units were created with distribution and populations targets.
The Peregrine Falcon Recovery Plan recommended that delisting be considered when : (1) 185 wild, self-sustaining pairs are established with the following distribution: California-120, Oregon-30, Washington-30, Nevada-5, and (2) fledgling success averages 1.5 fledged young per active pair per year for a 5-year period.
Both of the goals have been achieved and the number of breeding pairs is currently over 300.
Peregrine falcons nest on cliffs, often near water and forage on a diverse avian prey base.
The annual courtship period usually begins in February with egg laying normally occurring in April or May.
Young typically fledge in late May or June and remain near the nest cliff for six to 8 weeks.
Site specific nesting chronologies vary due to elevation, aspect of cliff, and individual behavioral variations.
Status in Action Area
Within the Park, there is one known eyrie.
From 1979 to 1996 at least 29 young have fledged from this site resulting in an annual fledging rate of 1.6 young per active pair.
This is above the recovery plan goal of 1.5 young fledged per active pair.
In 1995 the site was successful in producing an unknown number of young as egg shell fragments were collected from the nest ledge.
In 1996 nesting was recorded as failed due to a rock being mistaken for an addled egg, however, it should have been recorded as insufficient data as recorded in 1997 when an inadequate survey effort was made.
There are many potential nest sites available on the cliffs in the caldera, however, because appropriate surveys have not been conducted in this area the exact number of peregrine falcons that may use the Park for nesting or foraging is unknown.
Recovery plan goals established for the Pacific Coast Population of the American peregrine falcon have been met and the Service has developed a draft proposed rule to delist this species ( R. Mesta, USFWS, pers. com., 1998).
Bull Trout
Status Range-wide
Bull trout (formerly known as dolly varden, Salvelinus malma) were listed as a threatened species under the Act on June 5, 1998 and are also listed as a sensitive species by the state of Oregon.
Native bull trout were probably the only fish species present in Sun Creek, a tributary to the Klamath River, prior to early introductions of non-native salmonids.
Once found in most major river systems in the Pacific Northwest and Canada, bull trout distribution has been significantly reduced over the past 30 years, and many local extinctions have occurred (Goetz 1989, Roberts 1987).
The Klamath River Basin represents the southern limit of bull trout distribution and the populations are restricted to cold headwater streams.
Habitat degradation and introduction of non-native species are believed to be the primary causes for the recent decline of this species.
Status in Action Area
In 1947, Wallis (1948) collected bull trout, rainbow trout (Oncorhynchus mykiss), (formerly Salmo gairdneri) and brook trout (Salvelinus fontinalis) in Sun Creek.
Wallis described bull trout as being "well distributed" below a waterfall 0.7 km downstream of the Vidae Creek tributary.
Park and Oregon Department of Fish and Wildlife (ODFW) stocking records indicate repeated stocking of rainbow trout and brook trout, in Sun Creek, between 1926 and 1971.
Stocking before 1928 and after 1940 occurred downstream of the Park boundary, at the first road crossing (ODFW, Fish Liberation Records, Klamath Falls, OR.)
The bull trout is found in two streams in the Park; Sun Creek and Lost Creek.
The lower reaches of Sun Creek has a small population of bull trout that is interbreeding with brook trout.
Brook trout are being removed in the upper reaches of Sun Creek which has a more stable population of bull trout.
Park managers have introduced bull trout to Lost Creek to provide a spatially separated population in the Park.
The Lost Creek bull trout were established to provide a refugial population in case the Sun Creek population was lost during brook trout eradication efforts (antimycin).
The Park intends to move Lost Creek fish back to Sun Creek and return Lost Creek to a fishless condition.
Competition and hybridization between bull trout and brook trout have been identified as critical components effecting bull trout persistence.
A survey of Sun Creek was initiated in the summer of 1989 to investigate the distribution and abundance of fish relative to habitat characteristics (Dambacher et al. 1990).
This survey was funded by the NPS Water Rights Branch, relative to the present Klamath River Basin water rights adjudication.
The creek was surveyed from its headwaters to the Park boundary.
Bull trout, brook trout and bull trout/brook trout hybrids were collected.
Rainbow trout were not collected and presumably no longer exist in Sun Creek, within the Park.
Bull trout were restricted to a 1.9 km reach of Sun Creek.
Total number of bull trout was estimated at 130 fish, over 1 year or older, young of the year were very abundant.
Viability of such a small population is in question.
Population estimates were made from direct snorkel counts expanded over uncounted habitat units.
Previous work (Leary et al. 1983) found the brook trout/bull trout hybrids were male and presumably infertile; however a hybrid collected from Sun Creek was a female and possessed a developed ovary.
It is not known if hybrids from Sun Creek are capable of producing viable offspring.
Nonetheless, habitat utilization by the two species was very similar and competition and hybridization have probably reduced the distribution of the bull trout population.
A Bull Trout Management Plan was developed for the Park in 1991, and initiated in the summer of 1992.
EFFECTS OF THE ACTION
The proposed action is designed to allow the use of fire to provide a landscape that is closer to reflecting a landscape under a natural range of variability fire regime than one which reflects decades of fire suppression.
Decisions are likely to allow low to medium intensity fires.
High intensity fires could result in some areas due to variability in the distribution of fuel loads or if there is a loss of control of fire events.
The biological evaluation includes an analysis of the potential effects of implementing the FMP on the listed bald eagle, peregrine falcon, spotted owl, and the bull trout.
A broad range of determinations, from beneficial to adverse, were made with regard to fires of differing intensities.
However, site specific analysis is not possible because a multitude of factors which may affect the course, location, intensity, and extent of a natural fire is difficult to determine in advance.
It is reasonable to assume that high intensity fires have a greater potential for having adverse impacts to the listed species present than medium and low intensity fires.
Higher intensity fires are more likely in areas where fuel loading may have increased beyond the range of natural variability due to decades of human fire suppression activities.
There is also a greater likelihood for some impacts resulting from a high intensity fire to be sustained over a longer time frame than from fires of low or medium intensity.
High intensity fires may adversely impact water quality (e.g. silt, sedimentation, erosion), remove downed wood and litter, result in the loss of forest habitat or loss or degradation of other important aquatic and terrestrial cover types, and alter the distribution and abundance of prey items for listed, proposed, candidate, and species of concern.
Damage to habitat may be severe enough to be considered permanent or preclude reoccupation by a species for some time (e.g. loss of mature and overmature trees providing nesting habitat).
Spotted owl nest sites may be adversely affected by high intensity fires and have the potential for direct loss of individuals.
Foraging opportunities for the spotted owl could also be adversely affected by high intensity fires.
Bald eagle and peregrine falcon potential breeding sites are not likely to be adversely affected as there is only one known site within the project area.
In addition to the effects of prescribed natural fire, fire suppression activities have the potential to adversely affect all four listed species.
These activities could include the use of aircraft, heavy equipment, the creation of fire lines and breaks, use of chemicals, deliveries of water and/or fire retardants, and vegetation removal.
Listed species could be affected by disturbance and loss of habitat or cover from these activities.
Disturbance associated with these activities in and near breeding sites during a sensitive breeding period may result in the mortality of eggs and/or young.
There are several factors associated with the FMP which limit the potential of short-term impacts to three of the listed species (i.e., spotted owl, bald eagle, and peregrine falcon): * High intensity fires are highly unlikely prior to mid-June and more likely toward the fall when most species have either completed or are through the peak of the reproductive season.
* Fires suppression activities occur during the fire season which generally extends from to July 1 to October 1.
During the period May through September, most thunderstorm activity tracks through the Park in a southwest to northeast pattern.
Orographic lifting from the west side to the east side causes thunderstorm development, which has resulted in 78 percent of all fire ignitions at Crater Lake (since 1931).
In normal precipitation years, fire starts in the Cascade Mountains west side forests usually do not occur prior to snow melt in late June or July.
Wet fuel conditions in these forests preclude ignitions or significant fire spread until mid to late August in most years.
In drier east side forest, dominated by ponderosa pine or lodgepole pine, ignitions may occur as early as late May in drier years.
Starts in these forests that begin early in the season have the potential to become very large by late summer or early fall, depending on ambient weather conditions and additional potential effects that may result from drought conditions.
Of the total of 527 fires since 1931, 116 have been human-caused, 413 lightning-ignited and 27 scheduled prescribed burns.
Human-caused fires are most frequent in the Munson Valley, Annie Springs area, and along the Park's major roadways.
The highest fire frequency is from the first of August to mid-September when the forest is driest, lightning storms most frequent, and visitor use heaviest.
The revised FMP provides for minimal direct impacts resulting from human activities on the natural resources of the Park.
Historical fire records indicate the vegetative communities of the Park evolved with fire.
The wilderness character of the Park could best be maintained using fire as a resource management tool and process.
Greater plant diversity should result with this alternative which may result in a greater diversity of animal species.
Sensitive resources are proposed to be adequately protected or enhanced.
The FMP is a detailed program of actions that provides specific procedures to accomplish Park management policies and objectives.
The implementation of the FMP would allow fire to play its ecological role in the Park, and also provide for the protection of human life, developments, and cultural resources.
The FMP will be the primary guide for all wildland fire management actions within the Park, including response to wildfire and management of prescribed fire.
Although the FMP provides specific direction for implementing a fire management program at the Park, it is a flexible document that will change in response to increasing knowledge of fire behavior and effects on the Park's ecosystem.
Fire management planning at the Park is designed to provide adequate suppression capability based on probable wildfire occurrence and complexity, while permitting certain lightning fires to be managed unsuppressed within specific management areas.
Management-Ignited Prescribed Fire
This type of fire is intentionally ignited by management to accomplish management objectives in selected areas under prescribed conditions.
Management-Ignited Prescribed Fire (MIPF) will be managed according to priorities established in the annual prescribed burn program described in the FMP based on the hazard fuel analysis.
MIPF objectives will be to reduce fuel accumulations around developed areas, and restore natural processes where appropriate and to reduce the wildfire threat to human life and protect facilities.
Burn plans will contain a number of parameters (prescription) covering a wide range of factors such as wind speeds, temperatures, humidity, weather forecast, resource availability, flame lengths, size, and areas not to be burned.
MIPF that significantly exceed prescription will prohibit the ignition of new MIPFs.
Also, ongoing MIPFs that significantly exceed prescription will be declared wildfires and the appropriate suppression response will be initiated.
Professional skill on the part of the fire managers must be employed in making this type of determination.
Prescribed Natural Fire
Prescribed natural fire (PNF) is a fire ignited by natural means (usually lightning), that is permitted to burn under specific environmental conditions, in preplanned locations, with adequate fire management personnel, and equipment available to achieve defined objectives.
PNF objectives will be to perpetuate natural resources and associated processes.
To the extent which is politically and socially practical, fires will be allowed to continue burning as long as they stay within predetermined areas and burning conditions.
Fires exceeding these prescription limits will be declared wildfires and the appropriate suppression response will be initiated.
DIRECT EFFECTS
Effects to the Species: Habitat Loss and Disturbance.
1.
Bald eagle: There should be very little potential for impacts to this species from actions that would occur as a result of implementation of the FMP.
The primary area for potential nest sites for the species would likely be within the caldera in locations that fire and/or suppression activities should not affect.
Prey used by the bald eagle consists primary of fish and carrion that fire would have little if any adverse impact on.
Disturbance from aircraft should not be a factor as aircraft are not allowed below 2,000 feet in the caldera area.
2.
Peregrine falcon: peregrine falcons, like most raptors, are sensitive to disturbance during the reproductive period, particularly until the young have hatched.
If disturbance occurs during the early stages of nest site selection or courtship the pair may relocate or abort reproductivity efforts for that year.
Disturbance to peregrine falcons can occur from project activities that produce noise above ambient levels.
Such disturbance could be particularly harmful during the incubation season, as it may cause incubating or brooding adults to flush from the nest, allowing the eggs or newly hatched young to become chilled.
Known nest sites should be protected from human disturbance from January to the end of July to reduce the potential losses from nesting failure or mortality.
Peregrine falcon prey species could be affected in those areas impacted by fire, but due to the high mobility of this raptor and the fact that its prey consists of other mobile bird species any impacts from fire or suppression actions should be minor.
Areas near nest sites are restricted from suppression activities, therefore disturbance from activities that may occur under the FMP should not be a factor.
Disturbance from aircraft should not be a factor as aircraft are prohibited below 2,000 feet in the caldera area.
3.
Spotted owl: Implementation of the FMP may involve actions that could result in the incidental take of the spotted owl.
Natural fire events that are not suppressed and those that involve suppression activities could result in the loss of spotted owls, their young or eggs, and suitable habitat which would reduce nesting, roosting, and foraging opportunities for this species.
Fire suppression actions could also adversely impact this species through disturbance by aircraft and firecrew personnel during the nesting period.
While habitat loss could occur before suppression activities were successful, this ecosystem and the spotted owl have evolved with periodic fire events.
Greater impacts to this species and its habitat could result if the FMP was not implemented.
Natural fuels would accumulate with total suppression or lack of prescribed burns and when a natural fire event did occur it could result in larger areas being impacted and greater damage to the forest vegetation.
The potential fire danger, under normal conditions, within 0.5 mile of known activity centers is estimated from Jim Agee's research and fire reports the last three years to be in the moderate to low range.
During the last three years only two fires (AC #1 and AC #3) have occurred near spotted owl activity centers.
AC #1 was located near Boundary Springs and burned approximately 2 acres.
AC #3 was not allowed to burn and was suppressed shortly after detection.
4.
Bull trout: Impacts to habitat for this species should be limited to those caused by natural fire events which would be suppressed using LOTL methods.
This will help to minimize potential impacts that could result from a natural fire event.
Potential impacts that would be likely to occur would include increased sedimentation due to loss of vegetation, decaying ground cover, and possible increase in water temperature from loss of streamside vegetation and canopy cover.
Fire retardant material from aircraft drops are prohibited in any drainage where bull trout are known to be present.
Lost Creek is a small watershed and is part of the Sand Creek drainage.
It has a stand of lodgepole pine which largely regenerated after a 1869 fire.
The vegetation type has a moderate severity fire regime, and the same acreage limitations on high fire severity made for Sun Creek would apply here.
Management of bull trout in Sun Creek and Lost Creek over the long run will depend on the area avoiding a catastrophic disturbance.
The catastrophic event: most likely to affect either upper Sun Creek or Lost Creek is a high severity forest fire.
Catastrophic disturbance is more likely to occur the longer a fire exclusion policy is implemented in these watersheds.
Currently, prescribed natural fire is projected to create a patchy effect that may help prevent a large scale stand replacement fire in the Sun Creek watershed.
INDIRECT EFFECTS
There should be few if any adverse indirect effects as a result of implementation of the proposed FMP.
The possibility of disturbance effects related to fire suppression activities has the greatest potential for adverse impacts to the listed species within the Park.
However, if the safeguards and restrictions proposed in the conservation measures are followed, impacts from indirect effects should be relatively minor.
INTERRELATED AND INTERDEPENDENT ACTIVITIES
Regulations implementing section 7 of the Act require that the Service consider the effects of activities which are interrelated and interdependent to the proposed Federal action (50 CFR section 402.02).
Interrelated actions are those that are part of a larger action and depend on the larger action for their justification.
Interdependent actions are those that have independent utility apart from the action under consideration.
Interdependent and interrelated activities are assessed by applying the "but for" test, which asks whether any action and its associated impacts would occur "but for" the proposed action.
There were no interrelated and interdependent activities identified for the proposed actions beyond those associated with the FMP.
CUMULATIVE EFFECTS
Cumulative effects are those effects of future state or private activities on endangered and threatened species or critical habitat that are reasonably certain to occur within the area of the federal action subject to consultation.
Any state or private activities that would occur in the action area are controlled by the Park and would therefore become a federal action.
Future federal actions will be subject to the consultation requirements established in section 7 of the Act and, therefore, are not considered cumulative to the proposed action.
CONCLUSION
After reviewing the current status of the listed species present in the Park, the environmental baseline in the action area, the effects of the proposed action and the cumulative effects, it is the Service's biological opinion that the Crater Lake National Park FMP, as proposed, is not likely to jeopardize the continued existence of the spotted owl, peregrine falcon, bald eagle, or bull trout.
INCIDENTAL TAKE STATEMENT
Section 9 of the Act, as amended, prohibit taking (harass, harm, pursue, hunt, shoot, wound, kill, trap, capture or collect, or attempt to engage in any such conduct) of listed species of fish or wildlife without a special exemption.
Harm is further defined to include significant habitat modifications or degradation that results in death or injury to listed species by significantly impairing behavioral patterns such as breeding, feeding, or sheltering.
Harass is defined as actions that create the likelihood of injury to listed species to such as extent as to significantly disrupt normal behavior patterns which include, but are not limited to, breeding, feeding or sheltering.
Incidental take is any take of listed animal species that results from, but is not the purpose of, carrying out an otherwise lawful activity conducted by the federal agency or the applicant.
Under the terms of section 7(b)(4) and section 7(o)(2), taking that is incidental to and not intended as part of the agency action is not considered a prohibited taking provided that such taking is in compliance with the terms and conditions of this incidental take statement.
The measures described below are non-discretionary.
Failure to comply with these measures may cause the protective coverage of section 7(o)(2) to lapse.
AMOUNT OR EXTENT OF TAKE
The Service anticipates an unquantifiable amount of incidental take of spotted owl pairs or resident singles due to potential for loss of habitat and disturbance associated with the projects described in the Description of the Proposed Action section of this biological opinion.
This take will be difficult to detect because take due to fire events and harassment caused by fire suppression activities are difficult to quantify.
If spotted owls are nesting in suitable habitat within 0.25 mile of the proposed projects (or natural fire events), the Service anticipates some percentage of these individuals will be subject to take as a result of the impacts and disturbances associated with these activities.
This take can be qualified in terms of the cumulative probability that (1) suitable, unsurveyed habitat contains nesting spotted owls; (2) nesting adults and juvenile birds will in fact be disturbed; and (3) if disturbed, reproductive output will be negatively affected.
In this biological opinion, the Service has determined that this level of anticipated take is not likely to result in jeopardy to the spotted owl.
REASONABLE AND PRUDENT MEASURES
The service believes the following reasonable and prudent measures are necessary and appropriate to minimize take:
1.
Minimize disturbances to spotted owl pairs and their progeny during the nesting season.
2.
Prevent disturbances to bald eagles and if nesting, place restrictions on activities near the nest site.
3.
Prevent disturbances to peregrine falcons and their progeny during the nesting season.
4.
Minimize public use of drainages with bull trout populations during periods of high fire potential to reduce the likelihood of human caused fires.
TERMS AND CONDITIONS
In order to be exempt from the prohibitions of section 9 of the Act, the NPS must comply with the following terms and conditions which implement these reasonable and prudent measures.
These terms and conditions are not discretionary.
1.
The conservation measures described under Effects to the Species: Conservation Measures are hereby incorporated as conditions of this opinion that must be followed to the greatest extent practical.
In the event that the conservation measures are not followed or are violated the Service must be notified immediately.
2.
A annual report on prescribed and natural fires that occur within 0.5 mile of bald eagle or peregrine falcon nest sites, in suitable spotted owl habitat or the drainages occupied by bull trout shall be provided to the Service.
3.
All suitable spotted owl habitat should be surveyed to document presence and attempts made to locate nest sites.
If natural fire occurs in suitable habitat for spotted owls, prior to it being surveyed according to protocol, it should be assumed that the habitat contains a spotted owl or owls and appropriate safeguards taken to reduce the likelihood of incidental take from the fire event or suppression actions.
Maps outlining areas of suitable habitat and containing information on known spotted owl activity centers should be updated prior to the fire season and provided to the Resource Advisor and all fire crew leaders.
4.
If a fire occurs in suitable spotted owl habitat, especially if near a known owl activity center, Park staff should conduct an investigation to determine what affect the fire event had on the habitat and/or the spotted owls that may have occupied the area.
Review Requirement: The reasonable and prudent measures, with their implementing terms and conditions, are designed to minimize incidental take that might otherwise result from the proposed action.
These measures should decrease the level of take of spotted owls to the degree possible, given the circumstances surrounding the proposed action.
With implementation of these measures, the Service believes that some spotted owls may be incidentally taken as quantified above.
If, during the course of the action, this minimized level of incidental take is exceeded, such incidental take would represent new information requiring review of the reasonable and prudent measures provided.
The federal agency must immediately provide an explanation of the causes of the taking and review with the Service the need for possible modification of the reasonable and prudent measures.
Upon locating a dead, injured, or sick endangered or threatened species specimen, initial notification must be made to the nearest Fish and Wildlife Service Law Enforcement Office.
Care should be taken in handling sick or injured specimens to preserve biological materials in the best possible state for later analysis of cause of death.
In conjunction with the care of sick or injured endangered species or preservation of biological materials from a dead animal or fish, the finder has the responsibility to ensure that evidence associated with the specimen is not unnecessarily disturbed.
In Oregon, contact the Service's Law Enforcement Office at 541/883-6900, the Southwest Oregon Field Office at 541/957-3474, or the Klamath Basin Fish and Wildlife Office at 541/885-8481.
The Service analyzed the impact of the above reasonable and prudent measures on the proposed action and believes that these measures comply with the minor change requirement as defined by 50 CFR 402.14 (I)(2).
CONSERVATION RECOMMENDATIONS
Sections 2(c) and 7(a)(1) of the Act directs federal agencies to utilize their authorities to further the purposes of the Act by carrying out conservation programs for the benefit of endangered and threatened species.
The term "conservation recommendations" has been defined as suggestions by the Service regarding discretionary measures to minimize or avoid adverse effects of a proposed action on listed species or critical habitat, to help implement recovery plans, or develop information.
The Service offers the following conservation recommendations:
1.
Surveys should be conducted each winter when snow is present to determine if rare forest carnivores; wolverine, lynx, and fisher, are present in the Park.
The lynx is currently proposed for listing and the wolverine had been considered for listing and may be considered again in the near future.
2.
Annual surveys for bald eagles and peregrine falcons should be conducted each year in suitable nesting habitat to determine if there are any birds present.
If birds are present at a suitable nesting site, additional surveys should be conducted to determine if a nesting attempt is made and the number of young fledged at each site.
All surveys should be done according to acceptable protocol for the species.
The entire caldera area should be surveyed for bald eagle and peregrine falcon nest sites each spring.
When a peregrine falcon is not present on the usual nest ledge or cliff, this site should not be recorded as unoccupied unless a complete survey according to protocol has been completed on all cliffs surrounding the lake.
3.
The bull trout management plan should be followed and completed in a timely fashion.
Recommended Actions To Assist In Recovery Goals
1.
All known spotted owl activity centers should be surveyed each year to determine presence and record reproduction success.
2.
Conservation actions should be completed as possible to assist in the recovery of the bull trout as described in the Park's management plan.
To provide additional refugial populations of bull trout, the park should rehabilitate suitable and historical stream habitat, and reintroduce bull trout by transplanting from existing populations.
REINITIATION NOTICE-CLOSING STATEMENT
This concludes formal consultation on the actions outlined in the description of the proposed action.
As provided in 50 CFR 402.16, reinitiation of formal consultation is required where discretionary federal agency involvement or control over the action has been authorized by law and if (1) the amount or extent of incidental take is exceeded, (2) if new information reveals effects of the action that may affect listed species or critical habitat in a manner or to an extent not considered in this biological opinion, (3) the action is subsequently modified in a manner that causes an effect to the listed species that was not considered in this opinion, or (4) a new species is listed or critical habitat designated that may be affected by the action.
In instances where the amount or extent of incidental take is exceeded, any operation causing such take must cease pending reinitiation of formal consultation.
If consultation is reinitiated for any of the above reasons, the NPS shall not make any irreversible or irretrievable commitment of resources which has the effect of foreclosing the formulation of reasonable and prudent alternatives.
If you have any questions regarding this biological opinion, please contact David Peterson or myself at the Southwest Oregon Field Office, 541/957-3474.
cc: Steve Denny, ODFW, Roseburg, OR Nancy Lee, FWS-OSO, Portland, OR (e) Steve Lewis, FWS-KBFWO, Klamath Falls, OR (e) Office File, FWS-OSO, Portland, OR (e)
LITERATURE CITED
Anthony, R.G. and F.B. Isaacs.
1989.
Characteristics of Bald Eagle nest sites in Oregon.
Journal of Wildlife Management 53(1):148-159.
Burnham, K.P., D.R. Anderson, and G.C. White.
1994.
Estimation of vital rates of the Northern Spotted Owl. Appendix J, pp. 1-26 in USDA Forest Service, Final Supplemental Environmental Impact Statement.
Portland, OR. Vol.II.
Dambacher, J., M.W.
Buktenica, and G.L. Larson.
1990.
Interim report on fishes and habitat in streams tributary to the Klamath River, with special reference to the bull trout Salvelinus confluentus in Sun Creek, Crater Lake National Park, Oregon.
National Park Service, Cooperative Park Studies Unit, Oregon State University, Corvallis, Oregon.
Forsman, E.D., S. DeStefano, M.G. Raphael, and R.J. Gutierrez, (eds.) 1996.
Demography of the Northern Spotted Owl.
Proceedings of a workshop, Fort Collins, Colorado.
December 1993.
Studies in Avian Biology No. 17.
Cooper Ornithological Society.
Goetz, F. 1989.
Biology of the bull trout Salvelinus confluentus: A literature review.
Willamette National Forest, Eugene, Oregon.
53p.
(Available from D. Skeesick, Willamette National Forest, Box 10607, Eugene, OR 97440).
Isaacs, F.B., R.G. Anthony, and D.P. Anderson.
1997.
Bald eagle nest locations and history of use in Oregon and the Washington portion of the Columbia River recovery zone, 1971 through 1997.
Oregon Coop.
Wildl.
Res.
Unit, Oregon State University.
Corvallis, Oregon.
18 pp, 6 tables, 2 figures, 1 appendix.
Leary, R.F., F.W. Allendorf, and K.L. Knudsen.
1983.
Consistently high meristic counts in natural hybrids between book trout and bull trout.
Syst.
Zool. 32:369-376.
Mesta, R. Personal communication.
July 1998.
U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service.
Ventura, California.
Pagel, J. Personal communication.
1996.
U.S. Forest Service.
Medford, Oregon.
Palmer, R.S. (ed.) 1988.
Handbook of North American birds.
Volumes 4 and 5; diurnal raptors.
Yale University Press.
Reigel, L. Personal communication.
1997.
U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service.
Portland, Oregon.
Roberts, W. 1987.
The bull trout - endangered in Alberta.
In Proceedings of the Workshop on Endangered Species in the Prairie Provinces, (eds.): G.L. Holroyd, W.B. McGillivray, P.H. R. Stepney, D.M. Ealey, G.C. Trottier, and K.E. Eberhart.
Natural History Section, Provincial Museum of Alberta.
Edmonton, Alberta, Canada.
Stalmaster, M.B. 1987.
The Bald Eagle.
Universe Books.
New York, New York.
Thomas, J.W., E.D. Forsman, J.B. Lint, E.C. Meslow, B.R. Noon, and J. Verner.
1990.
A conservation strategy for the northern spotted owl.
A Report by the Interagency Scientific Committee to address the conservation of the northern spotted owl.
U.S. Department of Agriculture, Forest Service, and U.S. Department of the Interior, Fish and Wildlife Service, Bureau of Land Management, and National Park Service.
Portland, Oregon.
U.S. Department of Agriculture, U.S. Department of the Interior, U.S. Department of Commerce, and the Environmental Protection Agency.
1993.
Forest Ecosystem Management: An Ecological, Economic, and Social Assessment.
Report of the Forest Ecosystem Management Assessment Team.
Forest Service, Fish and Wildlife Service, National Marine Fisheries Service, National Park Service, Bureau of Land Management, Environmental Protection Agency.
Portland, Oregon.
U.S. Department of Agriculture, U.S. Department of the Interior.
1994a.
Final Supplemental Environmental Impact Statement on Management of Habitat for Late Successional and Old Growth Forests Related species within the Range of the Northern Spotted Owl. Forest Service, Bureau of Land Managment.
Portland, Oregon.
U.S. Department of Agriculture, U.S. Department of the Interior.
1994b.
Record of Decision for Amendments to Forest Service and Bureau of Land Management Planning Documents Within the Range of the Northern Spotted Owl. Forest Service, Bureau of Land Management.
Portland, Oregon.
U.S. Department of the Interior.
1992c.
Recovery Plan for the Northern Spotted Owl-Final Draft.
Portland, Oregon.
U.S. Department of the Interior.
1982.
Pacific States Population Recovery Plan for the Peregrine Falcon.
Fish and Wildlife Service.
Portland, Oregon.
U.S. Department of the Interior.
Addendum to the Pacific Coast (1982) and Rocky Mountain/Southwest (revised 1984) American Peregrine Falcon Recovery Plans.
Fish and Wildlife Service.
Portland, Oregon.
20pp.
U.S. Department of the Interior.
1986.
Recovery Plan for the Pacific Bald Eagle.
Fish and Wildlife Service.
Portland, Oregon.
U.S. Department of the Interior.
1987.
The northern spotted owl status review.
Fish and Wildlife Service.
Portland, Oregon.
U.S. Department of the Interior.
1989.
The northern spotted owl; a status review suppliment.
Fish and Wildlife Service.
Portland, Oregon.
U.S. Department of the Interior.
1990a.
1990 Status Review: northern spotted owl; Strix occidentalis caurina.
Report to the Fish and Wildlife Service.
Portland, Oregon.
U.S. Department of the Interior.
1990b.
Endangered and threatened wildlife and plants; determination of threatened status for the northern spotted owl; final rule.
50 CFR Part 17, Federal Register, June 26, 1990.
Pages 26114-26194.
U.S. Department of the Interior.
1992a.
Endangered and threatened wildlife and plants; determination of critical habitat for the northern spotted owl.
Federal Register, Vol.57, No. 10:1796-1838.
January 15, 1992.
U.S. Department of the Interior.
1994.
Final biological opinion for the preferred alternative of the Supplemental Environmetnal Impact Statement on Management of Habitat for Late-Successional and Old-Growth Forest Related Species Within the Range of the Northern Spotted Owl. Portland, Oregon.
U.S. Department of the Interior.
1995a.
Endangered and treatened species; bald eagle reclassification; final rule.
50 CFR Part 17, Federal Register, July 12, 1995.
Pages 36000-36010.
U.S. Department of the Interior.
1986.
NPS-18 Wildland Fire Management Guideline.
National Park Service.
U.S. Department of the Interior.
1977.
Fire Management Plan.
Crater Lake National Park.
National Park Service.
32pp.
U.S. Department of the Interior.
1986.
Statement for Management.
National Park Service.
Crater Lake National Park.
40pp.
U.S. Department of the Interior.
1991.
Bull Trout Management Plan.
National Park Service.
Crater Lake National Park.
17pp.
U.S.Department of the Interior.
1993.
Resource Management Plan.
National Park Service.
Crater Lake National Park.
132pp.
U.S. Department of the Interior.
1998.
Environmental Assessment Fire Plan.
National Park Service.
Crater Lake National Park.
89pp.
Wallis, O.L. 1948.
Trout studies and a stream survey of Crater Lake National Park.
M.S. Thesis.
Oregon State University.
Corvallis, Oregon.
