World Heritage logo Potential U.S. Nominations from the Tentative List (Complete Text) _________________________________________________________________
Note: Complete text downloaded from US/ICOMOS gopher site.
INDICATIVE LIST, UNITED STATES (by state)
ALABAMA Moundville Site
ALASKA Aleutian Islands Unit of the Alaska Maritime National Wildlife Refuge (Fur Seal Rookeries) C (vi); N (ii) Arctic National Wildlife Refuge Cape Krusenstern Archaeological District Denali National Park Gates of the Arctic National Park Glacier Bay National Park and Preserve INSCRIBED 1992 Katmai National Park Wrangell-St. Elias National Park and Preserve INSCRIBED 1979
ARIZONA Casa Grande National Monument Grand Canyon National Park INSCRIBED 1979 Hohokam Pima National Monument Lowell Observatory Organ Pipe Cactus National Monument Saguaro National Monument San Xavier Del Bac Taliesin West [added 17 Aug 90] Ventana Cave
CALIFORNIA Joshua Tree National Monument Point Reyes National Seashore/Farallon Islands National Wildlife Refuge Redwood National Park INSCRIBED 1980 Sequoia/Kings Canyon National Parks Yosemite National Park INSCRIBED 1984
CALIFORNIA/NEVADA Death Valley National Mounment
COLORADO Colorado National Monument Mesa Verde National Park INSCRIBED 1978 Lindenmeir Site Rocky Mountain National Park
DISTRICT OF COLUMBIA Chapel Hall, Gallaudet College Washington Monument
FLORIDA/GEORGIA Everglades National Park INSCRIBED 1979 Okefenokee National Wildlife Refuge
GEORGIA Ocmulgee National Monument Savannah Historic District Warm Springs Historic District
HAWAII Haleakala National Park [added 22 Aug 83] Hawaii Volcanoes National Park INSCRIBED 1987 Pu'uhonua O Honaunau National Historical Park
ILLINOIS Auditorium Building, Chicago Cahokia Mounds State Historic Site INSCRIBED 1982 Carson, Pirie, Scott and Company Store, Chicago Eads Bridge, Illinois-St. Louis, Missouri Frank Lloyd Wright Home and Studio Leiter II Building, Chicago Marquette Building, Chicago Reliance Building, Chicago Robie House, Chicago Rookery Building, Chicago South Dearborn Street-Printing House Row North Historic District Unity Temple, Oak Park
INDIANA New Harmony Historic District
LOUISIANA Poverty Point
MAINE Acadia National Park
MASSACHUSETTS Goddard Rocket Launching Site
MISSOURI Wainright Building, St. Louis
MONTANA Glacier National Park INSCRIBED 1995
NEW JERSEY/NEW YORK Statue of Liberty National Monument INSCRIBED 1984
NEW MEXICO Carlsbad Caverns National Park INSCRIBED 1995 Chaco Culture National Historical Park INSCRIBED 1987 Pecos National Monument Taos Pueblo INSCRIBED 1992 Trinity Site
NEW YORK Brooklyn Bridge General Electric Research Laboratories, Schenectady Prudential (Guaranty) Building, Buffalo Pupin Physics Laboratory, Columbia University Original Bell Telephone Laboratories
NORTH CAROLINA/TENNESSEE Great Smoky Mountains National Park INSCRIBED 1983
OHIO Mound City Group National Monument
OREGON Crater Lake National Park
PENNSYLVANIA Fallingwater Independence National Historic Site INSCRIBED 1979
TEXAS Big Bend National Park Guadalupe Mountains National Park
UTAH Arches National Park Bryce Canyon National Park Canyonlands National Park Capitol Reef National Park Rainbow Bridge National Monument Zion National Park
VIRGINIA McCormick Farm and Workshop Monticello INSCRIBED 1987 University of Virginia Historic District INSCRIBED 1987 Virginia Coast Reserve
WASHINGTON Mount Rainier National Park Olympic National Park INSCRIBED 1981 North Cascades National Park
WISCONSIN Taliesin
WYOMING Grand Teton National Park
WYOMING/MONTANA Yellowstone National Park INSCRIBED 1978
PUERTO RICO La Fortaleza-San Juan National Historical Site INSCRIBED 1983 ____________________________________________________
These sites are further detailed in the following Public Notice in the Federal Register (47 FR 19648), as amended by 48 FR 38101 and 55 FR 33781).
__________________________________________________________
INDICATIVE INVENTORY OF POTENTIAL FUTURE U.S. NOMINATIONS TO THE WORLD HERITAGE LIST
I. Cultural Properties Prehistory and Living Communities (formerly Archaeology)
Post-Contact Aboriginal
Taos Pueblo, New Mexico.
(36 deg.25' N.; 105 deg.40' W.) A center of Indian culture since the 17th century, the pueblo of Taos, still active today, symbolizes Indian resistance to external rule.
The mission of San Geronimo, one of the earliest in New Mexico, was built near Taos Pueblo in the early 17th century.
Criteria: (v) An outstanding example of a traditional human settlement which is representative of a culture and which has become vulnerable under the impact of irreversible change.
Post-Contact Aboriginal/Developed Agriculture
Pecos National Monument, New Mexico.
(35 deg.35' N.; 105 deg.45' W.)
This site was occupied since before A.D. 900 up until the 19th century.
The archaeological excavations of the area led to the development of a cultural sequence which in turn enabled the comparative dating of southwestern U.S. sites.
This classification is the cornerstone of the understanding of Southwestern archaeology.
In addition to the archaeology at Pecos, there are the foundations of a Spanish mission, the ruins of an 18th-century church, and numerous Pueblo Indian structural remains, including restored kivas.
Criteria: (iii) Bears a unique testimony to a civilization which has disappeared.
Developed Agriculture
Moundville Site, Alabama.
(33 deg.0' N.; 87 deg.40' W.)
This is probably the site described by De Soto in his Mississippian expedition.
This site demonstrates the Mesoamerican influence on the culture of the Southeast.
It is a"ceremonial" site with over twenty extant mounds and burial areas.
Criteria: (iii) Bears a unique testimony to a civilization which has disappeared.
Casa Grande National Monument, Arizona.
(33 deg.0' N.; 111 deg.30' W.) Casa Grande is a four-story tower of packed earthen walls built over 600 years ago by the agricultural Indians of the Gila River Valley.
The site also contains important Hohokam Indian remains dating from about 900 A.D. Criteria: (iii) Bears a unique testimony to a civilization which has disappeared.
Hohokam Pima National Monument, Arizona.
(32 deg.55' N.; 111 deg.30' W.) Hohokam Pima is part of the site of Snaketown, which was continuously inhabited by the Hohokam/Pima cultures for over 2,000 years.
This site contains essentially all phases of Hohokam cultural development from the earliest villages established around 400 B.C. up to A.D. 1450.
Subsequently this same site was occupied by the Pima from the time of contact with the Spanish until around 1940.
The Hohokam Pima site clearly demonstrates the Mesoamerican influence in the Southwestern U.S.
The site is located on a Pima reservation.
Criteria: (iii) Bears a unique testimony to a civilization which has disappeared.
Ocmulgee National Monument, Georgia.
(32 deg.50' N.; 83 deg.40' W.)
The large mounds and surrounding villages at Ocmulgee demonstrates the cultural evolution of the Indian mound-builder civilization in the southern U.S. Criteria: (iii) Bears an exception testimony to a civilization which has disappeared.
Poverty Point, Louisiana.
(32 deg.40' N.; 91 deg.25' W.)
An archaeological site that flourished from 1,000-600 B.C.
It contains a geometric earthwork complex, consisting of 11.2 miles of raised terraces arranged in six concentric octagons, and Poverty Point Mound, a bird-shaped ceremonial structure.
Criteria:(iii) Bears an exception testimony to a civilization which has disappeared.
Chaco Culture National Historical Park, New Mexico.
(36 deg.10' N.; 108 deg.0' W.)
This property bears testimony to the first five periods of the Chacoan variant and one period of the Mesa Verdean variant of the Pueblo civilization.
Chaco Canyon is a large canyon which contains approximately 1100 ruins including 13 major Pueblo Indian villages.
These villages consist of 3-5 story buildings which often contain over 1,000 rooms.
Criteria: (ii) Exerted great influence, over a span of time and within a cultural area of the world, on developments in town-planning; and (iii) bears a unique testimony to a civilization which has disappeared.
Mound City Group National Monument, Ohio.
(39 deg.25' N; 83 deg.1' W.) Twenty-three burial mounds of Hopewell Indians (200 B.C.-A.D. 500) have yielded vast quantities of artifacts that give insights into the ceremonial customs of the Hopewell people.
Criteria: (iii) Bears a unique testimony to a civilization which has disappeared.
Archaic/Paleo-Indian
Cape Krusenstern Archaeological District, Alaska.
(67 deg.0' N.; 164 deg.0' W.) Cape Krusenstern consists of a series of marine beach ridges (and nearby hills) which contain evidence of nearly every major cultural period in Arctic prehistory and history.
This area is very near the probable route taken by man's first crossing into North America and is still inhabited today.
Due to land subsidence along the coast a unique stratigraphy has formed which allows a complete dating sequence in an area where few dates are available.
Each ridge represents approximately a 200-year time span for a total of approximately 8,000 years.
Criteria: (iii) Bears a unique testimony to a civilization which has disappeared.
Ventana Cave, Arizona.
(32 deg.25' N.; 112 deg.15' W.) Ventana Cave offers a unique history of the hunter/gatherer cultural development and continuity.
This site has been occupied continuously from 200 B.C. until the present.
Excavations here solidified the stratigraphic sequence dates, and made a significant contribution to knowledge of the development of Hohokam culture in this area.
Criteria: (iii) Bears a unique testimony to a civilization which has disappeared.
Paleo-Indian
Lindenmeir Site, Colorado.
(40 deg.55'; 105 deg.10' W.)
This site was one of the earliest Folsom sites to be excavated by archaeologists and was instrumental in establishing man's presence in North America at its current early date.
The site consists of a kill site marked by numerous bison bones and a camp a short distance away.
This is one of the few early man sites where both site types were found, and it gives a more complete picture of the early hunters' life and cultural adaption.
Criteria: (iii) Bears a unique testimony to a civilization which has disappeared.
Hawaiian
Pu'uhonua O Honaunau National Historical Park, Hawaii.
(19 deg.25' N.; 155 deg.55' W.)
This area (formerly known as City of Refuge National Historical Park) includes sacred ground, where vanquished Hawaiian warriors, noncombatants, and kapu breakers were granted refuge from secular authority.
Prehistoric housesites, royal fishponds, and spectacular shore scenery are features of the park.
Criteria: (v) An outstanding example of a traditional human settlement which is representative of a culture and which has become vulnerable under the impact of irreversible change.
European Exploration and Colonial Settlement
La Fortaleza-San Juan National Historical Site, Puerto Rico.
(18 deg.28' N.; 66 deg.10' W.) Spanish defenses at San Juan guarded their sea lanes to the Caribbean; at this site they founded one of their earliest colonies in the Americas.
La Fortaleza, the first fortification of San Juan (built 1533-40), has been the residence of the island's governors since the 1620s.
The massive masonry citadel of El Morro was begun in 1591.
Criteria: (iv) An outstanding example of a type of structure which illustrates a significant stage in history;and (vi) directly and tangibly associated with events of outstanding universal significance.
San Xavier Del Bac, Arizona.
(32 deg.10' N.; 111 deg.0' W.)
One of the finest Spanish colonial churches in the United States, having a richly ornamented baroque interior.
(Comparative national and international study will be necessary before the United States would consider nominating property representative of this important international development.
For example, the California and Texas mission systems would be examined.)
Criteria: (iv) An outstanding example of a type of structure which illustrates a significant stage in history.
Savannah Historic District, Georgia.
The first settlement in the English colony of Georgia, which was founded with philanthropic intent, Savannah has retained much of James Oglethorpe's original city plan and possesses many structures of architectural merit.
Criteria: (ii) Has exerted great influence, over a span of time, or within a cultural area of the world, on developments in town-planning; and (vi) directly and tangibly associated with events or with ideas of outstanding universal significance.
Architecture: Early United States
Monticello, Charlottesville, Virginia.
(38 deg.0' N.; 78 deg.30' W.) Thomas Jefferson, the third American President, was a popularizer of the Classic Revival architectural style.
In Monticello, his mansion, he combined elements of Roman, Palladian, and 18th-century French design with features expressing his extraordinary personal inventiveness.
Criteria: (i) A unique artistic achievement, a masterpiece of the creative genius; and (ii) has exerted great influence, over a span of time and within a cultural area of the world, on developments in architecture.
University of Virginia Historic District, Charlottesville, Virginia.
(38 deg.0' N.; 78 deg.30' W.) Includes original classrooms and professors' quarters housed in pavilions aligned on both sides of an elongated terraced court, as well as the domed Rotunda, a scaled-down version of the Pantheon which was the focal point of Thomas Jefferson's design.
Jefferson envisioned a community of scholars living and studying in an architecturally unified complex of buildings.Criteria: (i) A unique artistic achievement, a masterpiece of the creative genius; and (ii) has exerted great influence, over a span of time and within a cultural area of the world, on developments in architecture.
Architecture: Modern U.S.
Consideration will be given to the nomination of a "thematic" Chicago School district, including some of the properties listed in this grouping.
Auditorium Building, Chicago, Illinois.
(41 deg.52' n.; 87 deg.40' W.) Constructed in 1889, this building is one of the most important works by Chicago School architects Dankmar Adler and Louis Sullivan.
Criteria: (i) A unique artistic achievement, a masterpiece of creative genius; and (ii) has exerted great influence, over a span of time, and within a cultural area of the world, on developments in architecture.
Carson, Pirie, Scott and Company Store, Chicago, Illinois.
(41 deg.52' N.; 87 deg.40' W.) A commercial establishment designed by Louis Sullivan in an original and practical form, Carson, Pirie, Scott and Company was his last large commercial commission.
An iron and steel framework supports the structure, which is most notable for its elaborate ironwork ornament on the first and second floor facades.
Sullivan's designs combine organic and geometric shapes in intricate and delicate patterns, in a type of ornament that is the hallmark of his work.
The addition was by Daniel H. Burnham in 1904-6.
Criteria: (i) A unique artistic achievement, a masterpiece of creative genius; and (ii) has exerted great influence, over a span of time, and within a cultural area of the world, on developments in architecture.
Leiter II Building, Chicago, Illinois.
(41 deg.52' N.; 87 deg.40' W.) Constructed in 1889-91, this building is the masterwork of architect William Le Baron Jenny.
One of the earliest surviving examples of the Chicago School curtain wall proto-skyscraper.
Criteria: (ii) Has exerted great influence, over a span of time, and within a cultural area of the world, on developments in architecture.
Marquette Building, Chicago, Illinois.
(41 deg.52' N.; 87 deg.40' W.) Architects William Holabird and Martin Roche made their first decisive statement on a new concept in building -- steel framing.
Constructed 1893-4.
Criteria: (ii) Has exerted great influence, over a span of time, and within a cultural area of the world, on developments in architecture.
Reliance Building, Chicago, Illinois.
(41 deg.52' N.; 87 deg.40' W.)
This building (1890-5) by Daniel Burnham and John Root is a key monument of the "Chicago School."
It has a steel framework and is covered with terra cotta sheathing except on the granite first floor.
Windows form continuous bands and are "Chicago windows" -- large single, fixed panes of glass which fill an entire bay except for narrow, movable, double hung sash in the projecting bays.
Criteria: (ii) Has exerted great influence, over a span of time, and within a cultural area of the world, on developments in architecture.
Rookery Building, Chicago, Illinois.
(41 deg.52' N.; 87 deg.40' W.)
One of the last great masonry structures of the 19th century, designed by Daniel Burnham and John W. Root.
Constructed in 1886-88, The Rookery is a transitional structure which presaged the modern steel frame office building.
It combines skeletal cast-iron columns and spandrel beams supporting masonry with granite and brick and terra cotta.
Criteria: (ii) Has exerted great influence, over a span to time, and within a cultural area of the world, on developments in architecture.
South Dearborn Street-Printing House Row North Historic District, Chicago, Illinois.
(41 deg.52' N.; 87 deg.40' W.)
This commercial district contains landmark structures in the development of skyscraper construction and some of the finest achievements of the "Chicago School" of architects: The Manhattan Building by William Le Baron Jenny, the first complete steel skeleton building, with wind bracing; the Daniel Burnham-designed Fisher Building, an early curtain-wall structure; the Old Colony Building by Holabird and Roche, using Corydon Purdy's wind bracing system; and the Monadnock Building, by Burnham and Root (north section) and Holabird and Roche (south section), one of the largest masonry bearing-wall structures ever built.
Criteria: (ii) Has exerted great influence, over a span of time, and within a cultural area of the world, on developments in architecture.
Prudential (Guaranty) Building, Buffalo, New York.
(42 deg.50' N.; 78 deg.50'W.)
The last collaborative effort of Dankmar Adler and Louis Sullivan, the 13-story Prudential, constructed in 1895, is a triumph of early skyscraper design.
It links two skyscraper periods and departs from the earlier commercial use of elaborate ornamentation in favor of an emphatically vertical appearance.
Although appearing rectangular in shape, it is actually U-shaped due to light corridors above the first floor.
Criteria: (ii) Has exerted great influence, over a span of time, and within a cultural area of the world, on developments in architecture.
Wainwright Building, St. Louis, Missouri.
(38 deg.40' N.; 90 deg.10' W.) Significant prototype of the modern office building, constructed in 1890-91.
This building represents a deliberate attempt to create an a historical form expressive of the new mass of the multistory office block.
For Sullivan, the potential aesthetic quality of the tall building lay in its unusual height.
To emphasize this height to the maximum degree, he devised a system of closely ranked, pier-like verticals that give the street elevations their forceful thrust.
Criteria: (i) Represents a unique artistic achievement, a masterpiece of the creative genius; and (ii) has exerted great influence, over a span of time, and within a cultural area of the world, on developments in architecture.
Architecture: Wright School
A single, or thematic, nomination representative of this group will be considered.
Frank Lloyd Wright Home and Studio, Illinois.
(41 deg.52' N.; 87 deg.50' W.) Wright lived and practiced here, in the Shingle-style home he built for his family, during the "First Golden Age" of his long career.
Constructed 1889-98.
Criteria: (ii) Has exerted great influence, over a span of time, and within a cultural area of the world, on developments in architecture.
Unity Temple, Oak Park, Illinois.
(41 deg.52' N.; 87 deg.50' W.) Wright designed the Temple with a rooftop skylight, rather than a steeple.
Constructed in 1906 of poured concrete, the Temple is basically a concrete cube with stark and largely unornamented interior walls.
Criteria: (ii) Has exerted great influence, over a span of time, and within a cultural area of the world, on developments in architecture.
Robie House, Chicago, Illinois.
(41 deg.52' N.; 87 deg.40' W.)
This brick house, with its low horizontal emphasis, was designed by Wright in his "Prairie"style, utilizing an open plan focused on a large central chimney mass.
He continued inside walls to the exterior to tie the surrounding landscape to the house.
Constructed 1907-9.
Criteria: (ii) Has exerted great influence, over a span of time, and within a cultural area of the world, on developments in architecture.
Taliesin, Wisconsin.
(43 deg.10' N.; 90 deg.10' W.)
The second great center of Wright's activity, this combination of home, workshop, laboratory, and retreat consists of several groupings of structures designed individually to suit their different uses.
It is the summer home and studio of the Taliesin Fellowship.
Criteria: (ii) Has exerted great influence, over a span of time, and within a cultural area of the world, on developments in architecture.
Fallingwater, Pennsylvania.
(39 deg.55' N.; 90 deg.25' W.)
One of the most famous of Frank Lloyd Wright's designs, regarded by many as his masterwork.
Criteria: (i) A unique artistic achievement, a masterpiece of the creative genius.
Engineering
Brooklyn Bridge, New York.
(40 deg.42' N.; 73 deg.57' W.) Built by John A. and Washington A. Roebling, the Brooklyn Bridge was one of the world's first wire cable suspension bridges.
The technical, problems faced in its construction were solved by solutions that established precedents in bridge building.
The cables themselves are supported by two massive Gothic pylons, each with two pointed arches.
The main span is 1595 feet.
Criteria: (iv) An outstanding example of a type of structure which illustrates a significant stage in history.
Eads Bridge, Illinois-St. Louis, Missouri.
(38 deg.40' N.; 90 deg.10' W.)
The first major bridge in the world in which steel was employed in the principal members.
The secondary members and the tubes enveloping the steel staves forming the arch ribs are of wrought iron.
Criteria: (iv) An outstanding example of a type of structure which illustrates a significant stage in history.
Washington Monument, District of Columbia.
(38 deg.52' N.; 77 deg.02' W.)
The hollow shaft, free of exterior decoration, is the tallest free-standing masonry structure in the world (555 feet).
It commemorates the achievements of George Washington, first President of the United States.
Criteria: (iv) An outstanding example of a type of structure which illustrates a significant stage in history.
Science and Industry
McCormick Farm and Workshop, Virginia.
(37 deg.40' N.; 79 deg.35' W.) Of the inventions that revolutionized agriculture during the first half of the 19th century, the mechanical reaper (1834), was probably the most important.
The well-preserved farmhouse and workshop of Cyrus McCormick, its inventor, are included within this property.
Criteria: (vi) Directly and tangibly associated with events of outstanding universal significance.
Original Bell Telephone Laboratories, New York.
(40 deg.45' N.; 74 deg.0' W.) From 1898 to 1967, America's largest industrial research laboratory, responsible for numerous contributions to pure science and pioneering work in telecommunications technology.
Criteria: (vi) Directly and tangibly associated with events of outstanding universal significance.
General Electric Research Laboratory, Schenectady, New York.
(42 deg.50' N.; 73 deg.55' W.) A three-building complex recognized as the first industrial research facility in the United States.
Since its construction in 1900, work at the laboratory has made many contributions to scientific knowledge, especially in the areas of physics and chemistry.
Criteria: (vi) Directly and tangibly associated with events of outstanding universal significance.
Goddard Rocket Launching Site, Massachusetts.
(42 deg.12' N.; 71 deg.50' W.)
At this site, on March 16, 1926, Dr. Robert H. Goddard launched the World's first liquid propellant rocket, an event that set the course for future developments in rocketry.
Criteria: (vi) Directly and tangibly associated with events of outstanding universal significance.
Lowell Observatory, Arizona.
(35 deg.12' N.; 111 deg.40' W.) Astronomical research conducted at this observatory, founded by Dr. Percival Lowell, has greatly enhanced man's knowledge of the universe.
Most significant of the observatory's discoveries was the first observable evidence of the expanding universe, made by Dr. V.M. Slipher in 1912.
The observatory is also noted for intensive studies of Mars, the discovery of Pluto, and research in zodiacal light and sunspot phenomena.
The 24-inch Lowell refracting telescope, installed in 1896, is in operation in its original housing.
Criteria: (vi) Directly and tangibly associated with events of outstanding universal significance.
Pupin Physics Laboratories, Columbia University, New York.
(40 deg.45' N.; 73 deg.58' W.) Enrico Fermi conducted his initial experiments on the fission of uranium in these laboratories.
In addition, the uranium atom was split here on January 25, 1939, 10 days after the world's first splitting in Copenhagen.
The cyclotron control room contains the table which held the instruments used on that night.
The United States would consider nominating this site only if the Copenhagen location is no longer extant.
Criteria: (vi) Directly and tangibly associated with an event of outstanding universal significance.
Trinity Site, New Mexico.
(33 deg.45' N.; 106 deg.25' W.)
The world's first nuclear device was exploded here in July 1945.
Criteria: (vi) Directly and tangibly associated with an event of outstanding universal significance.
Humanitarian Endeavor and Social Reform
New Harmony Historic District, Indiana.
(38 deg.08' N.; 87 deg.55' W.) Founded by the Rappite religious sect in 1815, New Harmony was purchased in 1825 by British visionary and socialist reformer Robert Owen, who sought to alleviate evils spawned by the factory system.
Some 35 structures from the Rappite-Harmonist period survive.
This property will be compared to Owenite remains in the United Kingdom and to other communal societies in the U.S. Criteria: (vi) Directly and tangibly associated with events of outstanding universal significance.
Chapel Hall, Gallaudet College, District of Columbia, District of Colombia.
This large Gothic Revival structure (1867-70) is the earliest major building at the college, the only institution of higher learning specifically devoted to the education of the deaf.
Criteria: (vi) Directly and tangibly associated with events or ideas of outstanding universal significance.
Warm Springs Historic District, Georgia.
(32 deg.50' N.; 84 deg.40' W.)
The National Foundation for Infantile Paralysis, which grew out of the Warm Springs Foundation established by Franklin D. Roosevelt, became one of the leading charitable institutions of the 20th century.
Warm Springs Hospital was the major international center for the treatment of infantile paralysis (polio); the research that led to the development of the preventive vaccines had its roots here.
Criteria: (vi) Directly and tangibly associated with events of outstanding universal significance.
International Affairs
Aleutian Islands Unit of the Alaska Maritime National Wildlife Refuge (Fur Seal Rookeries), Alaska.
(57 deg.30' N.; 170 deg. 30' W.) Originally frequented by the native peoples of Alaska, these islands have lured Russian, British, French, Spanish, and American fur hunters since the 18th century.
The seal herds have several times been threatened with extinction due to indiscriminate hunting, but a notable 1911 convention between the United States, the United Kingdom, Russia (USSR), and Japan has provided them with international protection and management.
Today's flourishing herds illustrate the international application of conservation principles.
Criteria: (vi) Directly and tangibly associated with events of outstanding universal significance.
Statute of Liberty National Monument, New Jersey-New York.
(40 deg.37' N.; 74 deg.03' W.) French historian Edouard Laboulaye suggested the presentation of this statue to the United States, commemorating the alliance of France and the United States during the American Revolution.
The copper colossus was designed by Frederic Auguste Bartholdi and erected according to plans by Gustave Eiffel.
The national monument also includes Ellis Island, the depot through which many millions of immigrants and emigrants passed.
Criteria: (iv) An outstanding example of type of structure which illustrates a significant stage in history, and (vi) directly and tangibly associated with events of outstanding universal significance.
II.
Natural Properties
Appalachian Ranges
Great Smoky Mountains National Park, Tennessee/North Carolina.
(35 deg.37' N.; 83 deg.27' W.)
This tract, which includes one of the oldest uplands on earth, has a diversity of lush vegetation associated with its varied topography,including spruce-fir, hemlock, deciduous, and mixed forests.
The area has been designated a Biosphere Reserve.
Criteria: (ii) An outstanding example of biological evolution, and (iii) contains superlative natural phenomena and areas of exceptional natural beauty.
Atlantic Coastal Plain
Okefenokee National Wildlife Refuge, Georgia/Florida.
(30 deg.48' N.; 82 deg.17' W.)
This tract includes a vast peat bog, interspersed with upland prairies, marshes, and open water.
These diverse habitats are some for a wide range of uncommon, threatened, and endangered species, including the American alligator.
Criteria: (ii) An outstanding example of biological evolution, and (iv) habitat of endangered animal species.
Virginia Coast Reserve, Virginia.
(37 deg.30' N.; 75 deg.40' W.)
The Virginia Coast Reserve is the most well-preserved extensive barrier island system remaining on the Atlantic Coast of North America.
The system of barrier islands, saltmarshes, and lagoons demonstrate dune and beach migration and storm action on barrier islands, and include virtually all of the plant communities which once occurred along the Atlantic Coast.
The area has been designated a Biosphere Reserve.
Criteria: (ii) An outstanding example of significant geological processes and biological evolution, and (iii) contains superlative natural phenomena and formations.
Brooks Range
Arctic National Wildlife Refuge, Alaska.
(69 deg.0' N.; 143 deg.0' W.)
This area's varied topography, extending from the Brooks Range north to the Arctic Ocean, is habitat for a tremendous diversity of wildlife, including caribou, polar and grizzly bears, musk ox, Dall sheep, Arctic peregrine falcons, and golden eagles.
It is a virtually undisturbed arctic landscape, with coastal plain, tundra, valley, and mountain components.
Criteria: (ii) An outstanding example of biological evolution, and (iii) superlative natural phenomena and areas of exceptional natural beauty.
Gates of the Arctic National Park, Alaska.
(67 deg.30' N.; 153 deg.0' W.) Gates of the Arctic includes a portion of the central Brooks Range and is characterized by jagged mountain peaks, gentle arctic valleys, wild rivers and numerous lakes.
Criteria: (ii) An outstanding example of significant ongoing geological processes and biological evolution, and (iii) contains superlative natural phenomena, formations, and areas of exceptional natural beauty.
Cascade Range
Crater Lake National Park, Oregon.
(42 deg.55' N.; 122 deg.06' W.)
This unique, deep blue lake lies at the center of Mount Mazama, an ancient volcanic peak that collapsed centuries ago.
The lake is bounded by multicolored lava walls extending 500 to 2000 feet above the lake's waters.
Criteria: (ii) An outstanding example of significant geological processes, and (iii) contains superlative natural phenomena, formations, and areas of exceptional natural beauty.
Mount Rainier National Park, Washington.
(46 deg.52' N.; 121 deg.41' W.) Mount Rainier National Park includes the greatest single-peak glacial system in the U.S., radiating from the summit and slopes of an ancient volcano.
Dense forests and subalpine meadows here are characteristic of the Cascade Range.
Criteria: (ii) An outstanding example of significant geological processes and biological evolution; and (iii) contains superlative natural phenomena, formations, and areas of exceptional natural beauty.
North Cascades National Park, Washington.
(48 deg.40',N.; 121 deg.15' W.)
The tall, jagged peaks of the North Cascades intercept moisture-laden winds off the Pacific Ocean, which produce glaciers, waterfalls, and ice falls in this wild alpine region where plant and animal communities thrive in mountain valleys.
Criteria: (ii) An outstanding example of significant geological processes and biological evolution, and (iii) contains superlative natural phenomena, formations, and areas of exceptional natural beauty.
Chihuahuan Desert
Big Bend National Park, Texas.
(29 deg.15' N.; 103 deg.11' W.)
This area has many excellent examples of mountain systems and deep canyons formed by a major river.
A variety of unusual geological formations are found here, with many vegetation types -- dry coniferous forest, woodland, chaparral, and desert -- associated with them.
The area has been designated a Biosphere Reserve.
Criteria: (ii) An outstanding example of significant geological processes and biological evolution, and (iii) contains superlative natural phenomena, formations, and areas of exceptional natural beauty.
Carlsbad Caverns National Park, New Mexico.
(32 deg.10' N.; 104 deg.40' W.)
This series of connected caverns, which include the largest underground chambers yet discovered, have many magnificent and curious cave formations, including an array of speleothems.
Criteria: (ii) An outstanding example of significant geological processes, and (iii) contains superlative natural phenomena, formations, and areas of exceptional natural beauty.
Guadalupe Mountains National Park, Texas.
(31 deg.50' N.; 104 deg.50' W.) Rising abruptly from the surrounding desert, the mountain mass constituting this national park contains portions of the world's most extensive and significant Permian limestone fossil reef.
A tremendous earth fault and unusual flora and fauna are also found here.
Criteria: (i) An outstanding example illustrating a major stage of the earth's evolutionary history, (ii) an outstanding example of significant geological processes, and (iii) contains superlative natural phenomena and formations.
Colorado Plateau
Arches National Park, Utah.
(38 deg.40' N.; 109 deg.30' W.) Arches National Park contains many extraordinary products of erosional processes, including giant arches, windows, pinnacles and pedestals.
Criteria: (ii) An outstanding example of significant geological processes, and (iii) contains superlative natural phenomena, formations, and areas of exceptional natural beauty.
Bryce Canyon National Park, Utah.
(37 deg.30' N.; 112 deg.10' W.) Bryce Canyon includes innumerable highly colorful and bizarre pinnacles, walls and spires, perhaps the most colorful and unusual erosional forms in the world.
Criteria: (ii) An outstanding example of significant geological processes, and (iii) contains superlative natural phenomena, formations, and areas of exceptional natural beauty.
Canyonlands National Park, Utah.
(38 deg.20' N.; 109 deg.50' W.) this area's diverse geological features, which include arches, fins pillars, spires, and mesas, exemplify the array of erosional patterns carved primarily by running water.
Criteria: (ii) An outstanding example of significant geological processes, and (iii) contains superlative natural phenomena, formations, and areas of exceptional natural beauty.
Capitol Reef National Park, Utah.
(38 deg.20' N.; 111 deg.10' W.,) The 100-mile long Waterpocket Fold is one of the world's most graphic examples of a monoclinal folding of the earth's crust.
A striking variety of features, including volcanic dikes and sills, arches and bridges, and monoliths and sinkholes, have been created or exposed by wide-scale erosion occurring over the past 270 million years.
Criteria: (ii) An outstanding example of significant geological processes, and (iii) contains superlative natural phenomena, formations, and areas of exceptional natural beauty.
Colorado National Monument, Colorado.
(39 deg.0' N.; 108 deg.40' W.) Sheer-walled canyons, towering monoliths, bizarre formations, and dinosaur fossils are contained within this national monument.
Criteria: (ii) An outstanding example of significant geological processes, and (iii) contains superlative natural phenomena, formations, and areas of exceptional natural beauty.
Rainbow Bridge National Monument, Utah.
(37 deg.0' N.; 111 deg.0' W.) Rainbow Bridge is the greatest of the world's known natural bridges, rising 290 feet above the floor of Bridge Canyon.
Criteria: (ii) An outstanding example of significant geological processes, and (iii) contains superlative natural phenomena, formations, and areas of exceptional natural beauty.
Zion National Park, Utah.
(37 deg.20' N. 113 deg.0' W.) Zion's colorful canyon and mesa vistas include erosion and rock-fault patterns that produce phenomenal shapes and landscapes.
Criteria: (ii) An outstanding example of significant geological processes, and (iii) contains superlative natural phenomena, formations, and areas of exceptional natural beauty.
Hawaiian Islands
Hawaii Volcanoes National Park, Hawaii.
(19 deg.20' N.; 155 deg.20' W.)
This site contains outstanding examples of active and recent volcanism, along with luxuriant vegetational development at its lower elevations.
The area has been designated a Biosphere Reserve.
Criteria: (i) An outstanding example illustrating the earth's evolutionary history, (ii) an outstanding example of significant geological processes, and (iii) contains superlative natural phenomena, formations, and areas of exceptional natural beauty.
Mohave Desert
Death Valley National Monument, California/Nevada.
(36 deg.30' N.; 117 deg.0'W.)
This large desert area, which is nearly surrounded by high mountains, contains the lowest point in the Western Hemisphere.
It is highly representative of Great Basin/Mohave Desert (mountain and desert) ecosystems.
Criteria: (ii) An outstanding example of significant geological processes and biological evolution, and (iii) contains superlative natural phenomena.
Joshua Tree National Monument, California.
(33 deg.50' N.; 116 deg.0' W.)
This area, located at the junction of the Mohave and Sonoran Deserts, contains an unusually rich variety of desert plants, including extensive stands of Joshua trees, set amongst striking granitic formations.
Criteria: (ii) An outstanding example of biological evolution, and (iii) contains superlative natural phenomena and formations.
New England-Adirondacks
Acadia National Park, Maine.
(44 deg.20' N.; 68 deg.20' W.) Acadia, situated on a rocky archipelago along the Maine coast, is an area of diverse geological features, dramatic topography (including the highest headlands along the entire Atlantic coast), and outstanding scenic beauty.
Criteria: (ii) An outstanding example of significant geological processes, and (iii) contains superlative natural phenomena, formations, and areas of exceptional beauty.
North Pacific Border
Point Reyes National Seashore/Farallon Islands National Wildlife Refuge, California.
(38 deg.0' N.; 123 deg.0' W.)
This proposal includes properties within the Point Reyes/Farallon Islands National Marine Sanctuary.
The Point Reyes Peninsula, an unique living example of tectonic and seismic activity, has moved more than 300 miles in the past 80 million years.
A complex active rift zone, including the famed San Andreas Fault, occurs where the Peninsula meets the California mainland.
The area is characterized by a diverse set of habitats,striking scenery, and a large variety of terrestrial and aquatic animal species.
The Farallon Islands support the largest seabird rookeries in the contiguous United States, including species such as the ashy storm petrel, western gull, Brandt's cormorant, black oystercatcher, and Cassin's auklet.
Criteria: (ii) An outstanding example of significant geological processes and biological evolution, and (iii) contains superlative natural phenomena, formations, and areas of exceptional natural beauty.
Pacific Mountain System
Aleutian Islands Unit of the Alaska Maritime National Wildlife Refuge, Alaska.
(54 deg.40' N.; 164 deg.10' W.)
The Aleutians represent a mixture of flora and fauna found in both the North American and Asian continents, and serves as a resting place for migratory species.
The area has been designated a Biosphere Reserve.
Criteria: (ii) An outstanding example of biological evolution.
Denali National Park, Alaska.
(63 deg.20' N.; 150 deg.40' W.)
This tract embodies a unique and spectacular combination of geologic features, including active glaciers, major earthquake faults, and Mt. McKinley, the highest mountain peak in North America.
It also includes outstanding examples of tundra and boreal forest ecosystems.
The area has been designated a Biosphere Reserve.
Criteria: (ii) An outstanding example of significant geological processes and biological evolution, and (iii) contains superlative natural phenomena, formations, and areas of exceptional natural beauty.
Glacier Bay National Park, Alaska.
(58 deg.30' N; 136 deg.30' W) Great tidewater glaciers, a dramatic range of plant communities from rocky terrain recently covered by ice to lush temperature rainforest, and a large variety of animals, including brown and black bear, mountain goats, whales, seals and eagles, can be found in this Park.
Criteria: (ii) an outstanding example of significant ongoing geological processes and biological evolution, and (iii) contains superlative natural phenomena, formations, and areas of exceptional natural beauty.
Katmai National Park, Alaska.
(58 deg.30' N.; 155 deg.20' W.)
This area's interior wilderness includes the Valley of 10,000 Smokes, the result of the 1917 volcanic eruption of Mt. Katmai.
The eruption produced countless fumaroles, a few of which are still active.
Criteria: (ii) an outstanding example of significant geological processes, and (iii) contains superlative natural phenomena and formations.
Rocky Mountains
(Includes northern, middle, and southern Rocky Mountain natural regions.)
Glacier National Park, Montana.
(48 deg.40' N.; 113 deg.50' W.) With mountain peaks exceeding 10,000 feet, this site includes nearly 50 glaciers, many lakes and streams, and a wide variety of wild flowers and wildlife, including bighorn sheep, bald eagles and grizzly bears.
The area has been designated a Biosphere Reserve.
Criteria: (ii) An outstanding example of significant geological processes, and (iii) contains superlative natural phenomena, formations, and areas of exceptional natural beauty.
Grand Teton National Park, Wyoming.
(43 deg.40' N.; 110 deg.40' W.) Containing the most impressive portion of the Teton Range in the Rocky Mountains, this series of peaks rise more than a mile above surrounding sagebrush plains.
The park includes the winter feeding ground of the largest American elk herd.
Criteria: (ii) An outstanding example of significant geological processes and biological evolution, and (iii) contains superlative natural phenomena, formations, and areas of exceptional natural beauty.
Rocky Mountain National Park, Colorado.
(40 deg.20' N.; 105 deg.40' W.) Within this 412-square mile national park, peaks towering over 14,000 feet shadow wildlife and wildflowers that are characteristic of the Front Range of the Rocky Mountains.
The area has been designated a Biosphere Reserve.
Criteria:(ii) An outstanding example of significant geological processes and biological evolution, and (iii) contains superlative natural phenomena, formations, and areas of exceptional natural beauty.
Sierra Nevada
Sequoia/Kings Canyon National Parks, California.
(36 deg.40' N.; 118 deg.30' W.) A combination of two adjoining national parks, this tract includes Mount Whitney, the tallest mountain in the United States outside of Alaska, Mineral King Valley, and two enormous canyons of the Kings River.
Groves of giant sequoia, the world's largest living things, are found here.
This area has been designated a Biosphere Reserve.
Criteria: (ii) An outstanding example of significant geological processes and biological evolution, and (iii) contains superlative natural phenomena, and areas of exceptional natural beauty.
Yosemite National Park, California.
(37 deg.50' N.; 119 deg.30' W.) Granite peaks and domes rise high above broad meadows in the heart of the Sierra Nevada,along with groves of sequoias and related tree species.
Mountains, lakes, and waterfalls, including the nation's highest, are found here.
Criteria: (ii) An outstanding example of significant geological processes and biological evolution, and (iii) contains superlative natural phenomena, formations, and areas of exceptional natural beauty.
Sonoran Desert
Organ Pipe Cactus National Monument, Arizona.
(32 deg.0' N.; 112 deg.50' W.)
This park contains block-faulted mountains separated by wide alluvial valleys, along with playas, lava fields, and sands.
It includes representative examples of the Sonoran Desert found in this region and nowhere else in the United States.
This area has been designated a Biosphere Reserve.
Criteria: (ii) An outstanding example of biological evolution, and (iii) contains superlative natural phenomena.
Saguaro National Monument, Arizona.
(32 deg.10' N.; 110 deg.40' W.) Giant saguaro cactus, unique to the Sonoran Desert of southern Arizona and northwestern Mexico, reach up to 50 feet in height in the cactus forest in this park.
Criteria: (ii) An outstanding example of biological evolution, and (iii) contains superlative natural phenomena.
48 FR 38101
The addition to the U.S. Indicative Inventory will consist of the following section:
II.
Natural Properties
Hawaiian Islands
Haleakala National Park, Hawaii.
(20 deg. 40'N; 156 deg. 10'W) With an elevational range from sea level to 3000 m, the park has a great variety of habitats.
Alpine deserts, subalpine shrubland, dry forests, subalpine grassland, bogs, rainforests, and coastal vegetation all occur within a linear distance of 25 km.
Of international botanical significance, over 95 percent of the species, and 20 percent of the genera of flowering plants are found nowhere else on earth.
Criteria: (i) An outstanding example representing major stages of the earth's evolutionary history, (ii) outstanding example representing ongoing biological evolution, and (iii) contains superlative natural beauty.
__________________________________________________________
NPS-US/ICOMOS Home Page
World Heritage Site map
Links to the Past _________________________________________________________________
Last Modified: Thu, Mar 27 2003 11:17:42 am EDT MLO
Parknet logo
