David McCullough Biography Biography Interview Appreciation Excerpts Lecture Bibliography About the Lecture McCullough Home NEH Home [chronicler.gif] He is called the "citizen chronicler" by Librarian of Congress James Billington.
His books have led a renaissance of interest in Portrait of David McCullough American history--from learning about a flood in Pennsylvania that without warning devastated an entire community to discovering the private achievements and frailties of an uncelebrated president.
His biography of Harry Truman won him a Pulitzer, as did his most recent biography of another president, John Adams.
David McCullough throws himself into the research of his subjects, tracing the roads they traveled, reading the books they read, and seeing the homes they lived in.
His diligence pays off in detailed and engaging narratives.
In receiving an honorary degree from Yale University the citation praised him: As an historian, he paints with words, giving us pictures of the American people that live, breath, and above all, confront the fundamental issues of courage, achievement, and moral character.
Meeting Thornton Wilder at Yale as an undergraduate inspired McCullough to become a writer--his first love, in fact, had been art.
While at college he also met his wife, Rosalee.
He learned his craft working at Sports Illustrated, at the United States Information Agency, and at American Heritage.
McCullough researched and wrote his first book in the precious hours away from his job with American Heritage; The Johnstown Flood came out in 1968.
It was a story and region familiar to McCullough, who was born and raised in nearby Pittsburgh.
The book was a success and he became a full-time author.
Since then, McCullough has given us six more books--The Great Bridge, The Path between the Seas, Mornings on Horseback, Brave Companions, Truman, and John Adams--earning him two Pulitzer Prizes, two National Book Awards, and two Francis Parkman Prizes from the American Society of Historians.
His other honors include a Charles Frankel Prize, a National Book Foundation Distinguished Contribution to American Letters Award, and a New York Public Librarys Literary Lion Award.
