About USAID Our Work Locations Policy Press Business Careers USAID Seal - Link to Home Page HEALTH STRATEGIC OBJECTIVE No. 3 (SO3)
AMENDMENT 1
ANNUAL PROGRAM STATEMENT FOR USAID/SENEGAL HEALTH STRATEGIC OBJECTIVE No. 3 (SO3)
Increased use of health services in targeted areas
1.
The submission dates of applications have been extended to :October 17, 2002 and April 17, 2003 The changes;
2.
Sections: VI: "Funding"; VII :" Reporting" have been revised
I. PURPOSE STATEMENT
This annual program statement (APS) is to disseminate information about USAID-supported Malaria and Tuberculosis activities in Senegal for the 2002-2006 period under USAID/Senegals Strategic Objective No. 3 (SO3).
The purpose of the APS is to provide a fair opportunity to interested local non-governmental organizations (NGOs) and locally based United States private voluntary organizations (U.S. PVOs) to submit applications for grant funding.
The APS briefly describes SO3, suggested technical interventions under the APS, results expected, indicators, target zones, processes and criteria for evaluating applications.
It also provides information on funding, application format and other relevant information.
II.
PROGRAM GOAL AND OBJECTIVES
Background:
USAID/Senegal is currently implementing its country strategic plan (CSP) for the 1998-2006 period.
The CSP includes three strategic objectives (SOs) and two special objectives (SPOs).
SO3 supports integrated and decentralized health service delivery in Senegal.
This new approach seeks to strengthen the quality and sustainability of activities at the peripheral and community level where the majority of the Senegalese populations seek health care services.
It is anticipated that this will be achieved through improved access to quality services, increased demand for services, and increased local financing of community health plans.
Within this framework, USAID is assisting the Ministry of Health (MOH) and local health districts in the following 4 technical focus areas: (1) Health care financing; (2) maternal health and family planning; (3) child survival; and (4) sexually transmittable infections and AIDS.
As part of this program, plans and budgets were developed to implement the Government of Senegal (GOS) strategy to better address the problems of tuberculosis (TB) and to more effectively combat malaria, the number one killer of children in Senegal.
Both activities are nationwide in scope.
The Senegal Malaria Program
Senegal is actively participating in the Roll Back Malaria Initiative (RBM), an international effort started by the World Health Organization (WHO) in 1998 to halve the worlds Malaria burden by 2010.
The RBM partnership includes United Nations organizations, the World Bank, governments, development agencies from 12 donor countries including USAID, professional associations, civil society, research groups, and the media, all building on previous experience and existing malaria-control efforts.
To increase effectiveness, the RBM program emphasizes consensus-building and timely sharing of knowledge and lessons learned between partners.
Specifically, USAID is funding expanded support to the National Malaria Control Program of the Ministry of Health in Senegal to explore the scaling-up to a national level of three key sets of interventions, based on the Abuja goals set by the heads of state of African nations.
The focus of this expanded support is on identifying, developing and evaluating key activities needed to produce national level impact in terms of the following three objectives: * increased use of prompt and effective treatment for vulnerable populations; * increased use of a minimum set of malaria-related ante-natal services for pregnant women; * increased use of insecticide-treated bednets by vulnerable populations.
These objectives are to be achieved over the course of an anticipated 5-year (2001-2005) program through collaboration between diverse partners.
These include the GOS Ministry Of Health Programme National de Lutte contre le Paludisme (MOH/PNLP), Roll Back Malaria (WHO/RBM), University of Dakar Department of Parasitology, and USAID/Senegals local implementing agencies: BASICS II, ADEMAS, MSH and NetMark together with additional technical resources from USAID/Washington.
The Tuberculosis Program in Senegal
USAID/Senegal is initiating its assistance to Senegals efforts to control TB as part of the USAID Infectious Disease (ID) Initiative, a 10-year congressionally mandated strategy aimed at reducing the threat of infectious diseases of public health importance.
The GOSs current 5-year (2002-2006) strategy is aimed at reducing TB-related morbidity and mortality through improved case management.
The main focus is on testing, treatment, and follow-up.
The bilateral program includes the following specific steps: * Initiate dialogue with the National Tuberculosis Program (NTP) to determine the status of the twin epidemics TB and HIV/AIDS and to ensure that the TB-HIV/AIDS link is on the policy agenda with the GOS, NGOs and partners; * Assist the NTP to establish more effective links to the national HIV/AIDS program and work with both programs to develop a care and support component that has a dual approach, addressing both community delivery treatment and prevention.
* Implement the directly observed therapy, short-course (DOTS) on a nationally, decentralized community-level basis; * Identify and explore areas in which USAID has a comparative advantage, which could assist the NTP to expand the coverage area of DOTS, or to strengthen certain components of the program;
III.
EXPECTED RESULTS
Malaria: Malaria interventions proposed under this APS shall contribute to achieving reduced maternal and child mortality and morbidity in targeted geographic areas.
NGOs and PVOs requesting funding under this APS shall propose from the attached set of core USAID Malaria Program indicators (see attachment 1.1) their own set of indicators which they will use for both the monitoring and evaluation of their proposals.
Depending on their proposed activities, PVOs and NGOs are also encouraged to add other process and intermediate indicators to their proposals.
Tuberculosis: Tuberculosis activities proposed under the APS must contribute to: * Increased community awareness of TB signs and treatment; * Increased identification of TB cases (active surveillance and referral); * Increased cases of TB who complete treatment;
PVOs and NGOs should propose indicators consistent with the national program (see attachment 2.1).
A key indicator for the TB component of this APS is the percentage of confirmed cases that complete treatment, or inversely the drop-out rate.
Other monitoring indicators can include items such as number of suspect cases referred, district cure rates, treatment success rates.
Proposing PVOs and NGOs will be expected to be accountable for district cure rates, treatment success rates, and treatment completion rates.
Applicants may propose additional monitoring and evaluation indicators appropriate for their proposed activities.
IV.
ELIGIBILITY
All locally-based U.S. PVOs registered with USAID and implementing health activities in Senegal are eligible to submit applications.
All applicants must be legally recognized entities under the laws of Senegal.
Selected applicants must meet USAID accounting requirements.
Priority will be given to U.S. PVOs collaborating with, and proposing to conduct activities with Senegalese NGOs.
A secondary objective of this APS is to strengthen the capacity of local NGOs through an umbrella-type partnership with US PVOs.
Applicants should submit clear plans for working with local NGO partners to implement TB and Malaria activities.
Applications should include letters of commitment from such partners.
V. TARGET ZONES AND PROPOSED ACTIVITIES
Under this APS, USAID/Senegal anticipates awarding grants to eligible organizations to finance technical proposals combining technical support for Malaria interventions and Directly Observed Treatment, short-course (DOTS) TB activities in the 6 regions of Kaolack, Fatick, Thies, Louga, Ziguinchor or Kolda.
NGO interventions should target entire districts.
Priority assistance will be provided to the districts listed below, and particularly to those in Ziguinchor and Kolda.
However, as appropriate, USAID reserves the right to fund Malaria and TB interventions in part of or beyond this geographic focus area given the nationwide scope of the GOS MOH TB and malaria strategies.
LOUGA REGION 5 health districts Louga Darou Mousty Linguere Dahra Kebemer
THIES REGION 8 health districts Thies* Mekhe Tivaouane* Khombole Mbour** Joal Thiadiaye Popenguine
KOLDA REGION 3 rural health districts Kolda Sedhiou Velingara FATICK REGION 6 health districts Fatick Guinguineo Diofior Foundiougne Sokone Gossas
KAOLACK REGION 4 health districts Kaolack Kaffrine Koungheul Nioro
ZIGUINCHOR REGION 3 health districts Ziguinchor Bignona Oussouye
Proposed Malaria activities: The primary areas of intervention under this APS shall be complementary and supplemental to on-going activities undertaken by the MOH or supported by USAID/Senegals implementing agencies, local partners, other donors and USAID/Washingtons central projects.
The focus shall be on identifying, developing and evaluating key activities needed to produce local level impact in terms of the three objectives of the national malaria program listed in section II.
B. Consistent with USAIDs emphasis on reduction of child mortality, NGO interventions should involve stakeholders at all levels of program implementation, foster community participation and ownership, and support government health services.
Suggested activities shall include but not be limited to the following: * Distribution of subsidized insecticide-treated nets (ITNs) to target populations through: * sales via revolving funds by community-based organizations, such as womens groups; * Sales via community pharmacies; * Distribution of subsidized nets to pregnant women attending pre-natal consultations * Community based identification and non-chemical elimination of mosquito breeding sites; * Collaboration with NGO-based pre-natal services to increase attendance by pregnant women and access to preventive treatment (IPT) and ITNs; * Promotion of community-IMCI activities, such as community drug supplies, IEC, improved home management of fever.
These activities will be conducted in conjunction with MOH health districts and, wherever possible, existing USAID/Senegal projects.
They will support existing SO objectives and utilize monitoring and evaluation indicators that are consistent with and approved by USAID/Senegal.
Proposed TB activities: Interventions under this APS shall be complementary and supplemental to activities undertaken or supported by USAID/Senegals local implementing agencies, the GOS NTP, local partners, other donors and USAID/Washingtons central projects.
The focus of the national strategy is on the DOTS strategy including: * Case detection by sputum smear microscopy; * Standardized treatment regimen for all sputum smear positive cases, with directly-observed therapy for at least the initial 2 months; * Regular, uninterrupted supply of all essential anti-TB drugs; * Quality control of regional laboratory services; * Standardized recording and reporting system that allows six-monthly assessments of patients treatment, at district level.
Other support activities include: * IEC and social mobilization; * Health personnel training, support and management; * Supervision of laboratory services, supplies and treatment at central and district levels; * Facility rehabilitation/renovations and Equipment; * Operational research; * Technical counseling; * Program review; * Program resource administration; * Program evaluation
Activities under this APS should be complementary to the National Strategy.
It is expected that the proposing NGOs and PVOs will assist the NTP to increase case identification (active surveillance and referral), and to provide DOTS (probably for the continuation phase of 6 months).
Another activity which an NGO or a PVO could assist with is providing logistics to get sputum samples needed after 5 months and the last month of treatment to the closest laboratory doing TB smear microscopy.
It is generally recognized that the lack of money to pay for transport is a major constraint for TB patients.
It is not necessary for the patient to travel, but for the sputum to be transported in a timely manner and under safe conditions.
NGOs/PVOs should propose innovative ways to ensure timely testing of potential patients and effective follow-up.
NGOs/PVOs may also propose ideas on enablers/incentives that would help Pro Test sites (PTS) adhere to their treatment and a motivator for the DOT provider in the community to take on the work.
Incentives do not need to be money, just something that incites someone to action, i.e. bonus to NGO for each patient cure.
Community-based DOTs (CB-DOTs) are enablers.
Patient food packages are considered enablers and incentives.
VI. FUNDING
It is anticipated that the total funding for activities under this APS will be approximately US$ 3,000,000, through 2006.
USAID anticipates awarding one (1) or several grants, which respond broadly and in a particularly creative fashion to the activities and results indicated above.
Funds will be allocated as follows:
Malaria activities: 50% TB activities: 50%
Activities proposed can be for any length of time starting in November 2002.
However, all activities should be planned to terminate by June 15, 2006, prior to the completion date of the Strategic Objective.
USAID/Senegal reserves the right to change the funding amounts, cycle and terms of the grant agreement as a result of availability of funding and U.S. Government requirements.
Grantees will be appropriately notified of such changes, should they occur.
USAID seeks from the grantees a contribution of 25% or more of the total cost of the activity.
VII.
REPORTING
Quarterly financial reports: The grantee shall submit an original and two copies of quarterly financial reports required in accordance with 22 CFR 226 (See www.usaid.gov).
The first report will be due NLT than 15 days following the end of the first quarter after grant award, and thereafter for each quarter.
Annual work plan: The grantee shall submit an annual work plan 30 days after award and thereafter for each subsequent year.
At a minimum the work plan will include a timetable for implementing the program description which will include activities to be carried out; clearly established results and milestones/targets that are realistic, measurable; and the highest program objective that the grantee can expect to materially affect.
Progress reports: For every year, the grantee shall provide three (3) 4-monthly progress reports to document major actions taken during the reporting period.
This report will summarize progress in relation to agreed upon milestones contained in the annual work plan, and will specify any problems encountered and indicate resolutions or proposed corrective actions.
The report will list activities proposed for the next period, noting where they deviate from the annual work Plan.
Three (3) copies each in English and French of these reports shall be submitted.
The first Progress Report should be submitted to USAID no later than January 15, 2003.
It should cover the first period of activities (i.e. November-December, for the first year; and October-January 15, 2003 for subsequent years).
Subsequent reports are due on May 15, covering the 4-month period January-April; and on September 15, covering the 4-month period May-August.
The report covering the last period of the calendar year (i.e. September-December) is due by January 25 of the following year and should constitute an Annual Report as well.
Final report: This report shall include the following: (a) an executive summary of the recipient's accomplishments in achieving results, and conclusions; (b) an overall description of the recipient's activities and attainment of results by technical focus area (i.e., Malaria and/or TB); (c) significance of these activities; (d) important findings; (e) comments, lessons learned and recommendations.
The final report shall be submitted within 30 days of the completion date of the grant.
VIII.
EVALUATION OF APPLICATIONS
Applications will be reviewed based on full and open competition and in accordance with selection criteria specified in this Annual Program Statement.
While priority will be given to proposals combining both malaria and TB interventions, single disease proposals will be considered.
A. General: Proposals should be submitted with a clear indication of which Result (s) the proposal addresses.
Awards will be made on a rolling basis over 6 months time and subject to available funding.
Evaluations will be conducted according to the following schedule:
Applications must be received by October 17, 2002 to be considered.
Applications must be received by April 17, 2003 to be considered.
B. Proposals received in response to this Annual Program Statement must address all of the following elements in order to be competitively reviewed:
1.
Proposals should, as much as possible, link appropriate community-based activities with clinic based programs; 2.
Proposals should target as much as possible entire health districts; 3.
Proposals should have a letter of endorsement from the Supervisory Doctor of the district (Mèdecin-Chef de District) 4.
Strategic fit and technical approach 5.
The proposed activities are likely to result in decreasing maternal and child mortality and morbidity 4.
Plans for sustainability and exit strategy 5.
Cost effectiveness, including a detailed budget and evidence of some recipient contribution (or some unique rationale to why recipient contribution is not appropriate).
If USAID/Senegal approves the proposed activity, a letter will be sent informing the applicant that negotiations will begin shortly and that additional information may be required.
Likewise, USAID/Senegal shall inform unsuccessful applicants in writing explaining briefly why the application was not selected for funding.
C. Evaluation Criteria
Proposals received in response to this Annual Program Statement will be evaluated against the following Technical selection criteria:
1.
Extent to which the proposed activities are likely to have measurable positive impact on Malaria prevention and treatment and Tuberculosis treatment completion rates.
(Technical quality of proposed interventions)-- -- 50 Points
Can the proposed technical approach reasonably be expected to produce the intended results? Creativity of the strategy Extent to which the strategy involves local communities Quality of the Monitoring and Evaluation Plan
2.
Local knowledge and experience of the USPVO and Senegalese NGOs 25 Points
The degree of experience the organizations have in conducting community-based health activities.
3.
Management, Budget and Financing -- 25 points
Coherence and quality of the management plan Percentage of Budget for direct interventions as opposed to overhead costs Percentage of PVO/NGO and/or local contributions to funding Sustainability of the Intervention
Total Value: 100 points D. Suggested Outline of Applications
Applications should be no more than 30 pages, excluding annexes.
The suggested outline for the technical application is:
I. Executive summary
II.
Program description
A. Goal and Objectives.
A succinct description of the proposed program objectives and its contribution to USAID's TB or Maria objective (s).
B. Background/problem statement.
C. Proposed interventions/technical approach D. Expected impact/Results E. Performance monitoring plan.
This should include performance indicators, baseline and targets, the number of people served (with gender and age disaggregation where appropriate) as well as quantitative and qualitative measures specific to the technical focus of the activity.
III.
Management plan (including partnership arrangements).
This should describe how the organization intends to manage the grant, and subgrants (if relevant), explanation of personnel in the field and in headquarters, past experience and key personnel.
IV.
Implementation schedule.
V.
The Financial plan (including a detailed budget) should be submitted in a separate document.
The technical application should make no reference to costs.
VI. Resumes of key personnel, including reference contact details.
IX. INSTRUCTIONS TO APPLICANTS
One original and two copies of applications must be submitted in English to:
Babacar Thioune Regional Contracting Office USAID/Senegal P.O. Box 49 Dakar, Senegal
Or
USAID/Senegal (derrière hôtel Ngor Diarama) Petit NGor Ngor Dakar, Senegal
Telephone: (221) 869-6152 Fax: (221) 869-6126 Email Address: [bthioune@usaid.gov]
Please submit all questions concerning this APS in writing to Babacar Thioune.
Issuance of this APS does not constitute an award commitment on the part of the US Government, nor does it commit the US Government to pay for costs incurred in the preparation and submission of any application.
USAID reserves the right to fund any or none of the applications submitted.
X. ADMINISTRATION OF AWARDS
The program is authorized in accordance with the Foreign Assistance Act.
Awards will be made in accordance with the USAID Standard provisions and other applicable US Government regulations, which are available on the USAID web site (http://www.usaid.gov/pubs/ads).
For US organizations the award will be administered under 22 CFR 226, OMB circulars and the USAID Standard Provisions.
Awards to non-U.S. organizations will be administered in accordance with the USAID Standard Provisions for Non-U.S. Non governmental Recipients.
NOTE: The Applicant is reminded that U.S. Executive Orders and U.S. law prohibits transactions with, and the provision of resources and support to, individuals and organizations associated with terrorism.
It is the legal responsibility of the Recipient to ensure compliance with these Executive Orders and laws.
This provision must be included in all subcontracts/subawards issued under this APS. __________________________________________________________________
ATTACHMENT 1.1
MAIN INDICATORS OF THE NATIONAL TUBERCULOSIS PROGRAM (NTBP):
In Senegal, several types of indicators are used to monitor the NTBP:
A. Case detection indicators
- Detection ratio: number of tuberculosis (TB) cases detected divided by the number of TB cases expected.
This ratio was 65.7 per 100,000 population in year 2000.
TB cases are more than twice as frequent among men than among women and the sex ratio was 2.2 in 2000.
- Case notification rate: This indicator is variable from one region to another.
In the region of Dakar, it ranges from 19.6 per 100,000 to 128.7 per 100,000.
The national average was 93.1 for all TB forms in 2000.
- The proportion of smear positive cases: is 60.6 per 100,000 - The proportion of retreated cases: is 5.8%
B. Treatment outcome indicators
- proportion of smear positive converted: is the percentage of smear negative TB patients relative to the number of treated TB patients at the end of the 2nd month of treatment.
This ratio is not used in the Senegal TB program; - The rate of treatment success: this indicator represents total cured rates and the completed treatment rates.
- The defaulter rate: is the proportion of TB patients for which the treatment has been interrupted during the 2 consecutive months.
In 1999, it was 29%.
The defaulter rate is currently one of the major challenges of the NTBP.
C. NTBP management indicators
- DOTS coverage: In Senegal, DOTS coverage is 100% thanks to LHL and the Government of Senegal joint efforts.
In all 10 regions of Senegal, conditions are met for assessment of TB patients and for the NTBP to perform case detection and diagnosis by sputum smear microscopy, case management and monitoring TB patients.
- The coverage of microscopy network: The number of labs with functioning microscopes increased from 53 in 1993 and 1994 to 70 in 1999, and stood at 76 in 2001.
The coverage rate per 100,000 people ranges from 55 to 160 across regions.
These variations reflect the disparities in population density and land area per region in Senegal.
Regions Population Number of functioning Labs Needs estimates for 100,000 people Coverage rate (%) Dakar 2,326,929 15 23 65 Diourbel 902,237 5 9 55 Fatick 628,969 6 6 100 Kaolack 1,100,938 8 11 70 Kolda 797,165 6 8 75 Louga 555,052 6 5 120 Saint-Louis 842,409 7 8 85 Tambacounda 518,040 5 5 100 Thies 1310,933 13 13 100 Ziguinchor 543,886 8 5 160 SENEGAL 9,524,089 76 93 80
- Quality assurance of smear examinations: Quality control is the responsibility of the Supervisor of the National Referral Laboratory during his/her visits to the laboratories.
During the supervisory visits to the labs, selected slats are read.
The new complementary method that is just beginning to be implemented is to send through the post office the slats whose outcome is known to the LNR Supervisor.
The latter method seems to be more promising for us since one single supervisor cannot visit all laboratories.
- Frequency of use of TB drugs and laboratory reactors: At the end of each quarter, and based on TB case reports, drugs and laboratory reactors are ordered.
The orders should arrive at the central level no later than 15 days after the end of the quarter.
The orders are generally based on regular needs and stocks.
- Number of trained health workers: In 2000, 60 physicians, or 1 physician per health center, were trained.
Over a three year period, 1,248 health workers have been trained in case management.
- Proportion completed supervisory visits relative to the number of planned ones: Much has yet to be done, mostly from the intermediate to the peripheral level.
- Reporting cohort analyses: These reports address TB patients who achieved their treatment 15 to 18 months earlier.
ATTACHMENT 2 Proposed Monitoring 
Malaria in Pregnancy 1.1 (need for behavioral indicator?) % of ANC service providers who can state 2 benefits to pregnant women of receiving IPT Facility Survey 1.2 (data need to indicate drug given, parity of mothers) (RBM) % of pregnant women attending pre-natal services who receive IPT (including CQ prophylaxis) MOH routine data DHS, Household survey 1.3 (RBM) % of ANC providers trained in IPT MOH data Facility survey
1.4 % of ANC attenders who are primagravidae MOH routine data DHS, Household survey 1.5 % of ANC facilities with IPT drugs in stock MOH routine data
V. 2.
ITNs 2.1 (RBM) % of households having at least one treated net Household survey (opportunistic) VI. 2.2 % of children 
2.3 % of pregnant women sleeping under a treated net last night DHS, Household survey 2.4 % of households where one parent knows that ITNs need retreatment Household survey (opportunistic) 2.5 % of nets treated in past 12 months Household survey (opportunistic) 2.6 % of subsidized ITNs distributed to vulnerable populations (pregnant women, rural households) Donor interviews by malaria coordinator
3.
Prompt 
3.3 (RBM) Availability of first line drug in public facilities: % of facilities with no more than 1 week stock-out of anti-malarials in past 3 months MOH routine data, mystery shopper survey Facility Survey, Mystery shopper survey 3.4 Methodology needed for this Availability of first line drug in private sector Some type of cluster survey of rural markets, stratified by type of shop
3.5 Provider behaviors: (1) correct dosage dispensed to consumer; (2) correct advice given MOH supervisory data (for public sector); Mystery shopper survey for private sector Mystery shopper survey 3.6 (as indicator of accessibility) Cost of first-line drug Mystery shopper survey 3.7 % of drugs sold/ dispensed of adequate quality Mystery shopper survey (including public facilities)
3.8 (RBM) % of children, pregnant women with fever starting treatment within 24 hours DHS, Household survey 3.9 % of children with fever receiving complete treatment regimen by source of treatment (home, facility) MOH supervisory data; household survey (opportunistic) DHS, Household survey 3.10 (RBM) % of caretakers of children under 5 who know danger signs
_______________________________________________________________________
Star Privacy : Plug-ins : FAQs : Help Desk : Contact Us : Site Map : En Español
