michigan.gif (3283 bytes) .
Letters . .
HOME
BIOGRAPHY
CONSTITUENT SERVICES
NEWS
ISSUES
LEGISLATION
PHOTO ALBUM
LINKS
FAQ's
TODAY IN CONGRESS
ENERGY AND COMMERCE COMMITTEE
May 24, 2000
The Honorable Janet Reno
Attorney General
US Department of Justice
10th and Constitution Avenue NW
Washington, D.C. 20530
The Honorable Rodney Slater
Secretary
U.S. Department of Transportation
Room 10200, S-1
400 Seventh St., S.W.
Washington, D.C. 20007
Dear Madam Attorney General and Mr. Secretary:
I am writing to you to express my concern about the announced merger between United Airlines and US Airways.
This merger, between the largest and sixth-largest U.S. passenger air carriers, will create an industry giant twice as large as its closest domestic competitor, and may spur further consolidation.
I am troubled by the potential and practical effects of concentration in the U.S. airline industry on consumers.
As you know, the state of competition in the domestic airline industry is, in many cases, precarious.
Between 1993 and 1999, the U.S. Department of Transportation (DOT) received at least 32 complaints from new entrant airlines regarding unfair competitive conduct by incumbent airlines.
Additionally, last year, the National Research Council released a report on competition in the airline industry.
The Council found competition was so lacking that it called for the U.S. Department of Justice and DOT to address anticompetitive acts by incumbent airlines and take steps to encourage competition in the U.S. domestic airline industry.
The Council was particularly concerned that airline alliances and partnerships could lead to less vigorous competition and "migrate toward mergers de facto, if not de jure."
Yesterdays merger announcement appears to confirm the Councils fears.
For many years, airline passengers have experienced the negative effects from the lack of airline competition, such as increased problems with scheduling, overbooking, high fares, baggage handling and overall customer service.
I would note that the number of airline passenger complaints to the DOT more than doubled between 1998 and 1999.
I have several questions with regard to the competitive effects of this merger that will be forwarded to you at a later date.
Consumers deserve the benefits that result from real competition: lower prices, increased flight offerings, and better customer service.
We must ensure that customers are able to realize these benefits, and to that end, this merger deserves thorough and careful scrutiny.
Contact Offices o Search : _______________ Submit o
Home | Biography | Constituent Services | Photo Album | News | Issues | Legislation | Links
