Skip common site navigation and headers United States Environmental Protection Agency Wetlands Recent Additions | Contact Us | Print Version Search: __________ Run Search Begin Hierarchical Links EPA Home 
A. Purpose and Background
Purpose: To promote the development of environmentally-beneficial constructed wetlands for water treatment systems by providing information on the legal, policy, and technical issues associated with these systems as well as guidelines for those developing and managing constructed treatment wetlands.
Background: The number of constructed treatment wetland projects receiving wastewater from municipal and industrial treatment sources as well as agricultural and storm water sources has increased to more than 600 active projects across the United States.
If planned properly, these treatment wetlands offer opportunities to regain some of the natural functions of wetlands and offset some of the significant losses in wetland acreage.
In arid regions and communities reaching the limits of water availability, water reuse via these systems is an attractive option that may help achieve water conservation and wildlife habitat goals.
With appropriate siting, design, preapplication treatment, operation, maintenance, monitoring, and management, these manmade systems can often emulate natural wetlands by providing integrated ecological functions within the watershed and landscape.
Constructed treatment wetland project proponents and regulators have expressed a desire for more efficient and consistent policy guidelines for the development and permitting of such projects, especially those providing both water quality and wildlife habitat benefits.
An initial effort to develop this guidance was funded by Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) Environmental Technology Initiative (ETI) Program.
A Workgroup ^1 was formed to identify general policy and permitting issues for a constructed treatment wetlands project, the Tres Rios Constructed Wetlands in Phoenix, Arizona.
The Tres Rios Constructed Wetlands project is a wildlife habitat and treatment wetland proposed by the City of Phoenix, the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, the U.S. Bureau of Reclamation, and other organizations.
For more information on the Tres Rios Constructed Wetlands Demonstration Project see their website at http://www.tresrios.net/.
Exit EPA Disclaimer
In September 1997, EPA convened a Federal Interagency Workgroup consisting of the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, National Marine Fisheries Service, Natural Resources Conservation Service, and the U.S.
Bureau of Reclamation to evaluate the technical and policy issues identified by the ETI project team (see their final report entitled Wetlands for Water Quality Management and Habitat Enhancement: Policy and Permitting Issues, January 1997) in order to provide a starting point for a national policy dialogue and for analysis of the issues associated with these wastewater treatment systems and the wildlife habitat they may be able to provide.
Common factors in successful constructed treatment wetland projects and lessons learned from less successful projects provided, in part, the basis for development of the technical and policy recommendations in these guidelines.
The process of writing and reviewing the guiding principles was highly educational, collaborative, and iterative.
The Workgroup decided to focus upon and encourage those projects that not only provide water treatment, but also strive to provide water reuse, wildlife habitat, and public use benefits.
While this document focuses on municipal wastewater treatment wetlands, many of the principles can be used to help guide other treatment wetland projects, such as those treating acid mine drainage, agricultural and urban storm water runoff, livestock and poultry operations, and industrial wastewater.
Information from specific case study projects, and scientific literature was used to develop these principles, along with technical information provided by constructed wetlands experts and dialogue during the Workgroup meetings.
We hope this document will facilitate the establishment of future projects, while improving compliance with the Clean Water Act (CWA).
B. What are Constructed Treatment Wetlands?
For the purposes of these Guiding Principles, constructed treatment wetlands are defined as engineered or constructed wetlands that utilize natural processes involving wetland vegetation, soils, and their associated microbial assemblages to assist, at least partially, in treating an effluent or other water source.
In general, these systems should be engineered and constructed in uplands, outside waters of the U.S., unless the source water can be used to restore a degraded or former wetland (see II.B "Opportunities for Restoration of Degraded or Former Wetlands").
The degree of wildlife habitat provided by constructed treatment wetlands, or sections of these wetlands, varies broadly across a spectrum.
At one end of the spectrum are those systems that are intended only to provide treatment for an effluent or other water source, in order to meet the requirements of the CWA, and that provide little to no wildlife habitat.
At the other end are those systems that are intended to provide water reuse, wildlife habitat, and public use, while also providing a final polishing function for a pretreated effluent or other water source.
This guidance primarily addresses the latter end of this spectrum.
C. What Are the Guiding Principles?
The Guiding Principles are intended to: * provide a framework for promoting sustainable, environmentally safe constructed treatment wetland projects.
* be usable nationally under a variety of settings and circumstances.
* educate and inform public and private decision makers, Federal, State, Tribal and Local regulatory and resource agency personnel, and the general public.
* provide guidance for environmental performance, especially for projects which are intended to provide water reuse, wildlife habitat, and public use, in addition to other possible objectives.
* highlight opportunities to restore and create wetlands.
* be applied, when appropriate, to any effluent or other source water treatment system as long as the source is adequately treated to meet applicable standards, protects the existing beneficial uses, and does not degrade the receiving waters.
* create opportunities for beneficial uses of dredged material, if feasible.
* minimize risks from contamination, toxicity, and vector-borne disease.
* be applied in a watershed context.
* be flexible enough to accommodate regional differences in climate, hydrogeo-morphology, wildlife habitat needs, etc. * complement Federal, Regional, State, Tribal, or Local authority, rules, and regulations and policies.
Footnotes
1.
The ETI Project Workgroup that participated in this effort included active participation by representatives from the City of Phoenix and their contractor, CH2M-Hill (and Wetland Management Services); EPA and its contractor, SAIC; U.S. Bureau of Reclamation; U.S. Army Corps of Engineers; U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service; AZ Dept. of Water Resources; AZ Dept. of Environmental Quality; AZ Game 
<
You will need Adobe Acrobat Reader to view the Adobe PDF files on this page.
See EPA's PDF page for more information about getting and using the free Acrobat Reader.
About the Wetlands Program | Helpline | Publications | Espanol
Begin Site Footer
EPA Home | Privacy and Security Notice | Contact Us
