United States Consulate, Chennai, India U.S. Embassy NEW DELHI Consulates MUMBAI o CALCUTTA Contact Us o Privacy Notice
HOME PRESS RELEASES
23 November 2003
"Tolerance and Diversity are Hallmarks of American Society" by Robert O. Blake, Jr.
Chargé d'Affaires ad interim, U.S. Embassy
For Muslims Ramadan is a time for reflection, renewal and introspection.
It is the holiest season in the Islamic faith, commemorating the revelation of the Qur'an to the Prophet Muhammed.
Ramadan provides an opportunity to reflect on this great religion, its values, and the importance of diversity to the world and all societies.
As Americans, we cherish the freedom to worship and the diversity of the world's religions and respect the importance of Ramadan to Muslims in India and throughout the world.
Islam has an important and growing role for the United States and its relations with the rest of the world.
America's history has taught its citizens the value of reaching across faiths, creeds, and cultures to achieve our dreams.
We are a nation of many races and religions.
In fact, our nation is diversity in action, not theory.
If you take a walk in the area around the Department of State in Washington, D.C., within minutes you can be at a mosque, a synagogue, a temple, or any of a large number of different kinds of churches.
America's remarkable diversity is ensured by a form of government that values the role of religion in the lives of its citizens while keeping the hand of government out of their faith.
It is predicated on open borders that allow goods, services, information, ideas - and people - to flow freely.
This has enabled America to perpetually reinvent itself and change with and adapt to a dynamic world.
Welcoming Muslims into American society has been not been an exception.
In fact, Islam may well be the fastest growing religion in the United States today.
By some estimates, in 2010 the Muslim-American population will be the second largest in the nation after Christian-Americans.
Historically, Muslims have been a part of American society since the late 1800s when people from the Middle East (present-day Syria, Jordan, and Lebanon) immigrated.
Today, the American Muslim population is highly diverse, representing Indians, Pakistanis, Bangladeshis, Middle Easterners, North Africans, Iranians, Turks, Eastern Europeans, Southeast Asians, and Africans.
Americans of Muslim faith number an estimated 6 million, including around one million Muslims from South Asia.
The U.S. Muslim population has grown especially fast over the past couple of decades because U.S. immigration laws changed to issue visas to new immigrants based on their ability to contribute to society rather than being relatives of US citizens.
This ensured a dramatic increase in the inflow of doctors, engineers and other professionals from India, Pakistan, Bangladesh and the Middle East.
Today, American Muslims are very young, with 74% under age 50; highly educated, with 58% holding college degrees; extremely successful, with 50% earning more than $50,000 annually; and involved, in the political process with nearly 80% registered to vote.
Muslims, like other immigrant groups, are also active in American society.
A recent independent survey conducted by the Hartford Institute for Religious Research showed that over 70% of American Muslims believe that it is important to be active in U.S. institutions and politics.
Involvement can take many forms, from religious groups to community organizations to local politics to social issues.
There are over 1,200 mosques in the United States, and around 2 million Muslims are associated with them.
Demonstrating the rapid growth of the Muslim faith in the United States, over 60% of the Mosques were founded after 1980, and 25% since 1994.
The Hartford Institute study also revealed that almost one-third of U.S. Muslims are converts (30%) and that the mosques are rarely places attended by just one ethnic group.
The vast majority of American mosques are places where people of vastly different backgrounds come together, united by their faith.
It is America's ideal that all U.S. citizens, including Muslims, are treated equally under the law and are protected equally by the Constitution.
Since America is a secular society, there is no state religion and the American government gives no preference to any religious group.
Most Americans even find it a severe infringement of privacy to even ask anyone their religious faith.
In fact, faith is so protected that the U.S. Government is prohibited from asking its citizens what their faith is when conducting its national census every ten years.
President Bush has said, "America rejects bigotry America values and welcomes peaceful people of all faiths -- Christian, Jewish, Muslim, Sikh, Hindu and many others.
Every faith is practiced and protected here, because we are one country."
Diversity, tolerance, and a commitment to basic human rights are values at the foundation of American society and free societies throughout the world.
These values are also shared with the world's Muslims.
During this Ramadan, let me wish people of all faiths peace and friendship.
Sorry, you need a JavaScript capable browser to get the best from this page
