The Connecticut Agricultural Experiment Station Available Speakers by Topic Most of the listed talks are intended for general audiences.
To contact speakers directly, click on the hyperlinked name for contact and biographical information.
Arrangements may be made through the Library at (203) 974-8447 if the scientist cannot be reached directly.
If an asterisk (*) appears next to a name, the scientist is at the Valley Laboratory in Windsor, otherwise the scientist is at the Main laboratories in New Haven.
* EXPERIMENT STATION
History and Current Work at the Experiment Station John F. Anderson (203) 974-8440 John.F.Anderson@po.state.ct.us The Connecticut Agricultural Experiment Station is the Nation's first state agricultural experiment station.
The Station's first laboratory was established in Judd Hall at Wesleyan University in 1875.
Two years later, the Station moved to Yale University.
In 1882, the Station moved to six acres of land purchased from Eli Whitney, Jr. in northern New Haven.
The Station is governed by an eight member Board of Control.
The Board owns in trust a 75 acre research farm in Hamden and a 50 acre research farm and woodland in Windsor.
Past and current Station accomplishments will be highlighted.
* ANALYTICAL CHEMISTRY
Analysis of Pesticides in Produce Using Liquid Chromatography and Mass Spectometry.
Brian D. Eitzer (203) 974-8453 Brian.Eitzer@po.state.ct.us A discussion of new analytical procedures developed for the analysis of non-volatile or water soluble pesticides in produce.
Applied Analytical Chemistry.
Mary Jane Incorvia Mattina (203) 974-8449 MaryJane.Mattina@po.state.ct.us Techniques (e.g. solid phase extraction), instrumentation (e.g., ion trap mass spectrometry), and research projects (pacitaxel in yews, Quinnipiac River, arsenic in pressure-treated wood) in food safety, natural products, and environmental monitoring underway in the Department of Analytical Chemistry.
Migration of Copper, Chromium, and Arsenic from Treated Wood.
David E. Stilwell (203) 974-8457 David.Stilwell@po.state.ct.us Presentation of the environmental impacts of the use of CCA pressure-treated wood.
* BIOLOGICAL CONTROL
Alternatives to Insecticides for Managing Vegetable Insects.
Kimberly A. Stoner (203) 974-8480 Kimberly.Stoner@po.state.ct.us This talk presents biologically-based methods of managing vegetable insects.
Environmentally-friendly Methods for Disease Control.
Sharon M. Douglas (203) 974-8499 Sharon.Douglas@po.state.ct.us This discussion refutes the common misconception that chemical sprays, dusts, and soil drenches are the only effective ways to control plant diseases.
The focus will be on non-chemical methods for control which include culture, sanitation, resistance, biological, and biorational or biocompatible chemical methods.
Specific diseases will be used for illustration.
Biological Control of Plant Diseases.
Victoria L. Smith (203) 974-8474 Vitctoria.Smith@po.state.ct.us Dr. Smith has studied biological control of damping off of snapbean, using one fungus to control several others.
She is expanding this work to include control of wilt diseases of garden vegetables using commercially-available formulations of biological control agents.
* CHRISTMAS TREES
Current Diseases of Christmas Trees.
Sharon M. Douglas (203) 974-8499 Sharon.Douglas@po.state.ct.us A discussion of the current tree health problems encountered in Christmas tree plantations in Connecticut.
This includes descriptions of symptoms, disease cycles and methods for spread, and management or control options.
* CHEMICALS
Factors Influencing the Biological and Physical Availability of Chemicals in Contact with Soil Particles.
Joseph J. Pignatello (203) 974-8518 Joseph.Pignatello@po.state.ct.us Adsorption of chemical contaminants to soil particles and the reverse, desorption, appear to be gradual, often requiring months to complete.
I will discuss the ramifications of these slow processes to the leaching potential and biological availability to exposed organisms of soil-borne chemicals.
Development of Hydrogen Peroxide-based Techniques for Destruction of Chemical Pollutants in Water and Soil.
Joseph J. Pignatello (203) 974-8518 Joseph.Pignatello@po.state.ct.us I will discuss our methods for purifying soil and water using a safe and inexpensive oxidizing agent and environmentally friendly catalysts (iron salts and solar light).
* CLIMATE, WEATHER, AND GREENHOUSES
Reducing the Heating Cost for Greenhouse Tomato Production.
Martin P.N. Gent (203) 974-8489 Martin.Gent@po.state.ct.us Heating the roots zone and cooling air temperature at night will lower greenhouse heating costs.
How do these procedures change the way plants grow?
Extending Vegetable Production with Row Covers, Tunnels, Cold Frames and Greenhouses.
Martin P.N. Gent (203) 974-8489 Martin.Gent@po.state.ct.us Vegetable plants grown in protected cultivation, but without heat, can produce in early spring and late fall in Connecticut.
* CROP IMPROVEMENT
Domestication and Evolution of Crop Plants.
Neil A. McHale (203) 974-8458 Neil.McHale@po.state.ct.us Current day crop plants evolved from wild relatives through gradual selection and breeding by primitive farmers.
In many cases valuable genetic diversity was lost in this process.
Efforts are underway to reintroduce these valuable genes into modern crop varieties.
Genetic Engineering of Agricultural Plants.
Neil A. McHale (203) 974-8458 Neil.McHale@po.state.ct.us Gene splicing technology makes it possible to clone genes as individual pieces of DNA and introduce them into a variety of important crop plants.
Genes from distantly related plant relatives or even from microbes are being tapped as powerful new tools for crop improvement.
Domestication and Evolution of Crop Plants.
Neil P. Schultes (203) 974-8464 Neil.Schultes@po.state.ct.us Current day crop plants evolved from wild relatives through gradual selection and breeding by primitive farmers.
In many cases valuable genetic diversity was lost in this process.
Efforts are underway to reintroduce these valuable genes into modern crop varieties.
Genetic Engineering of Agricultural Plants.
Neil P. Schultes (203) 974-8464 Neil.Schultes@po.state.ct.us Gene splicing technology makes it possible to clone genes as individual pieces of DNA and introduce them into a variety of important crop plants.
Genes from distantly related plant relatives or even from microbes are being tapped as powerful new tools for crop improvement.
* FERTILIZERS, SOILS AND SOIL TESTING
Organic vs. Inorganic Fertilizer and Season Can Affect Taste and Composition of Salad Greens.
Martin P.N. Gent (203) 974-8512 Martin.Gent@po.state.ct.us Does the nitrogen and vitamin composition of vegetables change with the type of fertilizer used and the time of year in the crop is grown?
Improving Soil in the Home Garden.
Gregory J. Bugbee (203) 974-8512 Gregory.Bugbee@po.state.ct.us Healthy plant require fertile soil.
The basics of soil improvement for homeowners are discussed.
They include; pH adjustment, organic matter additions, types of fertilizers and soil testing.
Soil Testing.
Gregory J. Bugbee (203) 974-8512 Gregory.Bugbee@po.state.ct.us Over 10,000 soil samples are tested each year at CAES.
An overview of the procedure is discussed.
Nutrition of Woody Plants (Conifers, Shade Trees, Shrubs).
Thomas M. Rathier* (860) 683-4977 Thomas.Rathier@po.state.ct.us In depth discussion of how woody plants grow and use plant nutrients.
Plant/soil relations stressed.
Soils.
Thomas M. Rathier* (860) 683-4977 Thomas.Rathier@po.state.ct.us Basic tutorial on soils including: soil origins; uses; biological, physical and chemical properties of soil; fertility; amendments and improvements.
Managing Losses of Plant Nutrients to Ground Water.
Thomas M. Rathier* (860) 683-4977 Thomas.Rathier@po.state.ct.us Discussion of how plant nutrients can move through soils to ground water and how to minimize such losses.
Management of crop nutrient uses and land uses are discussed.
* FOOD
Contamination of Food by E.coli.
Douglas Dingman (203) 974-8471 Douglas.Dingman@po.state.ct.us A presentation outlining the many ways that food can become contaminated by this bacterium and a detailed characterization of this microbe and its disease.
* FRUITS
Grapes: Their Culture and Diseases.
Sharon M. Douglas (203) 974-8499 Sharon.Douglas@po.state.ct.us Methods for growing grapes for home enjoyment and consumption and common diseases will be discussed.
Among topics under cultural care include fertilizing, pruning, watering, and selecting appropriate cultivars for Connecticut.
The common diseases of grapes will also be discussed and will include information on symptoms, disease spread, and management or control options.
Small Fruits and Tree Fruits.
Sharon M. Douglas (203) 974-8499 Sharon.Douglas@po.state.ct.us This discussion will cover the basics of growing small and tree fruits for home enjoyment and consumption.
Topics include selecting appropriate cultivars, cross pollination, fertilizing, pruning, and watering.
Additional discussion will cover commonly encountered diseases, their symptoms, and management or control options.
X-Disease: A Persistent Problem for Connecticut Peaches.
Sharon M. Douglas (203) 974-8499 Sharon.Douglas@po.state.ct.us This important disease of peach was first described by an Experiment Station scientist in 1933.
For many years the causal agent remained known although it is now known to be caused by a phytoplasma, a new class of disease agents.
X-disease continues to cause significant losses in commercial and backyard orchards throughout Connecticut.
Topics to be covered include symptoms, disease spread, and methods for disease management.
Diseases in the Home Orchard.
Sharon M. Douglas (203) 974-8499 Sharon.Douglas@po.state.ct.us This is a general discussion of diseases of stone, pome, and small fruits encountered in the backyard orchard.
Among the topics to be covered are recognition of the key diseases, symptoms, disease spread, and a discussion of management or control options.
These options include culture, sanitation, resistance, biological, and chemical methods.
Specific examples of current diseases will be used for illustration.
* GARDENS
Common Diseases of the Perennial Garden.
Sharon M. Douglas (203) 974-8499 Sharon.Douglas@po.state.ct.us Interest in perennials has increased dramatically in the past few years, especially here in Connecticut.
This discussion will focus on recognition and management of diseases of perennials using the concept of key diseases.
Other topics include a discussion of disease prevention as a fundamental component of management.
Specific diseases will be used for illustration.
Photosynthesis in the Home Garden.
Israel Zelitch (203) 974-8465 Israel.Zelitch@po.state.ct.us Dr. Zelitch relates his extensive technical knowledge about photosynthesis to basic aspects of home gardening.
Strategies for Reducing Deer Browse Damage.
Jeffrey S. Ward (203) 974-8495 Jeffrey.Ward@po.state.ct.us A five step program for preventing and reducing deer browse damage to landscape plants.
Container Gardening Indoors and Out.
Gregory J. Bugbee (203) 974-8512 Gregory.Bugbee@po.state.ct.us Growing plants in pots requires different strategies than growing plants in the ground.
Topics discussed are; choosing the right potting soil and pots, selecting the proper plants, fertilizing and watering, starting plants from seeds and cuttings.
General Gardening (Vegetables, Annuals, Perennials, Lawns and Woody Landscape Plants).
Thomas M. Rathier* (860) 683-4977 Thomas.Rathier@po.state.ct.us Basics of gardening including: soil preparation, plant choices, planting and cultural methods and pest management.
Container Gardening (Ornamentals and Vegetables).
Thomas M. Rathier* (860) 683-4977 Thomas.Rathier@po.state.ct.us Basics of container culture including: understanding of how plants grow in containers, potting media, fertility, water requirements and pest management.
General Gardening.
Rose Hiskes* (860) 683-4977 Rose.Hiskes@po.state.ct.us Covering annuals, perennials, vegetables or woody plants this talk focuses on matching plants with sites (light, soil, water) in order to prevent problems.
Pests of the Garden.
Rose Hiskes* (860) 683-4977 Rose.Hiskes@po.state.ct.us What's bugging your plants? Weeds, diseases or insects? Maybe a nematode? Bring in your problem to be diagnosed.
Management options for common pests of the flower and vegetable garden, as well as landscape, will be discussed.
* HOUSE PLANTS
House Plants: General Care and Diagnosis of Common Problems.
Sharon M. Douglas (203) 974-8499 Sharon.Douglas@po.state.ct.us House plants add color, beauty, and texture to the indoor landscape.
This discussion covers the general care and many of the common problems that we all encounter.
Specific types of plants will be highlighted.
Houseplants.
Rose Hiskes* (860) 683-4977 Rose.Hiskes@po.state.ct.us Keep gardening through the winter with the common philodendron or the exotic orchid.
Modify your home to make it more amenable to houseplants.
Specific plants and problems will be discussed.
* INSECTS
Exotic Insects in Connecticut Orchards and Forests.
Chris T. Maier (203) 974-8476 Chris.Maier@po.state.ct.us Introduced insects have had a major upon agriculture and forestry in North America.
Recently, four new exotic insects have been detected in or near Connecticut.
This talk focuses on the distribution, biology, and potential impact of these new invaders.
Periodical Cicadas.
Chris T. Maier (203) 974-8476 Chris.Maier@po.staet.ct.us In Connecticut, adults of these remarkable insects emerge by the millions once every 17 years.
Most of the 17-year life cycle is spend under the ground where nymphs feed by sucking fluids from tree roots.
This talk is about their unusual behavior and ecology.
Introduction to Insects and Their Biology.
Charles R. Vossbrinck (203) 974-8522 Charles.Vossbrinck@po.state.ct.us For grammar school children about insects, including a demonstration.
Pantry Pest Biology and Control.
Kenneth A. Welch (203) 974-8483 Kenneth.Welch@po.state.ct.us Several insects infest stored products such as cereal, flour, nuts and dried fruits.
This presentation covers the biology and control of the more common pests with the aid of colored slides.
Wood Destroying Insects.
Kenneth A. Welch (203) 974-8483 Kenneth.Welch@po.state.ct.us This talk is designed primarily for the following groups: Pest Control Operators, Architects and Builders.
The insects covered include termites, carpenter ants, powder post beetles and false powder post beetles.
Slides, actual insect specimens and samples of wood damage are used to provide information on their biology, prevention and control.
All About Lady Beetles.
Kimberly Stoner (203) 974-8480 Kimberly.Stoner@po.state.ct.us Lady beetles are one of the most widely, recognized groups of insects, but they are much more diverse than you may realize.
This talk presents lady beetles in a wide range of sizes from the tiny ones feeding on scales and whiteflies to the larger, more familiar aphids eaters.
Some lady beetles, like the Mexican bean beetle, even feed on crop plants.
General Entomology.
Gale E. Ridge (203) 974-8478 Gale.Ridge@po.state.ct.us The anatomy, physiology and development of insects; the behavior and ecology of insects; the introduction of the orders and the collection and preservation of arthropods in general.
* INTEGRATED PEST MANAGEMENT (IPM)
Integrated Pest Management for Ornamental Plants.
Timothy Abbey* (860)687-4763 Timothy.Abbey@po.state.ct.us This talk will provide information to professionals on the components of IPM and how to successfully implement IPM for ornamental plant production, landscape maintenance and lawn maintenance.
Major focus is on control of insect pests that feed on ornamental plants.
Also, can present general IPM practices to elementary and high school students.
* LANDSCAPE
Current Diseases in the Landscape.
Sharon M. Douglas (203) 974-8499 Sharon.Douglas@po.state.ct.us This is a general discussion of the current plant health problems encountered by homeowners in landscape plants in Connecticut.
The discussion will include how to recognize specific diseases and their associated symptoms.
Emphasis will also be placed on the management options for control of these diseases.
Options for control include culture, sanitation, resistance, biological, and chemical methods.
Diseases of Landscape Plants.
Victoria L. Smith (203) 974-8474 Victoria.Smith@po.state.ct.us Dr. Smith has extensively studied the biology and epidemiology of dogwood anthracnose.
She also has documented the spread of crown rot of hemlock through a commercial plantation.
She has documented the occurrence in Connecticut of a previously-unknown Christmas tree disease and a canker disease of Japanese maple.
Working with professional nurserymen, she is improving the production of container-grown azaleas and rhododendrons.
Diseases and Insect Pests of Rhododendron.
Sharon M. Douglas (203) 974-8499 Sharon.Douglas@po.state.ct.us Rhododendrons are one of the most popular woody ornamentals used in the Connecticut landscape.
This discussion will focus on how to recognize common disease and insect problems that are encountered.
Other topics include techniques to help maintain optimum vigor and beauty and methods to minimize the impact of these plant health problems.
* MOSQUITOES, BITING FLIES
Eastern Equine Encephalitis and Mosquitoes.
John F. Anderson (203) 974-8440 John.F.Anderson@po.state.ct.us Eastern Equine Encephalitis is a rare but often fatal disease of humans, horses, and some exotic birds.
It is caused by a virus that occurs naturally in song birds and is transmitted among birds by bird-feeding mosquitoes associated with large swamps.
Species of mosquitoes that feed on birds and mammals are thought to transmit the virus from birds to humans and horses.
Although no human cases have been documented in Connecticut, this virus was prevalent in Connecticut mosquitoes in southeastern Connecticut in 1996.
The virus was less prevalent in 1997.
The history, ecology, and current research will be reviewed.
West Nile Fever and Mosquitoes.
John F. Anderson (203) 974-8440 John.F.Anderson@po.state.ct.us An unprecedented outbreak of encephalitis cause by West Nile virus occurred in New York City in late summer and early fall of 1999.
Fifty-nine humans became ill and seven died.
The virus was isolated from mosquitoes and birds in Connecticut.
This virus, which occurs naturally in Africa, Europe, and Asia, had never before been known in North America.
The natural history of the virus and current research will be reviewed.
Epidemiology of Eastern Equine Encephalitis in Connecticut.
Theodore G. Andreadis (203) 974-8510 Theodore.Andreadis@po.state.ct.us Reviews history of outbreaks and current information on vector mosquitoes, bird reservoirs and transmission cycles.
Microsporidian Parasites of Mosquitoes.
Theodore G. Andreadis (203) 974-8510 Theodore.Andreadis@po.state.ct.us Review of life cycles, ultrastructure, pathology and natural epizootiology.
Biology of Mosquitoes.
Theodore G. Andreadis (203) 974-8510 Theodore.Andreadis@po.state.ct.us Review of life histories and biology of common species in Connecticut.
* MULCHES AND COMPOST
Mulches for the Home Garden.
David E.
Hill (203) 974-8490 David.Hill@po.state.ct.us Proper selection of mulches to warm the soil (plastic) or cool the soil (hay, grass, leaves) will improve yields of heat tolerant vegetables or heat intolerant vegetables.
How to Compost.
Abigail A. Maynard (203) 974-8516 Abigail.Maynard@po.state.ct.us General guidelines and helpful hints for both the backyard and the large scale composter.
Utilization of Compost in the Garden.
Abigail A. Maynard (203) 974-8516 Abigail.Maynard@po.state.ct.us Different uses for compost in the garden, how compost affects the soil and the surrounding environment, how different vegetables respond to compost applications, what are the best combinations of fertilizer and compost to obtain optimum yields.
Seventy Years of Research on Waste Composting and Utilization at the Connecticut Agricultural Experiment Station.
Abigail A. Maynard (203) 974-8516 Abigail.Maynard@po.state.ct.us How projects at an agricultural experiment station have uncovered practical methods for composters and users of compost, what the key areas are today.
Composting.
Gregory J. Bugbee (203) 974-8512 Gregory.Bugbee@po.state.ct.us Much of our organic waste stream can be composted and recycled as a soil amendment.
Proper composting will create a better compost in a shorter period of time.
Composting techniques and uses for the compost are discussed.
Compost for Nursery Crops.
Gregory J. Bugbee (203) 974-8512 Gregory.Bugbee@po.state.ct.us Compost can reduce production costs by replacing potting media amendments such as peat and bark.
Large quantities of leaf and biosolids compost are currently available.
This talk reviews station research on compost utilization by nurseries.
* PLANTS
Poisonous Plants.
Sharon M. Douglas (203) 974-8499 Sharon.Douglas@po.state.ct.us Poisonous plants have always been part of daily life.
In the nineteenth century, poisonings due to plants reached near-epidemic levels as people often foraged natural plantings for sources of food.
Today, potentially dangerous plants can still be found all around us.
Poisonous plants are frequently part of interiorscapes in homes as well as in landscape plantings outdoors.
This presentation discusses why plants are poisonous, the importance of plant identification in cases of plant poisoning, and provides suggestions for prevention of plant poisonings.
* PLANT DISEASES
Strawberry Diseases.
Wade H. Elmer (203) 974-8503 Wade.Elmer@po.state.ct.us Dr. Elmer will address the major diseases of strawberries in Connecticut.
He will explain the research being conducted by himself and other station scientists on control strategies to minimize the damage from the diseases.
Asparagus Culture and Diseases.
Wade H. Elmer (203) 974-8503 Wade.Elmer@po.state.ct.us Dr. Elmer will address the cultural conditions required to grow asparagus in Connecticut.
Asparagus is vulnerable to a destructive disease called Fusarium crown and root rot.
Dr. Elmer will talk about the recent strategies designed to suppress this disease.
Bedding Plant Diseases.
Wade H. Elmer (203) 974-8503 Wade.Elmer@po.state.ct.us Connecticut is a major producer of bedding plants.
Dr. Elmer will discuss the major diseases that greenhouse growers encounter and problems that homeowners can have in their gardens.
Soilborne Diseases of Plants.
Wade H. Elmer (203) 974-8503 Wade.Elmer@po.state.ct.us Soilborne disease are caused by fungi, bacteria, viruses, and nematodes.
Dr. Elmer will speak about each group of pathogens and describe examples of disease problems in Connecticut caused by each group.
Vegetable Diseases.
Wade H. Elmer (203) 974-8503 Wade.Elmer@po.state.ct.us Vegetable diseases are encountered in most every home garden.
Dr. Elmer will present a list of common vegetable diseases and discuss conventional and organic methods for suppressing each disease.
Airborne Spread of Plant Diseases.
Donald E. Aylor (203) 974-8496 Donald.Aylor@po.state.ct.us The biophysics of aerial dispersal of plant pathogenic fungus spores will be discussed.
Application of principles will be illustrated with examples including the dispersal of the downy mildew fungus which causes blue mold on tobacco and the fungus which causes apple scab.
Sanitation Practices to Reduce Diseases in Orchards.
Donald E. Aylor (203) 974-8496 Donald.Aylor@po.state.ct.us The major amount of the inoculum for reintroducing disease into an orchard in the spring often resides in the orchard over the winter in fallen leaves or mummified fruit.
Sanitizing the orchard by removing these sources of overwintering inoculum can go a long way toward reducing disease levels in the orchard and reducing the need for fungicides to control disease.
The principles are illustrated with a discussion of apple scab.
Minimizing the Effect of Plant Disease on Yield of Tomatoes.
Francis J. Ferrandino (203) 974-8504 Francis.Ferrandino@po.state.ct.us The use of resistant cultivars is very important in reducing the risk of yield-loss due to most soil-borne pathogens.
Proper sanitation, crop rotation and cultural practices reduce the risk of plant damage due to foliar pathogens.
Emphasis is placed on proper pruning and plant spacing to maintain good air drainage and watering from below to minimize leaf wetness.
Verticillium Wilt on Eggplant.
Francis J. Ferrandino (203) 974-8504 Francis.Ferrandino@po.state.ct.us Although no cultivars of eggplant are truly resistant to this disease, yield trials conducted in Connecticut over the past 10 years indicate that a number of cultivars maintain satisfactory yields even when affected by this wilt disease.
The use of black plastic as a mulch and proper fertilization can also be beneficial in reducing the effects of this disease.
Biology and Ecology of Plant-Parasitic Nematodes.
James A. LaMondia* (860) 683-4982 James.LaMondia@po.state.ct.us Nematodes are microscopic worms which can cause plant disease in roots and shoots of important plants.
Pathogens Which Cause Plant Disease.
James A. LaMondia* (860) 683-4982 James.LaMondia@po.state.ct.us Fungi, nematodes, bacteria and viruses can all cause disease in plants.
Examples of these diseases and the biology of the pathogens is discussed.
Nematode Diseases of Herbaceous Perennial Ornamentals.
James A. LaMondia* (860) 683-4982 Jame.LaMondia@po.state.ct.us A large number of ornamental species are attacked by root-knot or foliar nematodes.
The biology, identification, and control of these pathogens is important in nursery and landscape settings.
Fungicide Resistance and Plant Disease.
James A. LaMondia* (860) 683-4982 James.LaMondia@po.state.ct.us The continued use of site-specific fungicides can select pathogenic fungi which are insensitive to these fungicides.
Examples of fungicide resistance problems and ways to manage resistance are described.
Disease Control for the Homeowner.
Sharon M. Douglas (203) 974-8499 Sharon.Douglas@po.state.ct.us This is a general discussion of the types of plant health problems encountered by homeowners in Connecticut.
The discussion with briefly cover key diseases and their associated symptoms but will focus on the management options for control of disease.
These options include culture, sanitation, resistance, biological, and chemical methods.
Specific examples of current diseases will be used for illustration.
Phytoplasmas and the Yellows Diseases of Plants.
Sharon M. Douglas (203) 974-8499 Sharon.Douglas@po.state.ct.us Phytoplasmas, originally called mycoplasma-like organisms (MLOs), are plant pathogenic microorganisms responsible for more than 200 diseases of a variety of plants worldwide.
They only survive and reproduce in live plant tissue and cannot yet be grown in artificial culture.
Among the important diseases associated with phytoplasmas are aster yellows, ash yellows, and X-disease of stone fruits.
This discussion addresses the biology, spread, and control of these diseases.
Plants Get Sick Too! (Grades 1-4).
Sharon M. Douglas (203) 974-8499 Sharon.Douglas@po.state.ct.us Healthy plants are important to all of us and this discussion targets young audiences.
Youngsters will be introduced to the idea that plants get sick too.
This includes a discussion of the whys and hows of plant diseases and how they impact our daily lives.
Children will be introduced to some basic concepts of botany (e.g., leaves, stems), the bad guys (e.g., fungi, bacteria), and the results of their interactions (e.g., the icky carrot, the scabby apple).
Introduction to Plant Pathology.
Sharon M. Douglas (203) 974-8499 Sharon.Douglas@po.state.ct.us This discussion covers the basic concepts of plant pathology as a science.
Among topics to be covered are disease cycles, types of causal agents, pathogenesis, and control.
Understanding Plant Diseases: Their Historical Significance and Impact on Our Daily Lives.
Sharon M. Douglas (203) 974-8499 Sharon.Douglas@po.state.ct.us Healthy plants are important to all of us and this discussion considers the idea that plants, like humans, "get sick" too.
Plants in landscapes, gardens, production fields, forests, and interiorscapes are subject to a wide variety of problems that threaten their health.
Throughout time, plant diseases have had profound effects on the history of human civilization and culture and plant health problems continue to impact our daily lives.
This discussion will highlight several diseases of historical importance and will also cover how to recognize and manage the types of plant diseases that are commonly encountered.
* PLANT PHYSIOLOGY AND GROWTH
Photosynthesis and Primary Productivity.
Richard B. Peterson (203) 974-8463 Richard.Peterson@po.state.ct.us Green plants have the unique ability among living organisms to synthesize their own food using the energy in sunlight to convert atmospheric carbon dioxide to carbohydrate.
Important new information is available concerning the regulation of this process by the plant and on the role of secondary pigments that serve to protect the photosynthetic apparatus from potentially damaging effects of light.
Photosynthesis and the Fate of Carbohydrate Reserves in Agricultural Crops.
Martin P.N. Gent (203) 974-8489 Martin.Gent@po.state.ct.us Most of the weight associated with yield of agricultural crops comes from photosynthesis.
What is the rate of photosynthesis in crop plants and what if the fate of the sugars created by photosynthesis? * PLANT PROPAGATION
Basic Techniques for Propagating Plants.
Sharon M. Douglas (203) 974-8499 Sharon.Douglas@po.state.ct.us Many types of plants in and around the home can easily be propagated using fairly simple, inexpensive procedures.
This discussion highlights a few of the basic and most widely applicable techniques for vegetative propagation of plants.
Plants propagated using these methods have the same characteristics as the parent or source plant since vegetative material is used and no genetic recombination is involved.
The key techniques for propagation that will be highlighted are: leaf cuttings, stem cuttings, simple layering, and air layering.
* TICKS
Lyme Disease and Tick Control.
Kirby C. Stafford III (203) 974-8485 Kirby.Stafford@po.state.ct.us This talk covers the epidemiology of Lyme disease, the biology of the tick vector, the basic symptoms of Lyme disease, and tick bite prevention and tick control.
The content of each talk is customized to the audience and time available.
Lyme Disease and Other Tick-Associated Diseases.
Kirby C. Stafford III (203) 974-8485 Kirby.Stafford@po.state.ct.us This talk covers the three disease agents that cause Lyme disease, human babesiosis, and human ehrlichiosis which are transmitted by the "deer" tick, Ixodes scapularis.
Laboratory Diagnosis of Lyme Disease, Babesiosis, and Ehrlichiosis.
Louis A. Magnarelli (203) 974-8466 Louis.Magnarelli@po.state.ct.us This talk describes various methods used to detect antibodies or Disease organisms in human blood, summarizes the advantages and disadvantages.
Lyme Disease and Human Babesiosis.
John F. Anderson (203) 974-8440 John.F.Anderson@po.state.ct.us These two tick associated diseases are increasingly becoming prevalent in Connecticut.
Lyme disease is caused by a spirochete, and babesiosis is caused by a protozoan parasite infecting red blood cells.
The black legged tick (sometimes called the deer tick) carries and transmits both pathogens.
So long as deer and ticks remain abundant, humans will continue to be exposed to these disease-causing microbes following tick bites.
The history of the disease, disease symptoms, ecology of the pathogens, and their tick vectors will be reviewed.
* TREES
Importance of Trees.
Jeffrey S. Ward (203) 974-8495 Jeffrey.Ward@po.state.ct.us A general talk for school children about the importance of trees for clean air, water, wildlife, and as a renewable resource.
A History of Connecticut's Forest.
Jeffrey S. Ward (203) 974-8495 Jeffrey.Ward@po.state.ct.us Covers the four major epochs of Connecticut's forest since the early 1600s.
Tree Care: A Homeowner's Guide.
Jeffrey S. Ward (203) 974-8495 Jeffrey.Ward@po.state.ct.us Guidelines of how to plant and maintain trees around homes.
Growing Chestnuts.
Sandra L. Anagnostakis (203) 974-8498 Sandra.Anagnostakis@po.state.ct.us Chestnut trees can be easily grown in Connecticut, and the nuts collected and sold.
This talk discusses which cultivars do best here, how to grow them, and the problems encountered by chestnut growers with pests and pathogens.
Marketing strategies and suggestions for contacts with other growers are also given.
Chestnut Blight Disease in our Forests.
Sandra L. Anagnostakis (203) 974-8498 Sandra.Anagnostakis@po.state.ct.us The chestnut blight fungus came into this country in the late 1800's on Japanese chestnuts, and reduced our native chestnuts to understory shrubs that sprout, become infected, die, and sprout again.
I am working on a biological control for this disease, and breeding chestnuts for resistance.
Chestnuts in the 21st Century.
Sandra L. Anagnostakis (203) 974-8498 Sandra.Anagnostakis@po.state.ct.us Chestnut breeding has been done at The Experiment Station since the 1930's, and the program is now focusing on producing timber and orchard trees with resistance to chestnut blight disease and chestnut gall wasp.
Ecology and Control of Exotic Insect Pests on Red Pine and Eastern Hemlock.
Richard Cowles* (860) 683-4983 Richard.Cowles@po.state.ct.us
Managing Hemlock Woolly Adelgid in Forests and Ornamental Landscapes.
Richard Cowles* (860) 683-4983 Richard.Cowles@po.state.ct.us * TURF, LAWNS AND GRASSES
Common Turf Diseases: Diagnosis and Control.
Sharon M. Douglas (203) 974-8499 Sharon.Douglas@po.state.ct.us This discussion will focus on the common diseases of turfgrass here in Connecticut.
Diseases need to be accurately identified before they can be managed.
Diagnosis of turf diseases is very difficult since pathogens rarely act alone in causing disease and symptoms can be quite variable depending upon weather and cultural factors.
Topics to be covered include symptoms, spread, and management of disease.
Lawn Care.
Gregory J. Bugbee (203) 974-8512 Gregory.Bugbee@po.state.ct.us Large acreage's of Connecticut are devoted to lawns.
Knowing the proper methods for caring for lawns results in better grass.
In many instances use of fertilizers and pesticides can be reduced.
Proper fertilizing, weed control, disease prevention, mowing, watering and seeding techniques are discussed.
* VEGETABLES
Unusual Garden Vegetables.
David E.
Hill (203) 974-8490 David.Hill@po.state.ct.us Growing globe artichokes, Belgian endive, radicchio, specialty melons, and Chinese vegetables.
Improve Crops Yields Through Cultivar Selection.
David E.
Hill (203) 974-8490 David.Hill@po.state.ct.us Yields of broccoli, cauliflower, onions, pumpkins, lettuce, and supersweet corn can be improved by proper cultivar selection and management techniques.
Diagnosis and Control of Vegetable Diseases.
Sharon M. Douglas (203) 974-8499 Sharon.Douglas@po.state.ct.us Nothing tastes better than fresh picked, home-grown produce.
This discussion focuses on the diseases of many of the popular vegetables grown in backyard gardens.
Among the topics to be covered are recognition of the key diseases on each vegetable, symptoms, disease spread, and a discussion of management or control options.
These options include culture, sanitation, resistance, biological, and chemical methods.
Specific examples of diseases will be used for illustration.
* WEEDS
Weed Control in Lakes and Ponds Gregory J. Bugbee.
(203) 974-8512 Gregory.Bugbee@po.state.ct.us Many ponds and lakes become unsightly and unusable because of buildups in weeds and algae.
Alleviating these problems may involve reducing nutrients inputs, chemical ,or biological controls, harvesting, dredging, or other techniques.
* WOODY ORNAMENTALS
Pruning for the Home Gardener.
Sharon M. Douglas (203) 974-8499 Sharon.Douglas@po.state.ct.us Proper pruning of woody ornamentals can be a daunting task for the homeowner.
This discussion focuses on the whys and hows of pruning and will also include information on proper timing and equipment.
Proper Planting and Care of Woody Ornamentals.
Sharon M. Douglas (203) 974-8499 Sharon.Douglas@po.state.ct.us The focus of this discussion is to give woody ornamental transplants the proper start.
Topics to be covered include preparing the planting hole, preparing the rootball for container-grown and balled and burlapped plants, planting depth, mulching, watering, and aftercare.
Growth Regulators to Promote Flowering and Reduce Height of Woody Ornamental Plants.
Martin P.N. Gent (203) 974-8489 Martin.Gent@po.state.ct.us Growth regulator chemicals induce Rhododendron to flower as young plants, but they may retard plant growth for several years.
* OTHER
Introduction to Rocks and Minerals.
Charles R. Vossbrinck (203) 974-8522 Charles.Vossbrinck@po.state.ct.us A talk with examples about rocks and minerals for grammar school children.
Microsporidia, Their Phylogeny, and Those Which Opportunistically Infect AIDS Patients.
Charles R. Vossbrinck (203) 974-8522 Charles.Vossbrinck@po.state.ct.us About the single celled protozoa called Microsporidia, their biology, phylogeny and those which infect immuno-compromized persons due to the AIDS epidemic.
Biological Illustration.
Gale E. Ridge (203) 974-8478 Gale.Ridge@po.state.ct.us A history of biological illustration and a presentation of modern illustration techniques.
__________________________________________________________________
This page was last updated: Tuesday, October 21, 2003
Green Line [CAES Home][Contact Us]
State of Connecticut Disclaimer and Privacy Policy.
Copyright 2003 The Connecticut Agricultural Experiment Station.
