Rhode Island State Partnership Program ---Final Review--November 13, 2002 All Eligible libraries not specifically mentioned in this review document have been approved for the grant package as offered in the library's application and as indicated in the Eligibility List sent previously to the state library agency.
Summary of eligibility and applications received: Eligible Library Systems Eligible----------------------Library Systems applying-------------------------------Purchase Option Grant systems:-----------------------Purchase Option Grant systems applying-------------Number of these applied to appeal their eligibility--14 12 37 12 7
While the state library agency is not required to submit an application, they have requested the Gates Library Computer grant for which they are eligible.
Eligible library buildings not applying: - Providence Athenaeum - Redwood Library and Athenaeum Supplemental Training Lab grant has been approved for: - Providence Public Library Libraries appealing eligibility status or appealing for more computers than for which they were originally eligible: There were a total of 9 appeals.
1 appeal has been approved.
Library East Providence Public Library West Warwick Public Library System Barrington Public Library Exeter Public Library Island Free Library Lincoln Public Library Marion J. Mohr Memorial Library Tiverton Library Services Appealing for: Eligibility for cash grant 6 PCs ­ originally eligible for 4 Eligibility for cash grant Eligibility for cash grant Eligibility for cash grant Eligibility for cash grant Eligibility for cash grant Eligibility for cash grant Approval
! # # # # # # #
-1-
Rhode Island State Partnership Program ---Final Review--Westerly Public Library Eligibility for cash grant #
The following libraries have opted to purchase computers other than the Gates Library Computer: System Providence Public Library* Providence Public Library* Providence Public Library* Providence Public Library* Providence Public Library* Providence Public Library* Providence Public Library* Providence Public Library* Providence Public Library* Providence Public Library* East Providence Public Library East Providence Public Library East Greenwich Free Library Jamestown Philomenian Library Library Building Providence Public Library Fox Point Branch Knight Memorial Library Mount Pleasant Branch Olneyville Branch Rochambeau Branch Smith Hill Branch South Providence Branch Wanskuck Branch Washington Park Branch Riverside Branch Weaver Library East Greenwich Free Library Jamestown Philomenian Library Number of PCs 6 6 6 6 6 4 6 6 6 4 4 4 4 4
*Providence Public Library--all buildings requesting alternate equipment.
However, the training lab at Providence will be Gates Library Computers.
Content Server Requests: There were 9 requests for content servers: System Central Falls Free Public Library Cranston Public Library East Providence Public Library Middletown Public Library Newport Public Library Pawtucket Public Library West Warwick Public Library System Woonsocket Harris Public Library Providence Public Library Library Building Central Falls Free Public Library Cranston Public Library Weaver Library Middletown Public Library Newport Public Library Pawtucket Public Library West Warwick Public Library Woonsocket Harris Public Library Providence Public Library Approval
! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! !
Additional Spanish keyboard requests: 2 library buildings requested Spanish keyboards in addition to the number for which they are eligible, for a total of 5 additional Spanish keyboards.
System Library Building # of add'l Spanish
-2-
Rhode Island State Partnership Program ---Final Review--keyboards Central Falls Free Public Library Pawtucket Public Library Central Falls Free Public Library Pawtucket Public Library 1 4
Also, the library approved for the Supplemental Training Lab grant, Providence Public Library, has requested Spanish keyboards for all 11 of their computers.
Tentative Remaining Dates for Rhode Island: Awards sent to libraries: BYCA workshops start: State Library Class: Program Training in Seattle for 100K systems and lab recipients Implementation begins: Implementation ends: All granted funds must be spent by: November 26, 2002 February 19, 2003 March 31-April 1, 2003 ): April 21-24, 2003 May 7, 2003 May 21, 2003 Sept. 15, 2003
-3-
