FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE: April 18, 2002 GOVERNOR: STATE WILL APPEAL RULING ON ACID RAIN EMISSIONS [thinbar.gif] Continues Fight to Protect NY's Air, Land and Water From Out-of-State Pollution Governor George E. Pataki today announced that, working with the Office of the Attorney General, the state will appeal a recent federal court decision that would allow more harmful acid rain emissions to poison New York's air, water and soil resources.
The appeal continues New York's aggressive battle against acid rain by challenging the ruling that would allow for unrestricted trade of sulfur dioxide emissions allowances from power plants in New York to plants in upwind states.
"All New Yorkers deserve clean air, land and water, and this ruling will undermine our aggressive efforts to reduce acid rain pollution," Governor Pataki said.
"We will continue to fight for this important law that will protect New Yorkers from harmful emissions that threaten our precious natural resources from the Adirondacks to the Catskills to Long Island."
New York leads the nation in reducing acid-rain causing emissions.
In 2000, Governor Pataki signed the Air Pollution Mitigation law.
Under this law, electric generating plants in New York would be assessed penalties for selling sulfur dioxide allowances to power plants in Midwestern acid rain source states
The federal Clean Air Act's Acid Rain Control Program established the emissions allowance trading program, which requires power plants to obtain allowances or credits for each ton of sulfur dioxide they emit annually.
The number of allowances available nationwide is limited.
If a plant maintains emissions below a certain level, it may sell or "trade" its allowances to other plants whose emissions are above the allowed level.
Recognizing that out-of-state or upwind sources account for up to 80 percent of acid rain causing pollutants released into the air, the Air Pollution Mitigation law was enacted to ensure that the transfer of sulfur dioxide emissions allowances by New York power producers would not adversely impact New York's environment.
The United States District Court Northern District of New York struck down the New York State law on April 9, 2002.
The State has 30 days from entry of that ruling to appeal the ruling to the federal U.S. Court of Appeals for the Second Circuit.
Earlier this year, Governor Pataki announced draft regulations that will cut sulfur dioxide emissions from electric generators in New York State by an additional 50 percent below levels allowed under the federal Clean Air Act's Acid Rain Program requirements.
The reductions would reduce annual sulfur dioxide emissions by 130,000 tons a year and nitrogen oxide emissions from New York sources by 20,000 tons annually.
In 1999, the Governor signed legislation to improve the process for reviewing proposed electric generating facilities, allowing for more efficient, environmentally sound power plants to meet the growing demand for electricity.
The Governor has also supported federal legislation sponsored by Congressmen Sherwood Boehlert and John Sweeney that would require further reductions in sulfur dioxide and nitrogen oxide emissions in regions that contribute to acid rain in the Adirondacks.
William Cooke, director of government relations for the National Audubon Society of New York State, said, "We are very glad to see Governor Pataki taking this step, which is critical to protecting our ecosystems and the health of the Adirondacks.
We disagree with the court=s ruling on acid rain trading allowances and believe it should and will be overturned.
In appealing this decision, the Governor is continuing his long-term commitment to controlling acid rain and preserving New York=s vital natural resources and wildlife."
Sarah J. Meyland, executive director and general counsel for Citizens Campaign for the Environment, said, "We are exceptionally pleased that Governor Pataki continues to lead the battle for acid-free air and water in New York by challenging the recent court decision that ruled against New York=s Air Pollution Mitigation law.
The coming years will be the most critical in determining the long-term health of the State=s lands and forests, and losing 50 percent or more of the lakes in the Adirondacks to acid rain damage would be a disaster of immeasurable proportions.
Working to keep New York=s strong air emission controls from benefitting acid rain generators upwind of our State is the right thing to do."
Neil F. Woodworth, counsel to the Adirondack Mountain Club and the New York - New Jersey Trail Conference, said, "In taking this appeal, New York is sending a strong message to the rest of the nation.
The state is committed to greatly reducing acid deposition created in New York and ensuring that emissions credits earned in that cleanup are not used by coal burning plants in the Midwest to continue to foul New York's air and render more Adirondack lakes lifeless."
Aaron Mair, chair of the Sierra Club - Atlantic Chapter and president of the Board of Directors of the Arbor Hill Environmental Justice Corporation, said, "We applaud Governor Pataki's efforts to control acid rain and strongly support his decision to appeal this court ruling.
Once again, the Governor is demonstrating his commitment to clean air and reductions in the number of cases of asthma and other harmful health conditions."
Bernard C. Melewski, acting executive director of the Adirondack Council, said, "We are pleased with the dedication of the Governor and Attorney General to protecting air quality in New York State.
The decision to appeal the judge's ruling sends the message that our officials are serious about ending the damage of acid rain in the State.
None of this would be necessary if Congress would take prompt action to solve the acid rain problem."
State Department of Environmental Conservation (DEC) Commissioner Erin M. Crotty said, "Under Governor Pataki's leadership, New York's efforts to control acid rain are the toughest in the nation, addressing the acid rain problem at one of its major sources - power plant emissions.
We will continue to work with our federal partners to ensure that acid rain controls are effective and our air and natural resources are fully
[thinbar.gif]
Return to the Press Releases Return to the Office of the Governor
