Russian Holidays January 1-2 New Year Most important non-religious holiday in Russia.
Celebrations may feature the Yolka, or New Years Tree, Grandfather Frost and the Snow Maiden, and gift-giving and a feast.
Revelers crowd Red Square.
January 7 Russian Orthodox Christmas Christmas based on the Julian calendar, used in Russia prior to the 1917 Soviet revolution when the Soviet government switched to the Gregorian calendar in general use.
The Russian Orthodox Church marks religious holidays based on the old Julian calendar.
Some other eastern orthodox dioceses in the world including the Russian Orthodox Diocese in Alaska also celebrate Christmas on January 7.
This recent post-Soviet addition to Russian holidays is a work holiday.
March 8 International Womens Day Giving flowers to women in personal and professional relations is mandatory.
May 1-2 May Day / International Labor Day / Spring Holiday May Day, May 1, is traditionally celebrated as Labor Day around the world, a day of workers solidarity.
Under the Soviets, this was an important political holiday.
After the demise of the Soviet Union, the holiday was de-politicized and became a two-day Labor Day and Spring Holiday.
May 9 Victory Day Celebrates victory over Germany in 1945 in World War II or, as it is commonly referred to in Russia, The Great Patriotic War.
Equivalent to American Veterans Day
June 12 Independence Day or Sovereignty Day Marks the 1991 declaration of Russian sovereignty.
Date of Russian presidential elections every four years.
Next presidential election: 2004
November 7 Day of Accord 
After the Soviet collapse, the post-Soviet Russian government in an effort to forge political peace through compromise kept the date an official state holiday, adhering to seven decades of tradition, but designated the holiday as a day of accord and reconciliation in an effort to bridge the political divide.
The Communist Party still marks the date as the anniversary of the revolution, but for most of the country, it is simply provides a non-political holiday.
December 12 Constitution Day Marks adoption of Russias post-Soviet constitution.
Federal parliamentary elections held on this date every three years.
Additional Russian Holiday Information
Russian Easter Date varies
May 5, 2002 / April 27, 2003 / April 11, 2004 Holiest holiday in Russian Orthodoxy Celebrated based on the old Julian calendar
Recognition Days 
Weekend Holidays Holidays that occur on weekends are traditionally celebrated on Friday or Monday
Extended Holidays Russias holiday-to-holiday phenomenon: Separate holidays occurring close together tend to merge into extended holiday periods Anticipate closed offices, absent officials, work slowdowns during extended holidays
New Years Day-Christmas Season: Dec. 31-Jan. 7 Holiday lull is increasingly extending from Western Christmas to Orthodox Christmas
May Day-Victory Day: May 1-9 Much of Russia celebrates spring weather
August Summer Vacation August is the traditional Russian vacation month, as in many parts of Europe
Fireworks Fireworks displays are traditional on Russian holidays
Election Days National, regional and local elections occur on Sundays; treated as holiday
Joint U.S. 
Alaskas Russian Holidays
Sewards Day March 30 Celebrated last Monday in March Named after U.S. Secretary of State William Seward who negotiated the Alaska Purchase Holiday marks the anniversary of the March 30, 1867 treat signing Official State of Alaska holiday All Alaska state offices closed
Alaska Day October 18 Anniversary of the formal transfer in 1867 of Alaska from Russian to the United States Ceremonial re-enactment every October 18 in the former Russian capital Sitka Official State of Alaska holiday All Alaska state offices closed
Christmas January 7 Alaska Russian Orthodox diocese adheres to old Julian calendar Celebrated in many small Alaska communities where Russian Orthodoxy predominates Russian Orthodox Christmas traditions followed in many villages Not an official holiday, but schools, post offices, etc. may close in small villages | Back to Russian Far East Home Page |
[shim.gif] [shim.gif]
