The Star Spangled Banner...Long May It Wave Guidelines for Display of the American Flag Certain fundamental rules of heraldry, govern the proper display of the flag of the United States of America.
The following are rules established to demonstrate respect for "Old Glory.
1.
When carried in a procession with another flag or flags, the Stars and Stripes should be either on the marching right, or when there is a line of other flags, in front of the center of that line.
When displayed in a window, the flag should be in the same way, with the blue field to the left as one is looking at the flag from the street
When displayed over the middle of the street, the flag should be suspended vertically with the union (the blue field) to the north in an east-west street, or to the east in a north-south street.
When displayed with another flag from crossed staffs, the flag of the united States of America should be on the right (the flag's own right) and its staff should be in front of the staff of the other flags.
When it is to be flown at half-mast, the flag should be hoisted to the peak for an instant and then lowered to the half-mast position; but before lowering the flag for the day it should again be raised to the peak.
By half-mast is meant hauling down the flag to one-half the distance between the top and bottom of the staff.
On Memorial Day the flag should be displayed at half-mast until noon only; then hoisted to the top of the staff.
When flags of states or cities or pennants of societies are flown on the same halyard with the Flag of the United States, the latter should always be at the peak.
When flown from adjacent staffs, the Stars and Stripes should be hoisted first and lowered last.
The flag should form a distinctive feature at ceremonies unveiling a statute or monument, but it should never be used as a covering for the statute or monument.
When the flag is displayed from a staff projecting horizontally or at any angle from the window sill, balcony or front of a building, the union of the flag should go to the peak of the staff (unless displayed at half-mast).
When the flag is to cover a casket, it should be so laced that the union is at the head and over the left shoulder.
the flag should not be lowered into the grave or allowed to touch the ground.
The flag should always have the position of honor on the speaker' platform, standing to the right of the speaker.
all other flags should be to the speakers' left.
When carried in a procession with another flag or flags, the Stars and Stripes should be either on the marching right, or when there is a line of other flags, in front of the center of that line.
When a number of flags of states or cities or pennants of societies are grouped and displayed from staffs with our National Flag, the Stars and Stripes should be at the center or the highest point of the group.
13.
During the raising or lowering of the flag, or during its passage in a parade, all present should face the flag, stand at attention and salute with right hand over their heart.
Those in uniform should render a proper right hand salute.
Home | About | Benefits | Blind Annuity | Citizen Soldiers | Contact Us | Facilities | FAQ | Honoring NY's Vets | Links Offices | Other Help | Sitemap | Vietnam Veterans with Diabetes | Voter Registration | What's New | Women Veterans
