Secretary of State Jesse White SERVICES Spacer PROGRAMS Spacer PRESS Spacer PUBLICATIONS Spacer DEPARTMENTS Spacer CONTACT Spacer Chapter One: The Illinois Drivers License To drive legally in Illinois, you must have a valid drivers license, instruction permit, restricted driving permit or judicial driving permit.
This chapter tells you how to obtain an Illinois drivers license or instruction permit.
You will be given information about: * learning to drive * renewing your license * obtaining a duplicate or corrected license * changing a name or address * license requirements * notations on licenses * your health and driving * license fees * classifications * special permits * color-coded licenses and identification cards * exemptions * special services * the commercial drivers license
Learning To Drive
In Illinois, most young people learn to drive in high school or at a commercial driver training school licensed by the Illinois Secretary of State.
Approved driver education classes include at least 30 hours of classroom study and six hours of behind-the-wheel training.
Some high schools, community colleges and commercial driving schools offer classes for adults.
To find out about classes and fees, call your local high school, school superintendents office, community college or commercial driving school.
Instruction Permits
When you apply for your instruction permit, you must pass the vision screening and the appropriate written test for the classification you are seeking.
The behind-the-wheel test will be taken when you apply for your drivers license.
This book has the information you must know to pass the written test on traffic laws and signs in order to obtain basic driving privileges.
In order to drive larger vehicles or motorcycles, you must pass the appropriate written test(s).
This information is available in RULES OF THE ROAD FOR NON-CDL VEHICLES, the COMMERCIAL DRIVERS LICENSE STUDY MANUAL, and the ILLINOIS MOTORCYCLE OPERATOR MANUAL, which are available at any driver services facility, or visit the SOS Web site for further information.
If you are 15 to 17 years old, you may receive your instruction permit only if you are enrolled in an approved driver education class.
Your instruction permit must be used in the driver education class when an adult instructor is sitting beside you.
You may also practice your driving when one of your parents, a legal guardian or a responsible adult approved by your parents is sitting beside you.
This adult must be at least 21 years of age, have a license for the type of vehicle you are driving, and have at least one year of driving experience.
After you have successfully completed the driver education class, you may continue practicing to drive with your instruction permit under the supervision of a responsible adult as outlined above.
The instruction permit is valid for 24 months and must be held for at least three months prior to obtaining a drivers license when you are 16 years of age or older.
If you are 17 years and 9 months of age or older, you may apply for an instruction permit without taking a driver education course.
When you have completed the behind-the-wheel portion of driver education, and your training was administered by your local high school, the Illinois State Board of Education will notify the Office of Secretary of State electronically that you have completed training.
The Secretary of State will indicate this notification of completion on your Drivers License Record.
A Certification of Completion (blue slip) will no longer be issued by the Illinois State Board of Education.
To qualify for the above document, you must have received a passing grade in at least eight courses during the previous two semesters.
Any student under 18 years old who drops out of high school cannot obtain a Certificate of Completion unless 1) the instructor has written verification of enrollment in a GED or alternative program, 2) the student has a GED, 3) the student, prior to dropping out, received passing grades in at least eight courses in the previous two semesters, or 4) the student has written consent from his or her parents or legal guardian and the regional superintendent.
The local superintendent or chief school administrator may waive conditions deemed in the best interest of the student or dropout.
To apply for your drivers license before reaching the age of 18, you will need to bring your instruction permit and provide acceptable forms of identification, as outlined under the "License Requirements" section to the driver services facility at the time of application.
At that time notification of your completion date must have been received from I.S.B.E. or this office and loaded to your record.
You will also be required to present written certification from your parent, legal guardian, or, if there is no parent or legal guardian, a responsible adult, that you have had a minimum of 25 hours of behind-the-wheel practice time and are sufficiently prepared and able to safely operate a motor vehicle.
A certification form will be mailed after you are issued an instruction permit.
For your convenience, additional certification forms can be obtained at most driver services facilities, SOS Web site, high school driver education offices, and commercial driving schools.
Cooperative Driver Testing Program
High school students who successfully complete an accredited driver education course of classroom and behind-the-wheel instruction with a grade of A or B may not be required to take a duplicate road test at the time they apply for their drivers license.
The course must include a minimum of 30 hours of classroom training and six hours of behind-the-wheel training.
Each student also must pass a road test that meets minimum standards established by the Secretary of States office either during the drivers education course or at the time of application for the drivers license.
The program is voluntary, but school districts are encouraged to participate by contacting the Secretary of States office.
The Secretary of States office has established a procedure for spot checking student applicants who qualify for the program.
Under the spot check, students whose birthdays fall on certain dates will be required to pass a road test administered at the driver services facility even though they may have taken and passed a road test conducted by their driver education instructor.
Upon successful completion of the driver education course, the student will be issued a Cooperative Driver Testing Certificate, which must be signed by the driver education instructor and the students parent or guardian.
The certificate, which will expire on the same day as the students current instruction permit and will not be extended, must be presented at any driver services facility at the time of license application.
TOP ^|
Renewing Your License
When it is time to renew your license, you will receive a letter about 30 days before your current license expires.
Your renewal letter will tell you what identification is required and what tests are necessary.
You also will receive information about facility hours.
The Safe Driver Renewal program enables drivers with clean records to renew their drivers licenses from the convenience of home and visit a driver services facility only once every eight years.
To be eligible for Safe Driver Renewal, a driver must be between the ages of 22 and 74, NOT hold a Commercial Drivers License (CDL) or school bus driver permit; have no traffic infractions, sanctions, accident reports or medical report review requirements.
Motorists with drunk driving arrests are not eligible.
Drivers who qualify for "Safe Driver Renewal" receive a notice in the mail detailing how to complete the renewal process by Internet, telephone or mail.
After renewing from the comfort of home, Safe Drivers receive a renewal sticker by mail within ten business days of their renewal.
For further information please visit the SOS Web site.
TOP ^|
Obtaining a Duplicate or Corrected License
Duplicate License
If your license has been lost, stolen or destroyed, you may apply for another license.
You must go to a driver services facility.
There is a $5 fee; however, drivers age 60 and older who have had their license stolen will receive a free duplicate license if they present a police report on the theft.
You will be required to show acceptable forms of identification that prove your identity.
Corrected License
If your license requires a correction, follow the same process as for a duplicate license.
Your incorrect license must be surrendered at the driver services facility when you apply for your corrected license.
You will be required to show identification that proves the change in information.
Changing Your Name or Address
Within 10 days of changing your name or address, you are required by law to notify the Secretary of State of the change.
This may be done at any driver services facility, or by writing the Driver Services Department, Attention: Address Change, 2701 S. Dirksen Parkway, Springfield, IL 62723-0001.
In addition, residents who hold a valid CDL must obtain a corrected driver's license within 30 days of a change of address.
If you change your name, you must obtain a corrected drivers license, corrected title, and corrected registration ID card before the Secretary of State records can be changed.
A corrected drivers license must be obtained at a driver services facility.
You will be required to show identification with your new name and identification that links your old and new names.
Vehicle registration forms may also be completed at the driver services facility, or these forms can be mailed to you.
A change of address form is included in the back of this Rules of the Road manual or can be downloaded from the SOS Web site.
Complete this form and mail it to the address listed previously.
There is no fee for this change unless you wish to have a new drivers license with the change of address.
A new drivers license may be obtained only at a driver services facility.
A $5 fee is charged if you obtain a new license.
TOP ^|
License Requirements
To receive an Illinois drivers license or ID card, you must provide acceptable forms of identification.
You must do so to prove name, date of birth, Illinois residency, Social Security Number and signature for comparison.
Acceptable Identification (Photocopies will not be accepted)
Please note, after review of all identification presented, management has the right to accept or refuse any document.
A Written Signature B Proof of Date of Birth* C Social Security Number D Residency/Personal Data Canceled Check (w/in 90 days) CDTP Certification Form Court Order Credit Card-Major Brand@ Driver Education Certificate (Blue Slip) Government Drivers License Government Identification Card Illinois Drivers License- "current" Illinois Identification Card- "current" INS forms I-551 (Alien Registration Card) I-688 (Temporary Resident Card) I-688A (Employment Auth.
Card) I-688B (Employment Auth.
Card) I-766 (Employment Auth.
Card) I-94 (Arrival/Departure Record) with valid passport Medicare Card-with suffix A, J, H, M, or T Military Drivers License-US Military Identification Military Service Record -DD214 Mortgage or Installment Loan Documents Out-of-State Drivers License/ID card-"current" Passport-Valid U.S. or Foreign Social Security Card Adoption Records Birth Certificate ** Court Order- Change of Birth Date Official Grade/High School Transcript Illinois Drivers License- "current" Illinois Identification Card- "current" INS forms I-551 (Alien Registration) I-688 (Temporary Resident Card) I-688A (Employment Auth.
Card) I-688B (Employment Auth.
Card) I-766 (Employment Auth.
Card) I-94 (Arrival/Departure Record) with valid passport Military Drivers License-US Military Identification Card-US Military Service Record -DD214 Naturalization Certificate Passport-Valid with Complete Date of Birth Social Security Award Letter (Primary Beneficiary Only) Illinois Drivers License Record Illinois Identification Card Record Military Drivers License-US Military Identification Card-US Military Service Record- DD214 Social Security Award Letter (Primary Beneficiary Only) Social Security Card-Issued by Social Security Administration Examples of residency may be, but are not limited to the following: Utility Bill Vehicle Registration Card Voter Registration Card Current forms of identification with an Illinois street address which do not appear on the list of unacceptable identification may also be used to verify residency.
Any document listed in Group A, B, or C and other forms of identification not listed as unacceptable may be used to verify personal data.
For a name change, the identification must be a document which provides a link to the established DL/ID file.
@ Acceptable Major Brand Credit Cards are (American Express, Diners Club, Discover, Master Card 
To be verifiable, it must be possible to contact the regulatory authority to confirm the authenticity of the document.
**Original or certified by a Board of Health or Bureau of Vital statistics within the U.S. State Department, U.S. territories or Canada.
A certified copy is a document produced by the issuing jurisdiction which has an embossed seal or an original stamped impression.
Foreign birth certificates are accepted as "proof" if accompanied with any other item listed in Group B.
1.
First Time Illinois Drivers License/Identification Card Applicant: An applicant applying for a Drivers license or Identification Card for the first time in the State of Illinois must present one document from each of Group A, B, C, and D. 2.
Duplicate/Corrected Drivers License/Identification Card Applicant: An applicant applying for either a duplicate or corrected drivers license or Identification Card must present one form of identification from Group A, and at least one form from either Groups B, C, or D.
An applicant who requests a change in Name, Date of Birth, Social Security Number or Gender must provide acceptable identification to create a link pertaining to the change between the previous information and the new information.
3.
Illinois Drivers License/Identification Card Renewal Applicants: Applicants renewing their current Illinois drivers license or Identification Card need only present their current valid license or ID card unless otherwise stated on the renewal notice.
If they do not have their current drivers license or ID card, then they must present one form of identification from Group A and at least one form from either Groups B, C, or D.
NOTE: After review of all identification presented, management has the right to accept or refuse any documents.
TOP ^|
Unacceptable Identification Documents
Bond Receipt or Bond Card Business Cards Check Cashing Cards Club or Fraternal Membership Cards College or University Identification Cards Commercially produced (non-State or unofficial) ID Cards Firearms Owner ID Fishing License Handwritten ID or Employment Cards Hunting License IDPA (Public Aid) Cards Instruction Permit/Receipts
Insurance and/or Bail Bond Cards Library Card Temporary Drivers License Traffic Citation (Arrest Ticket) Verification by family members other than Father, Mother or Legal Guardian Verification by non-family members other than High School Driver Education Instructor or Secretary of State Personnel Video Club Membership Cards Wallet IDs Unlicensed Financial Institution Loan Papers
* High school and commercial driver education school applicants are required to present their Certificate of Completion, Cooperative Driver Testing Certificate (if applicable), instruction permit and provide acceptable forms of identification, as outlined under the "License Requirements" section, before a drivers license will be issued.
Electronic notice of completion (Public or Commercial) must have been received and entered to the applicants record prior to application * See above for the identification required for a first time issuance.
Drivers under the age of 18 must also present written certification from a parent, legal guardian, or, if there is no parent or legal guardian, a responsible adult at least 21 years of age stating that the applicant has had a minimum of 25 hours of behind-the-wheel practice time and is sufficiently prepared and able to safely operate a motor vehicle.
To receive a drivers license, you must also: * appear in person at the driver services facility when you apply for or renew your license.
You will have your photo taken and receive your license, ID, or permit at that time.
(If eligible for Safe Driver Renewal, you will not have to appear in person to renew your license.)
* turn in all valid out-of-state licenses, instruction permits, and commercial drivers licenses.
* pay the appropriate fee. * pass appropriate drivers tests.
You may be required to pass a vision screening, written and/or behind-the-wheel driving test.
(Exceptions apply for Safe Driver Renewals.)
New Residents
Drivers moving to Illinois from out of state may use their valid drivers license from their home state for 90 days.
To receive an Illinois drivers license, individuals must appear in person at a driver services facility and provide acceptable forms of identification, as outlined under the "License Requirements" section.
New residents must surrender their out-of-state license and pass a vision screening, a written exam, and possibly a driving exam.
Age Restrictions
You must be at least 18 years of age to obtain a valid drivers license in Illinois.
However, the following exceptions apply: * If you are 16 or 17 years old, you may receive your license if you successfully complete an approved driver education class; present written certification from a parent, legal guardian, or, if there is no parent or legal guardian, a responsible adult at least 21 years of age stating that the applicant has had a minimum of 25 hours of behind-the-wheel practice time, held a valid instruction permit for a minimum of three months, and is sufficiently prepared and able to safely operate a motor vehicle; and pass the three parts of the drivers license test.
* If you are 16 or 17 years old and have been issued a drivers license, for the first six months or until you reach the age of 18 you are restricted to driving with only one passenger under the age of 20 unless you are transporting immediate family.
Immediate family is defined as siblings, step-siblings, children, or step-children of the driver.
This is effective January 01, 2004.
* If you are 16 or 17 years old, you may receive your motorcycle license only after retaining your motorcycle instruction permit for a minimum of three months and successfully completing an approved motorcycle training course and an approved driver education class.
You also must pass the motorcycle drivers license tests.
* If you are under 18 years of age and unmarried, your application for any instruction permit or driver's license must also contain the written consent of a parent or legal guardian.
* If you are under 17 and driving after curfew hours, you must have a parent, legal guardian or other responsible adult with you.
Your parent(s) or legal guardian must approve of any other responsible adult accompanying you.
Curfew hours are 12:01 a.m. until 6:00 a.m.
Saturdays and Sundays, and for a period from 11:00 p.m. until 6:00 a.m. Sunday night through Thursday night.
In addition, local municipalities may provide curfew hours different than these.
If curfew conditions are not met, your license or permit may not be valid during curfew hours.
* Any person under age 18 who has been charged with an offense as a result of an accident in which a passenger was seriously injured or killed may be denied a drivers license or license renewal; alcohol need not be a factor.
Other Age Requirements
Minimum Age To drive for hire any vehicle transporting property (for example, delivery persons) 18 To drive for hire any passenger vehicle transporting 10 or fewer persons 18 To drive for hire a second division vehicle transporting 10 or more passengers 21 To drive a commuter van, religious organization bus, school bus, vehicle transporting senior citizens or a child care vehicle 21
Penalties for ID Fraud
It is a crime to sign a drivers license or ID card application that includes false information or to present false identification.
You may be charged with perjury or with a violation of the Identification Card Act.
It is also a crime for you to use a fictitious or unlawfully altered drivers license or permit, to present or possess another persons drivers license or ID card as if it were yours, or to allow another person to use your identification documents to apply for a drivers license or ID card.
If you are convicted of perjury, which is a Class 4 felony, you may be sentenced to jail for one to three years and fined up to $25,000.
If you are convicted of violating the Identification Card Act, which includes the unlawful use of a drivers license or ID card, it is a Class A misdemeanor with fines up to $2,500 and possible jail time of up to one year.
A subsequent conviction will result in a Class 4 felony which includes a possible 1-3 years imprisonment and fines up to $25,000.
If the conviction was a result of a fraudulent card made by an unauthorized non-governmental entity, it is a Class 4 felony for the first conviction and a Class 3 felony (3-5 years imprisonment and fines up to $25,000) for any subsequent conviction.
In addition, if you violate any of the above laws, your drivers license will be suspended or revoked for a minimum of 12 months.
A persons driving privileges may also be suspended or revoked for possessing a fraudulent license, ID or permit.
License Requirements for Special Vehicles
If you drive a commuter vehicle for profit, a religious organization bus or a vehicle transporting senior citizens, you also must meet the following requirements: * You must have a valid and properly classified license.
Depending on the size of the vehicle you operate, a commercial drivers license may be necessary.
* You must have had a valid drivers license three years prior to the date of application.
* You must demonstrate your ability to drive the vehicle safely.
* Within three years of the date of application, you must not have been convicted of driving under the influence of alcohol and/or drugs, reckless driving, leaving the scene of an accident involving death or personal injury, drag racing, manslaughter, reckless homicide, or reckless conduct from the use of a motor vehicle.
If you drive a child care vehicle, you must meet the following requirements: * You must have a valid and properly classified license.
Depending on the size of the vehicle you operate, a commercial drivers license may be necessary.
* You must have had a valid drivers license three years prior to the date of application.
* You must show your physical fitness to operate vehicles by having a medical exam.
* You must not have been convicted of more than two moving traffic violations within a 12-month period.
* Within three years of the date of application, you must not have been convicted of driving under the influence of alcohol and/or drugs, reckless driving, or reckless homicide resulting from the operation of a vehicle.
If you drive a school bus, you must have a properly classified commercial drivers license with the appropriate endorsements.
The Secretary of States Office is responsible for regulating all school bus drivers.
For further information or a copy of the rules, please write the Secretary of State, Driver Services Department, 2701 South Dirksen Parkway, Springfield, IL 62723.
You may also obtain information on school bus driving from a regional superintendent of schools or visit the Web at www.isbe.state.il.us.
TOP ^|
Notations on Licenses
When you have passed all applicable exams, your new drivers license will be issued.
Prior to your photo being taken, your signature, that will appear on the license, will be obtained.
Restrictions will be coded on your license.
On the back of your license you may: * indicate your wish to donate your organs or tissue in the event of your death.
Complete and sign the form on the back of your drivers license.
The special finish on the license allows you to sign with a ball point pen.
(See the sample license shown on the inside back cover.)
This conforms to the Anatomical Gift Act and is a legal Uniform Donor Card.
More information concerning the organ/tissue donor program is available at any driver services facility, or visit the SOS Web site.
* note your blood type and RH factor.
* place a decal or sticker indicating you carry an Emergency Medical Information Card.
Stickers are available at any driver services facility, hospitals, schools, medical groups or associations that provide Emergency Medical Information Cards.
* place a sticker indicating you carry a living will and/or power of attorney for health care notification card.
Stickers and cards are available at any driver services facility.
TOP ^|
Your Health and Driving
For your safety and the safety of others, you should remain medically fit to operate a motor vehicle.
When you apply for a drivers license, you will be asked questions about any potential physical or mental condition that may impair your safe operation of a motor vehicle.
You also will be asked about any medications (prescribed or over-the-counter), drugs or alcohol that may impair your driving ability.
If you answer "yes" to any of the above questions, a current and completed report from your doctor verifying your medical ability to safely operate a motor vehicle is required.
The form is available at any driver services facility or can be downloaded from the SOS Web site.
If your doctor verifies you are medically fit to safely operate a motor vehicle, you will be eligible to take the drivers license tests.
If you develop a medical condition that is likely to cause a loss of consciousness or any loss of ability to safely operate a motor vehicle, it is your responsibility to notify the Secretary of State within 10 days of becoming aware of the condition.
Failure to do so may lead to the cancellation of your drivers license and driving privileges.
Report forms are available at all driver services facilities.
TOP ^|
License Fees
License Fees Original instruction permit $20 Basic drivers license $10 Commercial drivers license $60 Limited commercial drivers license $20 School Bus Permit (original, duplicate or corrected) $4 Drivers license for persons age 18 - 20 $5 Drivers license for persons age 69 - 80 $5 Drivers license for persons age 81 - 86 $2 Drivers license for persons age 87 and older FREE Corrected or duplicate drivers license or permit $5 Duplicate license or permit for persons age 60 and above whose licenses have been stolen (must have police report) FREE New classification added, not at time of renewal (except CDL) $5 Original or renewal M or L classification $5 Five-year identification card $4 Corrected Identification Card $2 Duplicate Identification Card $4 Identification card for persons 65 or older FREE Identification card for persons with disabilities FREE
If you receive your license prior to the expiration of your instruction permit, you may not be required to pay an additional fee.
TOP ^|
Classifications
Drivers licenses are classified by the gross vehicle weight rating (GVWR) of your vehicle.
Drivers seeking a basic license to operate a car in Illinois are issued a class D license.
When you take the behind-the-wheel test, you must drive a representative vehicle of the class for which you want a license.
If you wish to operate a commercial motor vehicle, you will be required to obtain a CDL.
For more information, consult the CDL study guide, which is available at your local driver services facility or the SOS Web site.
The following chart lists the license classifications: * CLASS A: Any combination of motor vehicles with a Gross Combination Weight Rating (GCWR) of 26,001 lbs. or more, providing that the vehicle being towed is in excess of 10,000 lbs.
Does not include motorcycles or motor driven cycles.
(CDL is generally required.)
* CLASS B: Any single motor vehicle with a GVWR of 26,001 lbs. or more or any such vehicle towing another not in excess of 10,000 lbs.
Does not include motorcycles or motor driven cycles.
(CDL is generally required.)
* CLASS C: Any motor vehicle with a GVWR of more than 16,000 lbs. but less than 26,001 or any such vehicle towing another with a GVWR of 10,000 lbs. or less or any such vehicle designed to carry 16 or more passengers including the driver or hazardous materials that require placarding.
Does not include motorcycles or motor driven cycles.
* CLASS D: Any motor vehicle with a GVWR of 16,000 lbs. or less, except those vehicles requiring a class A, B, C, L or M license.
* CLASS L: Any motor driven cycle with less than 150 cc displacement.
* CLASS M: Any motorcycle or motor driven cycle.
NOTE: Any vehicle designed to transport 16 or more persons or used in the transportation of placarded hazardous materials requires a CDL.
There also are special endorsements for vehicles requiring a CDL.
For more information, consult the CDL study guide, which is available at your local driver services facility or the SOS web site.
It is against the law to drive a motor vehicle, even if it is borrowed for a short period of time, unless you have a valid drivers license with the proper classification and endorsements.
A rented vehicle, with a GVWR of 26,000 pounds or less, used for the transportation of an individuals own personal property or that of an immediate family member for non-business purposes within the State of Illinois, may be operated with a Class D license.
This person is required to successfully complete a safety course regarding the safe operation of that vehicle.
Motorized Pedalcycles (Mopeds)
A motorized pedalcycle (moped) is a motor driven cycle.
It produces two brake horsepower or less and has a maximum speed of 30 miles per hour.
If the moped has an internal combustion engine, the displacement shall not exceed 50 cubic centimeters, and the power drive system shall not require the driver to shift gears.
A moped driver must have a current, valid drivers license of any classification.
A person with no drivers license who wishes to operate only a moped must obtain a Class L license.
The owner must have a Certificate of Title.
A registration plate shall be attached on the rear of the moped.
A moped driver may not carry a passenger unless the moped is equipped with a passenger seat and passenger footrests.
If the moped is to be driven at night, it must be equipped with a white light on the front that is visible for 500 ft. and a red reflector on the rear that is visible from 100 to 600 ft. when in front of a vehicles headlights.
Also, a red light visible for 500 ft. may be used in addition to the reflector.
TOP ^|
Special Permits
RESTRICTED CDL: This special permit is issued for seasonal employees of farm services companies.
PROBATIONARY LICENSE: A conditional license, issued after the completion of a Defensive Driving Course conducted through the National Safety Council (NSC), which grants full driving privileges during a period of suspension.
RESTRICTED LOCAL DRIVER'S LICENSE: This special license may be issued to drivers who live in communities with less than 3,500 residents and who drive only within certain areas of the community.
RESTRICTED PERMITS: Illinois drivers whose driving privileges have been revoked or suspended may be allowed to drive using special permits.
Before a permit is issued, the driver must prove that a hardship exists and that he or she will not pose a hazard to others.
These permits are: * RESTRICTED DRIVING PERMITS: Restricted driving permits allow driving only during certain times and along specified routes for work-related or educational purposes or to receive medical care or drug treatment.
A restricted driving permit cannot be issued to a motorist under the age of 16.
* JUDICIAL DRIVING PERMITS: A judicial driving permit is issued, following a circuit judges order, to a first offender serving a statutory summary suspension following an arrest for driving under the influence of alcohol, other drugs and/or intoxicating compounds (DUI).
Judicial driving permits have the same restrictions and provisions as restricted driving permits.
A judicial driving permit will not be issued to a motorist under age 18.
* OCCUPATIONAL DRIVING PERMIT: This permit is issued to commercial drivers whose licenses have been suspended for three moving violations.
The permit allows you to drive in conjunction with your employment.
To qualify, you must drive for a living.
* FAMILY FINANCIAL RESPONSIBILITY DRIVING PERMIT (FRP): This permit is issued, following a circuit judges order, to a driver who has been suspended under the Family Financial Responsibility Law for nonpayment of court-ordered child support.
No permit will be issued to a person under the age of 16 years who possesses an instruction permit.
TOP ^|
Color-Coded Licenses and Identification Cards
Illinois drivers licenses and identification cards are color-coded to identify persons under age 21.
Commercial drivers licenses also are visually distinctive for easy identification.
Age restrictions and colors are as follows: * If you are under age 21, your digital drivers license or ID will have a red header and blue photo background.
The words "Under 21 Until" and "Under 18 Until" appear in the header on the front.
Previously issued "Under 21 Until" licenses only give the date of when the bearer turned 21.
* If your license is to be renewed on your 21st birthday, you may not renew before that date.
You will be able to renew on or after your 21st birthday.
* If you are 21 or older, your digital drivers license or ID will have a blue header and blue photo background.
The previous license had a blue photo background.
* ID card applicants must meet the same identification requirements as persons applying for drivers licenses.
[dl_under21.jpg] [dl01.jpg]
Licenses for drivers age 21 and over. [dl_cdl.jpg] [dlback.gif]
Back of driver's license includes Uniform Donor Card and space for medical information.
TOP ^|
Exemptions
Sometimes you may drive in Illinois without a valid Illinois drivers license.
You are exempt if you: * move to Illinois and have a valid drivers license from your home state or country.
You may drive with that license for 90 days.
* do not live in Illinois, but are driving in Illinois.
You must have a valid drivers license from your home state or country.
* are an out-of-state student at a college or university.
You may drive with a valid license from your home state or country.
This also applies to your spouse and children.
[military_deferral_card.gif] * are on active duty for the Armed Forces.
You may drive with a valid license from your home state.
This also applies to your spouse and children.
* have been serving in the Armed Forces outside the United States but are a legal resident of Illinois.
You may drive the first 45 days of your return without any license.
* are employed by the U.S. government or are a member of the Armed Forces.
You do not need a valid Illinois license if you are on official business and driving a vehicle owned by or leased to the government.
* are operating a road machine temporarily on the roadway or operating a farm tractor between the farm buildings and nearby farmland.
No license is needed.
TOP ^|
Special Services
The Secretary of States office provides special services for senior citizens, persons with disabilities, and veterans: * free Rules of the Road review classes.
The classes are offered to anyone preparing to take a drivers license test.
* reduced drivers license fees.
Persons age 69 to 80 pay $5 for a four-year license.
Those age 81 to 86 pay $2 for a two-year license.
Persons age 87 and older pay nothing for their annual license.
* license plates and placards for persons with disabilities.
* free duplicate drivers licenses for persons age 60 and older whose licenses are stolen.
Simply present a police report at a driver services facility to obtain a free duplicate license.
* free photo identification cards for persons age 65 and over.
Other drivers and nondrivers may receive a photo identification card for $4.
* free special photo identification cards for persons with disabilities who meet eligibility requirements.
* auto insurance discounts.
If you are over age 55, you may receive a reduction in your vehicle liability insurance.
You must successfully complete an approved crash prevention class.
To find out about these classes, contact your auto insurance company.
* reduced license plate renewal fees for seniors 65 years of age and older and persons with disabilities who meet income level criteria.
You must file a Circuit Breaker application with the Department of Revenue each year.
If you qualify, the Secretary of States office will send you a discount card.
* interpreter service for deaf or hard of hearing.
Individuals may be assisted by an interpreter when obtaining or renewing their drivers licenses.
The interpreter may be a family member or friend.
The Secretary of States office will also administer the written test in sign language.
A signed examination, which must be scheduled two weeks in advance, can be arranged by calling the toll-free number listed below.
For more information about these special services, contact the Department of Senior and Community Services at (800) 252-2904 (voice and TDD).
TOP ^|
The Commercial Drivers License (CDL)
The federally mandated commercial drivers license program provides thorough testing, increased reporting requirements and sanctions for truck and bus drivers.
For more information, please obtain a CDL Study Guide available at any driver services facility or the SOS Web site.
TOP ^|
Chapter One Study Question 1.
A licensed driver in the State of Illinois is required by law to notify the Secretary of States office within 10 days of a change of name or address by writing the office or by visiting a driver services facility.
True or False
TOP ^|
Table of Contents __________________________________________________________________
The Illinois Driver's License | The Driver's License Tests | Traffic Laws | DUI | Traffic Crashes License Revocation, Suspension, Denial and Cancellation | Roadway Signs | Traffic Signals 
This edition of the RULES OF THE ROAD is as accurate as possible at the time of publication.
The manual gives drivers information on obtaining a drivers license, drivers license laws, traffic safety issues and general information regarding Illinois traffic laws and ordinances.
(Additional information on several of these subjects along with many forms can be found on the SOS Web site, www.cyberdriveillinois.com) The language of the Illinois Compiled Statutes is condensed and paraphrased and does not cover every law or explain every possible situation that motorists may face while operating a motor vehicle.
The manual also provides highway safety information not in the law.
It is intended as a tool for drivers and should not be cited as a legal authority in court.
Spacer BACK TO CYBERDRIVEILLINOIS.COM HOME PAGE Spacer
