15 Africanisms Upon the Land: A Study of African Influenced Place Names of the USA Annette I. Kashif
Session One: Memorializing Places of Diaspora
T
he vitality and trans-ethnic influence of African American language continues to be a widely acknowledged phenomenon within the American populace.(1) Since the mid 1900s, there have been several systematic studies which demonstrate that that vitality is in some ways a function of African influences in African American language varieties.(2) The African stratum preserves remnants of the various predecessor African languages in complex, though uneven and interesting ways.
As more evidence is uncovered which delineates Africanisms in the Diaspora, the once widely held belief that African culture was extinguished under the devastation of slavery will be more firmly overturned.
For a complete picture to emerge, American place names research needs to be included in the effort to discover linguistic Africanisms.
It is important to understand that a "unique source of information about a society's history, beliefs, and values is in the names people give to their surroundings."(3) This sources is referred to as place names, or toponyms, a part of onomastics.(4) One language study could be found on the subject, and it focused on only Bantu (Central African) linguistic influences in the place names of nine formerly confederate states.
Of course, African descendants in the United States have a heritage of African admixture extending from Central Africa, to at least, the northwestern belt of the continent.
In its explanation that numerous aspects of a country's development achieve linguistic recognition in its place names, The Cambridge Encyclopedia of Language states that the "various"
steps in the exploration of America...can be seen reflected in the layers of Spanish, French, Dutch, Indian, and English names introduced by different groups of explorers."(5) Though it is a major reference work found in many public and academic libraries, there is no mention of any African impact on America's development, which may be seen through its toponyms.
Seeking to put an end to such oversights, this study delineates a broader and more varied African impact on American toponyms.
A curious off-hand comment turned the writer's attention, in the 1970s, to the impact African Americans may have had on American place names.
A female acquaintance rushed into a nearby dormitory bedroom, excitedly recounting to her friend a harrowing experience she had undergone before dawn with another college classmate.
The gist of the narrative went thusly: returning them to town after a home visit, the bus driver had dropped his passengers off at the closed bus station.
It was already after midnight, so they were unable to catch a cab.
Though they returned without incident, she exclaimed that she was terribly frightened because they ended up having to walk through "Colored Town" to get back to campus.
The writer, having never heard such a reference before, was surprised and unsettled.
The acquaintance turned in surprise to see the writer, then apologetically explained that no harm was intended; it was just a term that whites in her Florida hometown used to refer to the "black section of town."
Further, when the researcher worked as a camp counselor the following summer in a rural settlement near Palakta, Flordia, she was surprised to come upon a street name, "Colored School Road" emblazoned on an old, wooden-plank street marker.
Those encounters led to wondering, "Were there or had there been autonomous towns or settlements established by black people in the U.S.?
16
Places of Cultural Memor y: African Reflections on the American Landscape
Given the opportunity, would African Americans assign racially self-referent names to their town and street names?" Or, "Was the racially referent, `Colored Town' just derisive slur?" Subsequent to those experiences, it was found that African Americans had exercised onomastic agency in bestowing the alternate names, e.g., "Chocolate City," an alternative name for two different types of predominantly black habitats--one, Washington, DC, the nation's capitol; and, the other a long-standing housing project in Orlando.(6) These are essentially questions about the language of group agency, identity, and autonomy upon the American landscape.
The African enthusiasm for naming and naming ritual has been widely observed and document.
From Djdehuty of the Ancients in Egypt, to Nommo of the Dogon in Mali, this enthusiasm is tied to African spiritual philosophy.
Obenga says, "we see throughout Africa the creative and powerful force of the word.
To name is to beget, that is, to call up a genealogy and an evolution."(7) Further, from this African worldview, the one who names has the power to structure or re-structure reality.(8) We come to understand then the connections between naming, power, and dominion.(9) African descendants desired to structure a reality of self-determination, and freedom from racist oppression and exploitation, by securing plots of land over which they could exercise power and dominion.
sometimes no more than that the referent is so-called.(11) Accordingly, the Cambridge Encyclopedia's place names entry explains that "many thousands of names have an unclear or unknown etymology, and this fact provides a continuing motivation for toponym study."
While place names may be "fanciful and idiosyncratic" sometimes, a "small set of creative processes" will account for the "vast majority" around the world.
Those creative processes result in categories, such as geographic features; religious import; royal or lofty status; explorers and other famous people; memorable or outstanding events; state of affairs; animals; and other places.(12)
African Onomastics Though African personal names are characteristically drawn from common nouns, descriptive phrases, and even whole sentences which provide transparent meaning, it is not necessarily so and one may easily find a meaning known only narrowly to bearer (e.g., a revered ancestor name with opaque meaning in the contemporary language community).(13) To some onlookers beholding African onomastica, [t]he African continent offers a bewildering array of names: names of distinctive populations and their subdivisions, their languages and dialect; names of countries, geographical places, and archaeological sites; names of empires, kingdoms, chiefdoms, and villages; terms for territorial and administrative divisions; and names of kinship groups, cults, and associations.
This terminological profusion permeates all aspects of life, from personal name giving to...artistic and technical taxonomies.(14) Considering the deep antiquity of African peoples, cultures, and civilizations, one should not be surprised at this
onomastic profusion.
It is a basis for the expectation that, being so deeply and broadly ingrained, onomastic Africanisms would survive within the African Diaspora.
Migrating African peoples, upon the founding of settlements, usually named them after their founders.(15) Yai also found that in Yorubaland (Togo, Benin, and Nigeria), for example, the placename also designates the language and ethnicity of the inhabitants.(16) And from oral traditions (e.g., oriki recitations), one could discover information about certain lineages that make up most of the Yoruba ethnic groups.
Interestingly, he also found some language mixture among the toponyms where Yoruba have been in contact situations with different ethnic groups in other localities.
First, there are hybridized forms, e.g., where emigrant Yoruba have assimilated into the Mahi population of Benin, one may find the toponym, Nagokome, resulting from the agglutination of Nago (Yoruba people) + kome (district, a determinative in Mahi).
This example serves as historical evidence of the persistence of ethnic reference in African toponyms.
Second, Yai found toponymic calques, wherein a word from one language is translated into the language of the surrounding population.
In a predominantly Fon district in Benin, for example, one will find that the toponym, Idaaasa Iqbo, or "underwood," in Yoruba, 
Linguistic Status of Names Place names, or toponyms, are proper names, and proper names are words that serve a particularizing and referential function.(10) However, proper names have varying degrees of transparent meaning, or semantic content,
Names and Language Contact African influences in African American onomastics is to be understood in the context of language contact when speakers of disparate languages and social (and/or ethnic) statuses come into contact within the same geo- and
Africanisms Upon the Land: A Study of African Influenced Place Names of the USA
17
socio-political environment.
Linguistic outcomes may be of three general types: maintenance, mixture, or shift.
Language mixture includes the development of creole languages.(18) When features of a supplanted ancestral language persist after language shift, and exert influence within the successor language, these features constitute a stratum in the successor language.
The language forms in the stratum are variously referred to as continuity, retention, or survivals.
Moreover, social and emotional (i.e., non-linguistic) elements which influence linguistic ones must be considered in analyses of contactinduced language mixture.
Beside the fact that names reflect cultural, historical, and social change, there are other attributes of names that further justify their importance in the study of language mixture induced by a contact situation, as is represented by the African American experience: 1.
Because they are lexical items, names are among the easiest linguistic items to transfer into a successor or second language.(19) 2.
It is not uncommon that a toponym is the only record of a historical event, or of a person's existence.(20)
African mother tongue.(21) Then, subsequent generations incorporated elaborated and restructured features into the pidgin, forming deep and more stable regional creoles; they were characterized by mixture of English-Irish, and West African grammatical structures and vocabulary.
These creoles lasted throughout the centuries of enslavement.
All the while, of course, a smaller number of African descendants would have common access to non-African speakers, which afforded them opportunities to learn other languages.
This is not only true for those more frequently in contact with prestige dialects of English, but also those affiliating with Native Americans.
Also, the continuous arrival of continent-born Africans right up until the Civil War reinforced persistence of Africanisms.
Colonial and Slaver y Era Africans were brought here mostly in chains from the 1500s to the beginning of the Civil War in 1861, an era that lasted longer than any other in African American history to date.
Spanning Africa's central region, out to its northwestern bulge, they were kidnapped from places named Abomey, Calabar, Congo, Djenne, Gizzi, Gola, Kanem, Mande, Mina, Ngola, Oyo, Segu, Whydah, and hundreds more.(22) They had been the skilled and unskilled, literate and illiterate, peasant and artisan, bureaucrats and soldiers, royalty and subjects, aristocrats and commoners, and et cetera.
Their back-breaking toil and know-how were at the foundation of the development of the "new" Americas.
Hall found, for example, that in colonial times, the survival of French Louisiana was due not only to African labor, but also to African technology in rice cultivation, indigoterie, medicine, and
African American Onomastics in Historical Context A historical overview of the North American language contact situation into which Africans were initially plummeted should be considered basically in three eras: Colonial/Enslavement; Emancipation-Reconstruction; and, Outward Migrations.
The literature indicates that the language of African descendants began shifting first, from an African polyglot status in the first generations of arrival, to a period of bilingualism between a pidgin and each person's
surgery.(23) In addition, Africans did the "metal work, shipbuilding and river transport."(24) It was clear that "Africans and their descendants were competent, desperately needed, and far from powerless."(25) The records indicate that they did not simply wait idly by for deliverance from their brutal servitude.
Constantly on the look-out for available opportunities, they were agents on their own behalf.
That agency included violent and non-violent resistance to slavery.
And, that should come as no surprise when one considers the wide range of culture complexes and civilizations, from which they were so hatefully uprooted.
Throughout all of American history, there were numerous courageous, desperate, and determined acts of agency by African descendants in their quest for freedom and selfdetermination.
Prior to the abolition of slavery, the record is replete with news of African resistance, including mutinies, runaways, conspiracies, revolts, and maroonage (settlements of runaways in the wilderness).
These acts of daring were committed in the face of white retaliation, including torture, imprisonment, mutilations, and executions.
Runaways, with opportunity, giving reasons for having done so, "almost invariably cited unjustified and excessive punishment, overwork, and inadequate food."(26) Beginning in the early 1500s, many maroon settlements were successfully established throughout the antebellum era.
Their members carried arms, and sometimes waged guerilla raids and warfare against the slave plantations.(27) With a few exceptions, the literature does not identify maroon settlements of North America by name, perhaps one indication of their precarious status.
Aptheker reported in 1939 that the "mountainous, forested, or swampy regions of South Carolina,
18
Places of Cultural Memor y: African Reflections on the American Landscape
North Carolina, Virginia, Louisiana, Florida, Georgia, Mississippi, and Alabama were the favorite haunts of these black Robin Hoods."(28) According to Creel, a careful examination of the existing sources shows that a spirit of rebellion, and strong will to freedom were prevalent among South Carolina slaves.(29) About escapees along its Gullah coastal regions, Creel found that, while African-born persons were more likely to escape singly, a mixed group of American and Africanborn were more likely to make up a band of maroons.(30) But even among the mixed groups, the predominant identity was that of "African."
However, it was sometimes true that whites and Indians joined with the maroon bands.
"Maroonage" around colonial French New Orleans was characterized by more interracial amalgamation and permanence of its settlements.
Rather than a widely diverse grouping, the Africans were found to have been taken from mostly Wolof and Bambara speaking regions of the continent.
Among the swamps around New Orleans, a network of maroon villages were established, and are identified by name on a 1768 map of the region.(31) The daring Juan Malo, was the singular warrior-governor over this network.
One of the villages was apparently named after him, Bayou St. Malo, and another possibly, Bayou Marron, as well.
Apropos for his exploits, Malo's surname is from the Mandekan group, perhaps Bambara.
As they sought to survive and avoid recapture, these valiant fugitives also forged an autonomous culture from various ethnic backgrounds, to create cohesive communities, a process taking place concomitantly within the woeful confines of "Slave Row," to use Lerone Bennett, Jr.'s, terminology.(32) These communities foreshadowed the cultural syncretism and creolization which would
become characteristic of the African American population in the post-slavery eras.
An important element in the maroon mix was Native Americans, who were being killed and cruelly driven from their ancestral lands by the colonial settlers and militias.
The fleeing indigenous bands and African escapees established close relations for mutual benefit, and sometimes intermarried.
But, they generally maintained separate identities.
In Florida, their settlements acquired names that reflect this admixture.
Although not so identified in the literature, their towns--bearing names such as Wahoo Swamp, King Cudjoe's Town, and Minatti--indicate African linguistic agency in place-naming.
Both "racial" groups were understood to constitute the Seminoles, but those of African descent are most frequently termed Black Seminoles, or a similar variant.
On the lushly thicketed Florida frontier, Black Seminoles built housing compounds distinct from the indigenous peoples.
Their compounds might be within the same village as their Native American affiliates, or situated in a network nearby, or even more remote villages.
By the late 1700s across Flordia, Black Seminoles numbered more than 100,000, a testament to their more than 100-year alliance with indigenous peoples in Spanish Florida.(33) One of the Seminole initiatives which precipitated the Second Seminole War (1835-1842) was the "Dade Massacre" in Sumter County, and its attendant liberation of enslaved Africans from plantations to its north and east.(34) This initiative has been posed as possibly the largest slave revolt in U. S. history.(35) So prominent was African influence in their alliance that, during, General Jesup wrote that, in reality, it was not an Indian, but "a negro war."(36)
Though most maroon camps and setlements in the U. S. were eventually crushed before the Civil War, that was not always true.
The Dismal Swamp Maroons persisted from the colonial era up to the War.(37) Their villages stood in the swamplands bordering Virginia and North Carolina.
Reaching from the Roanoke are to the Albermarle waterways, the Dismal Swamp sheltered about 2000 fugitives.(38) Similar to the permanent marooners of Louisiana and Florida, they carried on "regular" trade with ordinary citizens.
They even assisted the Union Army, as independent contractors, in its triumph over the Confederate militia in their region, during the latter part of the Civil War.
Laeming's cultural analysis of the Dismal Swamp Maroons also revealed some maintenance of distinct African identity in the presence of intimate alliances with fugitive whites, and indigenous peoples.(39) Pondering the possiblilty that there may have been Africans in sufficient enough numbers to form ethnically disticnt villages within the network, he noted that there "was a Congo village, as well as, individual maroons of other specific west African cultural or religious emphases," reflected in their leaders' names, e.g., "Osman (Islamic) and Gamby Gholar and his spiritual associates, who he identified as YorubaDahomean."
Though maroonage was one avenue through which African descendants imprinted their language upon the American landscape in the antebellum centuries, it was not the only way.
In fact, marooners were often more campers than settlers, needing to abandon areas quickly to avoid recapture and slaughter.
Aptheker posits that those maroon towns and settlements in the U.S., which experienced unusual longevity, probably had done so because they traded in desired goods,
Africanisms Upon the Land: A Study of African Influenced Place Names of the USA
19
and avoided clashes with white planters and settlers.
Furthermore, because the large majority of maroon communities wre destroyed, and the inhabitants captured and/or killed, it could be that the majority of the toponyms they bestowed are lost to history.
In his Names on the Land, Stewart expressed no doubt that "many hundreds of small streams and swamps," whose meanings he could not distinguish, "were named by Negroes."(40) He further recognized that "Pinder Town in South Carolina preserved the Kongo Mpinda (peanut)."
But, he added that "white men probably did the naming after the word had become current in local speech."
His understanding that black people did, in fact, assign place names is correct thinking, but his attitude is somewhat problematic.
First, he seems unable to conceive of Africans having left their distinct liguistic imprint on large geographical masses; and, second, that when African names appeared as a whole town name, that is was not by direct African American agency.
One attestation concerning personal names is illustrative of the probability of a more than insignificant and indirect African American toponyimc agency.
The son of a Mississippi slaveholder recollected the exasperation of white planters over the attributive names insistently given to them by the Africans they held captive on "Slave Row": The redesignation would take place in spite of all [resistance], and so thoroughly that often friends and acquaintancs of the family never knew the real name of the child.
[Eventually] the parents themselves at last fell into the use of the...strange grotesque...applications of Ripper, Snorter, Coon, Possum, Boots, Horse...and many others like them...Few could get rid of
them...barnacle-like they clung to their owners through the whole voyage of life.(41) When one considers that it was overwhelmingly African labor and skill that cleared and worked the land, it is far from inconceivable that direct African American agency is partly responsible for the African linguistic impact on American toponyms.
That is not to say it is easy to unmask.
Vass provides a convincing example of an African name upon a massive, as well as famous geoscape: Suwanee River 
Africans escaping slavery did sometimes, indeed, establish settlements and towns in the North and West.
The Abolition Movement, particularly through the Underground Railroad, was instrumental in helping Africans to escape to free states.
They were not always welcomed, and met with white hostility and/or "white flight."
So they, as a group, moved into or evolved into onerace towns, respectively.
In 1840, Illinois saw the first of the all-black towns become established in the North.
Originally named Lovejoy, after the area's most vocal abolitionist.(43) It was re-named Brooklyn later, and incorporated in 1910 with a black majority in political control.
It survives to-date.
One early settlement founded by runaways in Maine is Malaga Island.
Established in 1847, its "early settlers are known to have maintained their ancestral languages and lived in caves" to avoid recapture.(44) As typical of many eastern island communities, they were squatters.
In 1912, however, the inhabitants were dealt with in a ruthless and devastating manner.
Forced wholesale by the state into the Maine School for the Feeble-Minded, the inhabitants were, along with their houses and
gravesites, wiped from view.(45) An example of the effect of white hostility "out West" may be seen in the fortunes of Kentucky Ridge, established by African Americans in 1851.
Established in the quartz mining regions, white vigilantes attacked the settlement, and by 1853, the inhabitants, with their founders, all moved to larger settlements nearby.(46)
From Black Reconstr uction to the Great Depression After a bloody and bitter upheaval across the southern U. S., the Civil War finally brought the 300-plus years old "peculiar institution" to a halt by 1865.
Unfortunately, the African descendants' ecstatic Jubilees over their liberty, and "Black Reconstruction" lasted briefly.
Bennett explains that it would be among "the first of many illusions and deceptions," as the parasitic exploitation of, and brutality against African Americans would be re-instituted in other guises; one of the first avenues for this reinstitution would be the infamous Black Codes of 1865-1866, to be followed by the notorious Compromise of 1877.(47) By the opening of the Black Reconstruction period, most African descendants were speaking a set of regional, stable Anglo-African creoles.
As they began to take on the status of "citizens," African Americans' language began decreolizing some toward EuroAmerican English.
Decreolization proceeded more quickly among those who left the isolated rural south for metropolitan areas, received formal education, and lived among other in-group members who were "mainstream" speakers.(48) As was always true in the preceding era, they had acquired a repertoire of language varieties and registers to be used to their advantage.(49)
20
Places of Cultural Memor y: African Reflections on the American Landscape
Because disparities in power and opportunity continued, code-switching continued to be practiced.
One variety would maintain in-group solidarity, while a different variety would be used in interactions with out-group whites.
African language use, per se, became even more restricted among the number of users, and in functional domains (e.g., storytelling) because, with the cessation of illegal African arrivals, there were no ancestral language reinforcements.
Deep Anglo-African creoles continued to predominate in isolated enclaves (e.g., Gullah in South Carolina, and Gombo in Louisiana).
Additionally, distinctive African American forms became more diffused into the language of EuroAmericans, as levels of intergroup contact increased.
Convinced early on of the nonrepentant proclivities of whites, some tens of thousands migrated to Liberia.
Although many migrated northward or westward also, the large majority of African Americans stayed in the rural south.
Pointing to songs, tales, and other lore of "Slave Row" culture, V. P. Franklin concludes that, with freedom having been considered the ultimate goal of their individual and collective struggles under slavery, it was logical that "self determination and social advancement" would become defining values among African Americans.
Whenever amenable, they became vastly more involved in government, schooling, and accumulation of land and property.
But, with the spirit of the late 1800s and early 1900s settling on widespread racial hostility toward them, African Americans placed increasingly more emphasis on self-help, mutual aid, racial solidarity, emigration, separatism, and attempts to create all-black communities.(50) These efforts were established
within and beyond the confederate states, and in all-black towns or black enclaves of other towns.
The Homestead Act of 1866 brought many of the freedmen into areas more sparsely settled prior to the Civil War; and black towns were created within the former confederacy and without.
Land acquisition through the Freedmen's Bureau was woefully insufficient, so most African Americans who managed to acquire land had given up the wait for "40 acres and a mule," and some resolved to make their own land purchases.
Even with 40 acres awarded, or lands collectively purchased, there was no guarantee African Americans would be able to keep it.
A wide array of obstacles could be faced, including white opposition.
Such was the case that spawned Belle Ville in McIntosh County, GA.
As an outcome of General William Sherman's Special Field Order #15, two brothers were awarded land on St. Catherine's Island.
Their colony was broken up during the backlash, which returned the properties to the former slaving planters.(51) But, so determined was the group that they pooled their meager monies, formed themselves into the Belle Ville Farmers Association, and leased this acreage, when it was still a plantation.
Soon after, they bought it, and their town was incorporated on March 4, 1867.(52) In December 1875, a national black convention was held in New Orleans.
Learning how widespread were racist depredations, the delegates formed "Colonization councils" that helped collect names of African Americans in their representative areas who were interested in leaving.
Henry Adams, one of the delegates from what is now Shreveport, LA, wrote, in a letter to the U. S. Attorney General in late 1878:
"I trust God that the United States will give us some Territory to our selves--and let us leave these Slaveholders to work their own land, for they are killing our race by the hundreds every day and night."
But the "violence, intimidation, fraud and terrorism continued...and by April 1879 the Colonization Council had collected more than 98,000 names of people willing to migrate to the North or West, as well as to emigrate to Liberia."(53) In the late 1870s, when Benjamin "Pap" Singleton, and other promoters of westward migration, needed names of willing persons, the Council was one of the groups providing them leads.
Estimates are "that during the spring and summer 1879 and 1880, nearly 60,000 blacks left Northern Louisiana, North Carolina, Texas, Mississippi, and Alabama for Kansas and Indiana to take advantage of the federal government's offer of land for homesteading.(54) Morris Turner calls this period, ending in 1881, the "Black Exodus."(55) The Black Exoduster towns came to have names such as Abila, Blackdom, Tullahassee, and Three Creeks.
Though scant, some literature about this era addressed onomastic Africanism.
Personal names, rather than place names was the subject, though in may still be found instructive for the study of the place names of these post-Civil War black towns.
Some African descendants consciously maintained their Africanness.
Cudjo Lewis, for example, became a leader of ex-slaves captured form Togo.
He also retained his African forename, Cudjo 
Persons reported that in order to inculcate the status of
Africanisms Upon the Land: A Study of African Influenced Place Names of the USA
21
free citizen, they must discard their slavery time name in favor of a free citizen name, in effect, an Euro-American name.
Thusly, they practiced the African postulate of marking life's significant events through bestowal of additional names.
African influence was not always masked by this process, because some acquired new names that are English words based on common semantic and/or syntactic categories common in African names; an example found was a calque-phrase name, Try and See.(57) Having not experienced "a marked improvement in their status from the end of Reconstruction to the onset World War I," black workers were enticed northward, Bennett explains, by "hard pressed" industrialists.
Previously, these northern industrialists had severely restricted blacks' employment, preferring white European immigrants, who were now detoured by the war.
To take advantage of increased job opportunities, massive numbers of African Americans moved in two "Great Migrations," 19151920, and 1920-1924.
By 1930, they numbered "more than two million."
Marking the first major shift in their overriding status as servants, laborers, and peasants since the 1600s, more than one-third of black workers were employed in industrial occupations.
Cohesive black communities developed in these industrial centers; and a northern black professional class emerged.(58) V. P. Franklin described the "complex social networks" developed by African Americans of the Great Migrations, who shared the values of self-determination and freedom with the earlier black-town pioneers: With the influx of large numbers of rural blacks into northern and southern urban centers during the last two decades of the nineteenth century, Black churches, separate schools, fraternal institutions, voluntary asso-
ciations and advancement groups sprouted up to meet their social and cultural needs.
The expanding populations of African Americans found that they could become a part of a wide array of organizations in which blacks exercised complete control.
As long as these institutions functioned, there was little need of the discrimination practiced in whitedominated public and private [ones].(59) This became the overriding mode until the Great Depression in the 1930s, which forced thousands of self-help organizations to disband.
Afterward, African Americans seemed to have thought it was best to pursue integration "into white-dominated programs and institutions, especially those programs offered by the New Deal."(60) Turner collected copious linguistic data in the 1930s and 1940s from Gullah speakers (a.k.a. Geechees), African descendants who had not migrated, but remained continuously over all the centuries on largely isolated (island) enclaves along the southeastern Atlantic coasts of Georgia and South Carolina.
His data analyses culminated in the seminal work, Africanisms in the Gullah Dialect.
It showed decisively the richness of African onomastics in this deep creole language variety.
Gullahs/ Geechees have an official name, plus an alternate, or "basket" name that was kept secret.
The basket names were found nearly always to be African homophones.
But, there were also some calques which related to weather, physical or emotional state, life situation, or time of birth.(61) Even though his informants did not remember the meanings of their names, most of which were also personal names in West African languages, they continued to use them, because their older relatives and friends had.
Curious
about those whose forenames and surnames were both African, it was explained to Turner, by informants who were ex-slaves that "[a]fter slavery, many of them refused to use any longer the name of their former enslavers."(62) In those words, one finds the evidence of a self-determining identity expressed in language.
Turner took only slight note of Gullah/Geechee agency in bestowals of place-name Africanisms.(63) His nine examples include Peedee, Tybee, and Wassaw.
A native observer of Edisto Island (a Gullah enclave) reportedly said that "the Sea Island Negro is most fertile in naming everything, giving particular names even to the narrow saltwater drains or gutters interlacing the marshes when they are dry at low tide."(64)
From the Post Depression to the Present Appearing to be fewer in number than those founded by previous black pioneers and exodusters of the postReconstruction period, thousands of African Americans settled "suburban" towns for themselves prior to the 1960s.(65) Most of these were established in subsequent migrations from the urban town centers, which were not only white controlled, but also becoming "havens of overcrowding, unemployment, and crime."
Weise interprets this black out-migration as having been part of the "national trend toward urban expansion and suburban decentralization," except that they retained a southern rural flavor in the years before World War II.(66) Real estate prices and home ownership were significantly less expensive than in the big cities, and most were blue-collar workers.
Their place names include Lincoln Heights, Glenarden, and Kinloch.
The professional
22
Places of Cultural Memor y: African Reflections on the American Landscape
class African Americans, not proscribed to slums, overwhelmingly preferred the central city.
Numbering more than 3,500,000 people across this country, African American migration to the suburbs from 1960 to 1980 was "unprecedented."(67) On the heels of civil rights legislation, many opted for integration into more affluent, white suburbs.
They generally shunned the older black suburban towns with rural flavor.
However, some did, and do, move into a few of the older suburbs, which have managed to thrive and up-grade housing-stocks (e.g., Glenarden, Maryland).
During this interval, the migrations were concentrated in and around 12 cities, with the concentrations of greatest magnitude in Washington, DC, Los Angeles, and Atlanta.
So, from the close of Reconstruction to the contemporary era, it is clear that through "the act of migration, ...families and entire communities moved [in order] to control their own destinies and to give greater meaning and substance to the cultural value of black freedom."(68) Throughout the post-Depression era, intergroup tensi
The tension is posed against some highly visible easements in racial discrimination, in the aftermath of the Civil Rights movement.
Bennett locates the progress of this period in the "middle of the economy."
We find the eradication of overt Jim Crow laws, return of blacks to elective offices, diversification of career opportunities, and non-proscription of mobility and inter-ethnic personal relations.
He calls this state of affairs a "central paradox" of American life; that is, [E]verything has changed in Black America, and yet nothing has changed.
This means, among other things, that we have not yet gotten to
the bottom line: the integration of the money and the power and the resources.
The great movement of the [1960s] ...did not and could not at that time destroy the invisible institutional manifestations of racism.(69) This bi-polarity (and escalating ethnic duality) increases social identity ambivalence that is mirrored in African American language.
On the one hand, more African American speakers have shifted closer to Euro-American varieties, (e.g., employing increased denasalization).
On the other hand, heightened ethnic distinctiveness has emerged in certain syntactic forms and speech events (e.g., specific subject/ verb co-occurrences and rap/rhyme respectively).
The in-group vernacular, most popularly referred to as Ebonics or Black English, enhances group solidarity, identity, and/or esteem.(70) Depending on socio-familial background, African American variation along the continuum between "talkin' black" and "talkin' white" is probably more of a conscious choice than in previous eras.
And again, it is seen that some distinctive African American forms have become infused into "mainstream" vernaculars.
So salient is "black talk" as an American pop culture resource (like jazz or blues), it seems much more likely that some of the most stable African American speech markers (e.g., habitual aspect "be") will cross racial boundaries rather than become extinct.
The advocacy for reclamation of African identity and esteem in this era has definitely impacted personal names.
In her study of African American personal names, Kashif found that onomastic Africanisms occur not only as African homophones, but also in the form of calques and hybrids.
These hybrids have never been discussed in the research literature.
a.
African Homophones, e.g., Keisha 
There is also some evidence, in the contemporary era, for conscious revivals of African influenced place names; for example, Oyotunji Village became the name of a black cultural hamlet, founded in the late 1970s, in South Carolina; and the historic town of Prichard, Alabama officially reclaimed one of its former names, Africatown.
So, it is shown that, across the centuries of African American history, nonlinguistic factors have interacted with linguistic ones in the evolution African language.
The western and central African polyglot of the antebellum era, under influence mostly from English and ScotIrish dialects, was largely replaced by a set of creolized speech varieties among African descendants.
The historical evidence is that African descendants exercised the prerogative of naming settlements, land masses, and other geo-
Africanisms Upon the Land: A Study of African Influenced Place Names of the USA
23
graphical features in their environs, beginning even during the era in which they were held in bondage, denied the status of free citizens, or landowners.
Following Emancipation, African American creoles shifted closer, over the centuries, toward Euro-American codes.
But, due to the psychosocial distinctiveness of African descendants, and the internal vitality of African American language, now more than 500 years old, enough features of the supplanted ancestral African language elements have survived to form an African stratum.
Intermittently, various linguistic Africanisms have been revived, consciously and unconsciously.
Under the influence of a bi-polar psychosocial continuum from assimilationists to separatists, African Americans code-mix and code-switching along the linguistic continuum, ranging from deep creoles (e.g., Gullah and Gombo) to mesolects (e.g., Ebonics or Black Vernacular) to arcolects (e.g., Standard Black English [SBE] or Standard English).(72)
Pur pose of Study The purpose of this study is to expand the identifications of America's African influenced toponyms, especially in terms of their varied manifestations.
Propelled by the persisting Black Studies movement, and influenced greatly by the work of Lorenzo Dow Turner's Africanisms in the Gullah Dialect, there is a noticeable increase in the number of contemporary researchers seriously addressing the subject of Africanisms.
These studies address African influence within, and beyond the African American collective.
Few of these discuss onomastics, but when one considers the literature on the response of names to extended language contact, and the history of Africa's descendants in America, there should be a greater body of such studies.
Those
that do focus on African American onomastics, deal with personal names almost exclusively.
Vass is the one researcher who has made place names one of the focal points of her efforts to identify Africanisms in American language.
Her chapter in a 1993 work she co-edited, "Bantu Place Names in Nine Southern States," expands an earlier publication, which, itself, was an outgrowth of her master's thesis in mass communications.
The Bantu branch of African languages covers almost all of central and southern Africa.
The Bantu languages of particular import for African Americans include Fang, Kongo, Luba, and Mbundu.
Arguing for a predominance of Bantu language influence over all other African language branches, Vass sought to identify retentions from the latter two, predominant in Angola and Zaire/Congo.
She was raised in Zaire, the child of Caucasian missionaries.
A glance at Turner's small collection of toponyms, taken from the Gullah/Geechee region, and only in South Carolina and Georgia, alerts one very quickly that much is left to discern.
Using the corpus of all the town names in each of nine confederate states, she compared their pronunciations to words and phrases in the Bantu languages.
She expanded the corpus to include names of rivers/streams, mountains, locales, and populations; the working definitions of the latter two terms are not provided.
To build her case for an Africanism, Vass included elaborations on meanings or emotional character denoted by the proposed Bantu source words.
She notes that in Zaire, place names commonly denote "significant human experience, emotion, or action."(73) Too often, she conjectures or sets forth imagined scenarios that the African descendants may have been engaged in or encountered, then
proceeds to extrapolate upon the conjectures as if they were attested facts.
This was especially problematic when there were more than a few sound differences between the toponym and her proposed Bantu source.
She was much less careful than Turner; in order for an African form to be posed as a source by Turner, it had to be "phonetically identical with or strikingly similar to" the Gullah name, emphasizing thereby a "strong probability that the [selected Gullah] names are African words."(74) However, many of the toponyms Vass proposed as Africanisms are convincing when based on close sound similarities coupled with transparent, rather than conjectured, meanings, and/or when a locality's historian admits that the toponym has an unknown origin or meaning.
Another puzzle is that Vass's findings from a random sample of Zaire toponym denotations do not comport with the findings of Cheikh Anta Diop, an African toponym expert of international repute.
He found that an African toponym is most typically the personal name of the founder of the town or settlement.
Perhaps the difference is explained by whether or not inhabitants migrated to a site; or a pattern shift may have occurred on the Continent with the cessation of the antebellum slave trade.
Theoretical Perspective on Research Needs As was done in the writer's discoveries of patterns of Africanisms in generations of African American personal names, the methodology employed within amounts to card stacking, i.e., using as many linguistic and non-linguistic facts available which are relevant to African provenance for each selected place-name Africanism.(75) Using racial/ethnic history and make-up of a region is one of
24
Places of Cultural Memor y: African Reflections on the American Landscape
the most convincing card-stacking strategies.
Turner targeted Gullah Sea Island habitats and Vass widened the target areas to nine confederate states.
So the geopolitical history serves as indirect attestation of African linguistic provenance.
The argument for African influence is also more convincing when historians of a locale have found the etymology of its toponym unsure or obscure; it is common in place-name texts to express no consideration whatsoever of African language sources.
The analyses within 1.
Avoids some of Vass's weaknesses shown in positing a U. S. place name as a Bantu Africanism or Bantuism; she · often did not identify the specific Bantu language(s) of a posited source, thereby leaving one to assume that she means perhaps all Bantu languages; · provided no explanation of guidelines for deciding the extent of phonetic similarity necessary between a place-name and its posited Bantu source; this resulted in posited African sources that seem counter intuitive, and therefore unconvincing.
2.
Moves beyond "Bantu" language sources so that place names derived from the other African languages, including converging source words, may be identified.
3.
Moves beyond African homophones to include other types of Africanisms, as described above.
4.
Identifies toponym Africanisms beyond the South, analyzing "autonomous" black towns and settlements across the U. S., from as early as the era of maroonage.
mixture resulting from language contact phenomena.
These are issues of concern in sociology, anthropology, linguistics, history, and social psychology, among others.
The identification of a toponym as African influenced is based on its linguistic similarities to, and modification of, African forms and structures.
A purposive sample of African American toponyms was collected from historical, geographical, journalistic and linguistic surveys.
The study began with a central focus on Florida, because it is found to have the longest history of African agency and struggle of any state in the now United States.
164 place names of towns identified in the available literature as having been established and/or founded by African American were collected.
The researcher identified and classified into transfer types all of the African American toponyms which (in their morphological, phonological and semantic characteristics) correspond to or appear modeled upon African names, words, morphological processes, and toponym motifs.
Several types of changes in African words toward American English phonology were predictable, e.g., (a) deletion of tones, or (b) simplification of co-articulated stops (ng-, kp- 
The selected African American toponyms were divided into Africanism types: African homophone, African hybrid, and African semantic transfer.
They are to be understood as follows: 1.
African homophone, the toponym's phone or sound sequence matches that of (an) African source(s); a match means that the sound segments of the African American toponym have undergone no more than two changes that are unexplainable by common American English phonological processes (as those noted above).
2.
African hybrid, the toponym conjoins (a) two or more African source words or word-parts or (b) an African source word or word-part and nonAfrican one.
3.
African semantic transfer, the toponym is a calque or word(s) in English that shows transfer of an African motif or semantic content of the following type: (a) town or settlement founder or inspirer, (b) ethnic/ linguistic group reference, (c) duplication of another toponym, or (d) commentary on human state-ofaffairs.
The four subcategories typify, but are not exclusive to, African place-name onomastics.
However it is firmly established in the language contact literature that ancestral language retentions occur in these "translated" forms.
One way that convergence with a non-African language may be unmasked is through comparison of the preponderance of each name type among the non-African language speakers in the contact environment.
Findings and Inter pretations Entry Guide Below, an alphabetically with toponym glosses is each toponym identified Africanism.
Symbols are ed as follows: 
<
Methodology Toponym, or place-name Africanisms, were addressed in terms of language
Africanisms Upon the Land: A Study of African Influenced Place Names of the USA
25
Abbreviations Sources from the Reference list Ath, Athearn Br, Brown Dp, Diop, 1978 Lmg, Laeming Ln, Landers Mc, McCarthy MTr, Turner 1998 Od, Oduyoye Rv, Rivers, 2000 Tr, Turner, 1949 Sources from personal communication Al, Albury, A., 7/00 Ay, Ayittey, G,10/90 CBr, Brown, C., 11/00 Ctr, Carter, W., 1/88 Nj, Njokunma, A., 4/00 Languages Ak, Akan (Ewe, Fante, Twi) Egy, Egyptiam or Khemetic B, Bambara Bb, Bobangi Bml, Bamilike Bn, Bantu (Fang, Kongo, Luba and Mbundu) Dj, Djerma K, Kongo Mdg, Manding(k)o(a) T, Twi Yor, Yoruba Alafia River, FL 
By the 1880's economic decline "many
ex-slaves stayed in the [Tampa, FL] area to farm and homestead the land.
A group of them established the community of Bealsville, near the Alafia River (Mc, 306).
Angola, FL - same name as that of the central African country.
So-called by Cuban fisherman making a land claim in the area in 1821, referring to a "Negro maroon settlement on the Manatee River, across the Sarasota Bay (CBr).
Population consisted of hundreds of black men, women and children (CB, 89); one of the last refuges for black warriors, having served with Britain in the War of 1812.
Also contained escaped slaves from Mobile, AL; Pensacola, FL; St. Augustine, FL; and, Georgia (see Ln, 230-237); disrupted by 1821 Creek raid (Rv, 195).
Boley, OK 
Established in 1903, one of the largest all-black exoduster towns.
The city is reportedly named after one of the white founders of the town, but Boley is not found in American surname books, suggesting that the founder referred to may not have been.
Booker, TX 
One of the all-black exoduster towns (MTr, 142).
Bucker Woman's Town, FL 
One of the important maroon settlements of free blacks in central Florida, 1814-1840s; aka Buckra..., lead by the sister to the dead Seminole chiefs, Kings Payne and Bowlegs, and mother of Billy Bowlegs.
By 1923, transferred her cattle operations and black vassals to creek flowing westward into Peace River, 15 miles below Minatti (Ln, 236, Rv, 195-97) in the Big Hammock, between today's Hernando and Pasco counties.
Coffeyville, KS 
An Exoduster colony that lasted only one year (Ath, 78).
Congo Village, NC 
One of the settlements in the Dismal Swamp, NC, its leader, Congo Jonah, was called King Jonah by those of other settlements.
He probably was from a noble family of the Congo region (Lmg, 289).
Coosaw, Island/River, SC 
Located on the Gullah/Geechee sea islands.
Cudjoe Key, FL 
An isolated key out from Key West; etymology of name unknown in Florida place name texts.(76) During the eighteenth and nineteenth centuries, the Keys were a major destination of slave ships, and the site of the infamous 1701 shipwreck of the slaver, Henrietta Marie.
The Keys were well known for working thousands of enslaved Africans harshly, and prosecuting a zealous abolitionist who tried to secure their escapees well as notoriety over the efforts of a (Mc, 146-153).
Ellaville, FL 
The town was wiped out by Ku Klux Klan hordes when the residents lobbied to get a school.
Hayti, NC 
26
Places of Cultural Memor y: African Reflections on the American Landscape
querer'.(78) An African American settlement near Durham, since at least 1877 (MTtr, 121). [kawkaw], SC 
A place-name on Gullah/Geechee coast (Tr, 113 and f.n. 6,307).
KaoKao, an important, ancient ethnic group that migrated to Senegal from the Nile Valley (Dp, 92).
Kush, MS - same as that of the ancient Nile civilization.
So named by the Republic of New Afrika, this is a district consisting of 25 black counties along the Mississippi River from Memphis to Louisiana (Ctr).
LaVilla, FL 
A freedmen's town (1866-1887)that was pressured into annexation by the larger, predominantly white city of Jacksonville.
It was begun through the protection and assistance of a Freedmen's Bureau unit stationed in the area, and is now designated a historic district.(79) Little Coney Colony, LA 
Exoduster town incorporated in 1881.
Led by A. Fairfax, who had been elected to the LA Congress but forced to flee by mob of protesting Democrats (MTr, 85).
Bayou Malo, LA 
One of a network of maroon settlements led by Malo in LA during the late 1700s.(80) Black Mingo Pocosin 
A swamp in border areas of NC and VA, near Roanoke; "living here were `black indians' (Lmg, 286)."(81)
Minatti, FL 
Coastal West Africans were reported to have high appreciation for its flesh.(82) A maroon settlement located northeast of Tampa Bay's Negro Point maroon settlement north of Bartow in present-day Polk county (Br,39-40); "housed Creek Chief Oponay's slaves and later some of Angola's refugees (Rv, 195)."
Fort Mose [moh-say], FL
A fortified town established in 1728 by Spanish about two miles north of present-day St. Augustine in territory they held in Florida.
"[T]he old Indian place-name" according to Landers, but no language or ethnic group source given (Ln 294).
Complete form of the name, Gracia Real de Santa Theresa de Mose (Ln, 29).
New Eufala, FL 
Near present day Brooksville, it was led by Simaka.(84) Ocala (from Ocali, the name of an older Seminole nation encompassing all of Marion County), FL 
A river in Gullah/ Geechee sea islands area (Tr, f.n.,307).
Oyotunji Village, SC- Yor `return of the ancient Oyo kingdom' (Al). settlement
near Beaufort, established by African Americans for traditional Yoruba cultural practices.
Peedee River,SC 
Name for two rivers in Gullah/Geechee region.
Suwannee Old Town, FL 
Tybee Island/Creek,SC 
An island and a creek in the Gullah/Geechee region.
Wahoo Island/River, SC 
Located in the Geechee/Gullah region.
Wahoo Swamp, FL 
Site of Seminole maroon settlements and battles in the 1800s.
It lies 80 miles northeast of Tampa, in present-day Sumter County, above the bend in the Withlacoochee River.(89) Wando River, SC 
A river in the Gullah/Geechee region (Tr, 307).
Wassaw Island/Sound, SC 
Located in the Gullah/ Geechee region (Tr, 307).
Africanisms Upon the Land: A Study of African Influenced Place Names of the USA
27
African Homophones Of the 172 toponyms in the corpus, 31 were found to be African homophones.
Multiple or additional African sources were posited for some of them.
This strengthens the argument for each proposed Africanism, especially when its semantic field content is opaque, i.e., no longer transparent.
Identified in earlier works of Vass and Turner, Suwanee River and Wando, respectively, are two of the Africanisms for which the researcher was able to posit additional African sources.
Concerning Suwannee, Vass had derived it from nsub'wanyi, Bn, `my house, home'.
Though its semantic field content is a powerful argument in itself, the Mandingo, Suwane, argues for a more powerful influence for two reasons.
Suwane [suh-wah-nee?] (1) requires no or fewer sound changes vs. nsub'wanyi; (2) is an African personal name; and, (3) is nearly the same as the attested name, Suwanna, found among Gullah/Geechee females when Turner was collecting their names in the late 1930s.
Since a town founder's name is the most typical toponym of migrating Africans, Suwane could easily have been, like the legendary Malo of colonial Louisiana, the maroon founder and leader of the earlier swampy settlements along the famous river.
The Hausa [suuwaa-naa]`which one's?' does not have the force of the other two sources, but evokes a picture of Suwane's followers asking which sites along the river should be settled.
Turner derives Wando from the Hausa [wan-doh] `trousers'.
Even though it shares an apparent one-to-one sound correspondence with the Africanism, [wan-doh] is easily subordinated in favor of Kwando as the predominant African source; Kwando not only has a strong sound correspondence with Wando, but shares one-to-one semantic correspon-
dence in its designation of the geographical feature, `river'.
Though not the only one, combined sound-meaning correspondence is always the stronger one.
For this reason, some of the homophone toponyms were posited without reference to multiple language sources.
This may apply whether the semantic content of the African source (1) has persisted in semantic field content in the Africanism; or, (2) conveys canonical African principles of place naming.
Florida's Wahoo Swamp and LaVilla, are illustrative.
Wahoo has maintained the semantic field of creation of marked sounds from its Yoruba source.
It is through consideration of the historical context that the case is sealed.
The historical reality is that fleeing and warring bands of Seminole-African maroons had to set up and hide in difficult to access areas, as are swamps; and a war band would have a designee whose role was to give out a special whoop to signal attack.
The Seminole soldier, Jumper was documented to have done such in the Dade Massacre.(90) Perhaps the samenamed river and island in South Carolina were sites of maroon activity or the founder of the Wahoo Swamp was a fugitive who escaped from South Carolina.
Also, Wahoo is very likey the root word for yahoo and yehaw.
LaVilla (pronounced luh-VIh-luh) shows only a few sound changes in the Kongo source word, [lu-Vee- la].
As is typical, the vowels have been reduced in this homophone Africanism; but the meaning of the Kongo source word, `relationship, family, clan', shares the semantic field content, `an ethnic group' with the African principle, thereby stacking the cards more heavily in favor of the homophone's selection.(91) As Yai explained, an African place name is often the same as one's ethnic group and language name.
LaVilla is also interesting because it exemplifies convergence or masking, another expected phenomenon in cultural retention in a contact situation.
Its orthography suggests a romance language word.
Even the fact of a non-Latin pronunciation would just barely attract attention.
Its pronunciation has probably been thought of as simply interference from the English sound system.
But the history of LaVilla as an all-black town coupled with the salient sound-meaning correspondences unmasks the Africanism.
African Hybrids From this corpus, only one hybrid form, Black Mingo Pocosin, was found to occur.
It is analyzed as Black + Mingo Pocosin; the racial/color reference black is a toponym Africanism that has been translated into a semantically transparent English "equivalent" and conjoined to African forms that are retained opaque homophones.
It is expected that, with a completed analysis of pocosin, it may be found that the toponym is an independent clause or sentence, "They are the black buffaloes."
This recalls that African men, serving in America's western cavalries were called "Buffalo Soldiers."
These Dismal Swamp maroons successfully resisted destruction, and were not assimilated into the American polity until the end of the Civil War.
If the selection of pocosin (with the gloss "buffalo") becomes solidified, it would be an even more powerful Africanism, announcing ethnic identity and dominion over a geographic space in a complete sentence.
There were no admixtures within an indivisible homophone such as that which can be found in African American personal names (as shown above).
However, nineteen of the African homophones do co-occur with European
28
Places of Cultural Memor y: African Reflections on the American Landscape
Toponyms by Motif or Semantic Content Founders or Memorable Africans Abraham's Town,FL AdderleyTown, FL Allensworth CA Beckwourth, CA Belltown, DE Bobtown, LA **Bookertee, OK Ceasar's Creek, FL Coit Mountain, NH Daniel Votaw Colony, KS Dempsey, AL Douglas City, OK Eldridge, MI Estill's Station, KY Ferguson Haney, OK Harry's Bay, FL Hoggstown, KS James City, NC King Heijah Town, FL Langston, OK Lovejoy*, IL Montgomery, ND Mulattoe Girl's Town, FL Mulatto King's Town*, FL Nero's Town, FL *Nicodemus, KS Payne's Town, FL Penneytown, MI Princeville, NC Rhodes Creek, ID Singleton Colony, KS *St. Maurice Colony, LA *Wild Cat, OK Winstonville, MS Ethnic/Color Reference African Bar, CA Africky Town, AL Arkansas Colored, OK Bayou Marron, LA Blackdom,NM Black Star,CT Blackville,* AR Brownlee, NA Canadian Colored*, OK Darky Spring, ND Freemanville, FL Freedmantown, TX Negro Bar, CA Negro Point, FL Negro Slide, CA Nigger Heaven, CA North Fork Colored, Tullahassee, OK Yemassee, FL State of Affairs-(emotions,experiences, actions, attitudes) Belle Ville, GA Bullet Town, NC Dearfield, CO Freedom Hill*, NC Free Haven, NJ* Liberty, OK Little Hell, DE Lost Creek, IN Mystery Hill, CO New Discovery, DE Parting Ways, MA Peace, AR Scuffle Town, KS Southern Improvement, AL Duplicate Place Name Africa,* FL Kentucky Ridge, CA Kush, MS *Little Africa, NY Mississippi Town, KS New Africa, MS Rusk, OK Tennessee Town, KS
*Indicates that the name was reported to have been eventually changed.
Africanisms Upon the Land: A Study of African Influenced Place Names of the USA
29
words, affixes, and modifiers that mostly signal a collective of persons under a system of governance (e.g., town, colony or -ville).
Because these are highly transportable and unmarked, and place names are not "required" to have transparent meanings, their co-occurrence with the Africanism has an effect of leveling it toward American English.
African Semantic Transfers The toponyms which fit into the four African semantic fields are listed by category in the table opposite.
With 39 towns and settlements having been named after African American town/settlement founders, Diop's characterization of the typical African placename is also true for African Americans.
Therefore, this propensity among African Americans is an Africanism.
Of the 39 though, three were illustrious figures admired by the founders: Nicodemus, Bookertee, and St. Maurice.
Because all three are African, they may just as easily have fit into the ethnic/racial category by indirection.
The list of town founders actually exceeds 39 because there were white and Native American ones, e.g., Eatonville, FL, or Payne's Town, FL.
There were 11 in the corpus.
"Lincoln" far outnumbers them all (e.g., Lincoln City, OK, Lincoln Heights, OH, Lincolnville, FL).
Washington and Jefferson do make an impression, though.
The listing firmly suggests African Americans' desire to exercise self-determination.
Further, Diop and Yai both argued ethnic designating toponyms are also to be commonly found among Africa's toponyms.(92) There were 17 African American toponyms that corresponded with this semantic content.
In could even be argued that toponyms such as Kush and Africa, in the context of American race relations, are indirect ethnic/racial
self-references, though here they are grouped under "duplicated place-name" category above.
This tendency toward ethnic self reference is an Africanism that predicts such contemporary appellations as "Chocolate City."
With a toponyms using the "N-word" and "Darky" we are witnessing, no doubt, that words may elevate or deteriorate in their connotations.
Evidently, they were not always slur words among African descendants, like the personal name Africanisms Sambo or Bimbo.
An interesting finding was that native American ethnic group names occurred.
This occurrence confirms the development of an authentic "Black Indian" identity in America.
Both the Tullahassee and Yamassee were known to have integrated and sometimes assimilated with Africans who were exceptional and pivotal as warriors.
It is most likely that these towns were so-named because the town founders and some of its inhabitants had been closely affiliated before forced removal to the west.
The same number (17) of toponyms referred to natural environmental features, but the researcher is not yet prepared to list such occurrences as Africanisms.
Such names included Cedar Lake, Mud Town and Three Creeks.(93) Yai did provide an example of natural feature toponyms for Fons migrating to Yoruba districts, but he did not suggest they were just as numerous as ethnic references, but ethnic references, in these names, are naturally designators of Africanness.
A methodology to show a propensity for such assignations when compared to other ethnic/ racial groups needs to be investigated.
With 13 toponyms falling into the category, state-of-affairs commentary, Vass's position was lent some support.
Names in this category, like Bullet Town or Parting Ways do evoke a picture of the inhabitants' attitudes and experi-
ences, but contrary to Vass's prediction that the type would predominate was not supported.
Diop, with his assertion about town founders' had found the most powerful explanation.
However, Vass's explanation that toponym Africanisms were marked by the absence of animal reference was firmly supported.
Only two occurred on the entire list, Cow Creek and Hare Valley.
The phenomenon wherein African American towns and settlements undergo a series of name changes seems to confirm that toponyms may parallel the stages of creolization evident in other levels of African American language (e.g., syntax).
These changes seem to fit along the creole continuum (see also above).
The case of Sandy Ground, NY is illustrative.(94) Sandy Ground was settled in 1833 by African American oystermen who chose self-determination and freedom from industry restrictions in Maryland.
These settlers first named their town, Harrisville, after one of the founders, and became "the first free black community in New York."
Their district is reported to have run a station on the Underground Railroad.
Later, they changed the town's name to "Little Africa".
Eventually, the town changed to its current name to reflect the "poor quality of soil in the area."
Turning to the creole continuun, we may place the original name at the first stage, the Basilect.
At this stage the toponym, Harrisville results from the canonical African principle that a town is named after its founder.
Since it is a creole, its name becomes mixed by the conjoining of the "Americanism", -ville.
The name change to "Little Africa" is at a mid-stage, the Mesolect.
The name changes to a characteristic that is common, but not predominant in African place-naming, i.e., ethnic and/or duplication of another place-name; it is also mixed through the co-occurrence of the English word,
30
Places of Cultural Memor y: African Reflections on the American Landscape
"Little."
Then it shifts to the last stage-- the Acrolect, decreolizing to "Sandy Ground."
The name refers to natural environmental features, not a defining characteristic of African toponyms.
With a movement toward ethnolinguistic distinctiveness, as that being sustained in the current era.
It is expected that African revivalist toponyms will emerge.
Oyotunji Village (`return of the Oyo kingdom') is clearly such a revival.
Overall, it was found that African influence is identifiable in African American toponyms or place names of the United States, not only in the form of African homophones, but also in the form of hybrids and semantic transfers.
Further, a range of Kwa and Bantu languages have contributed over the centuries to African retention.
This is so because the overwhelming majority of the ancestors of America's African descendents were brought, so woefully over the centuries, from cultural zone complexes of west and central Africa.
Interestingly enough, Cheikh Anta Diop's long standing argument of a fundamental cultural unity of Africans is substantiated by the fact that several widely dispersed African languages provided source words for a single place name.
When debates about African American language variety erupt, and consideration is given to Gullah, or Ebonics, or Standard Black Vernacular, the body of African American toponyms belong in those exchanges.
The results from this study of African American place names confirm the importance of onomastics in the effort to identify and describe America's African heritage.
Notes 1.
The public firestorm over "Ebonics" in the late 1990s is a recent testament to that popular interest.
2.
Lorenzo Dow Turner, Africanisms in the Gullah Dialect (Chicago: University of Chicago, 1949); Annette Kashif, "Generations of African Influenced Names Among African Americans: Forms and Meanings" (Ph.D dissertation, Howard University, 1991); J. Holloway and W. Vass, eds.
The African Heritage of American English (Bloomington: Indiana University Press); S. Mufwene, ed., Africanisms in AfroAmerican Language Varieties (Athens: University of Georgia Press, 1993).
3.
D. Crystal, The Cambridge Encyclopedia of Language and Linguistics (Cambridge and New York: Cambridge University Press, 1991), 114-115.
4.
The study of the etymology and use of proper names.
See Crystal, Cambridge Encyclopedia, 426.
5.
Ibid, 114.
6.
Annette Kashif, personal communication with Dorothy Shabazz, January 2000.
7.
T. Obenga, "Who Am I?", in African World History Project, J. Carruthers and L. Harris, eds., 31-44 (Los Angeles: ASCAC, 1997), 43.
8.
N. Akbar, "The Mummy is Out of the Tomb," lecture given in Washington, DC, 1989.
9.
A. N. Wilson, The Falsification of Afrikan Consciousness (New York: Afrikan World InfoSystems, 1993), 22.
10.
S. Mufwene, "Dictionaries and Proper Names," in International Journal of Lexicography 13(3)(1988): 268-283.
11.
T. Alegeo, On Defining the Proper Name (Ganiesville: Uniersity of Florida Press, 1973), 83.
12.
Crystal, Cambridge Encyclopedia, 114.
13.
See B. Blount, "Luo Personal Names: Reference and Meaning," Paper presented at the annual meeting of the African Studies Association, Atlanta, GA, 1989 14.
D. Biebuyck, S. Kelliher, and L. McRae, African Ethnonyms: Index to ArtProducing Peoples of Africa (New York: G. K. Hall, 1996), xiii. 15.
C. A. Diop, "A Methodology for the Study of Migrations," in African Ethnonyms and Toponyms, 86-109 (Paris: United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, 1984), 105.
16.
O. Yai, "African Ethnonymy and Toponomy: Reflections on Decolonization," in African Ethnonyms and Toponyms, 39-50 (Pairs: United Nations Educational, Scientific, and Cultural Organization, 1984), 41.
17.
Ibid, 41-42.
18.
A "creole" language means, within a mixed language, crystallized at a stage intermediate between an ancestor language, and a targeted successor language that has a second or later generation of speakers.
19.
R. Jeffers and I. Lehiste, Principles and Methods for Historical Linguistics (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press), 52.
20.
Crystal, Cambridge Encyclopedia, 114.
21.
A "pidgin" is a language with a reduced range of structure and use, characterized in the first stages of language shift.
Ibid, 428.
Africanisms Upon the Land: A Study of African Influenced Place Names of the USA
31
22.
Diop, "A Methodology for the Study of Migrations," 15; J. Harris, Africans and Their History (New York: Penguin Group, 1998), 50.
23.
G. Hall, Africans in Colonial Louisiana (Baton Rouge: Louisiana State University, 1992), 121.
24.
Hall, Africans in Colonial Louisiana, 133.
25.
Ibid, 155.
26.
Ibid, 142.
27.
K. Bilby and D. B. N'diaye, "Creativity and Resistance: Maroon Culture in the Americas," in Festival of American Folklife, P. Seitel, ed. (Washington, DC: Smithsonian, 1992), 54-58.
28.
H. Aptheker, "Maroons Within the Present Limits of the United States," in Maroons Societies: Rebel Slave Communities in the Americas, R. Price, ed., 151-167 (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1979), 152.
29.
Margaret W. Creel, A Peculiar People: Slave Religion and CommunityCulture Among the Gullahs (New York: New York University Press, 1988), 114.
30.
Ibid, 116.
31.
Hall, Africans in Colonial Louisiana, 212.
32.
Ibid, 145-166.
33.
Kevin McCarthy, The Hippocrene U.S.A.
Guide to Black Florida (New York: Hippocrene Books, 1995), 44.
34.
McCarthy, Guide to Black Florida, 42-44.
35.
L. Rivers, Slavery in Florida: Territorial Days to Emancipation (Gainesville: University of Florida Press, 2000), 203.
36.
Rivers, Slavery in Florida, 204.
37.
H. Laemming, Hidden Americans: Maroons of Virginia and North Carolina (New York: Garland, 1995).
38.
Aptheker, "Maroons Within the Present Limits of the United States," 152.
39.
Laemming, Hidden Americans, 286-293.
40.
George Stewart, Names on the Land (Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1967), 329.
41.
William Stewart, "Acculturative Processes and the Language of the American Negro," in Language in its Social Setting, W. Gage, ed., 1-46 (Washington, DC: The Anthropological Society, 1974), 20.
42.
Holloway and Vass, African Heritage of American English, 134.
43.
Ibid, 367.
44.
Morris Turner, America's Black Towns and Settlements: V.1 (Rohnert Park, CA: Missing Pages Productions, 1998), 92.
45.
Ibid, 94.
46.
Ibid, 41-42.
47.
L. Bennett, Jr., The Shaping of Black America (New York: Penguin Group, 1993) 170, 252; V. P. Franklin, Black Self-Determination: A Cultural History of the Faith of the Fathers (Westport, CT: Lawerence Hill, Co., 1984), 111-112.
48.
Kashif, "Generations of African Influenced Names," 20.
49.
One language which is modified from formal to informal based on the social context of communication.
50.
M. Berry and J. Blassingame, Long Memory: The Black Experience in America (Oxford and New York: Oxford University Press, 1982), 403.
51.
See Bennett, The Shaping of Black America, 187-191.
52.
P. Cimbala, Under the Guardianship of the Nation (Athens: University of Georgia Press, 1997), 288, footnote 35.
53.
Franklin, Black SelfDetermination, 127-142.
54.
Ibid, 132.
55.
Turner, America's Black Towns, 12.
56.
Kashif, "Generations of African Influenced Names," 21.
57.
Ibid, 22.
58.
Bennett, The Shaping of Black America, 267-269.
59.
Franklin, Black SelfDetermination, 143.
60.
Ibid, 144.
61.
Turner, Africanisms in the Gullah Dialect, 40.
62.
Ibid. 63.
Ibid, 307, footnote 8.
64.
Holloway and Vass, African Heritage of American English, 108.
65.
A. Weise, "Places of Our Own: Suburban Black Towns Before 1960," in Journal of Urban History 19(3)(1993): 50.
66.
Weise, "Places of Our Own," 31.
67.
Ibid, 30.
68.
Franklin, Black SelfDetermination, 126.
69.
Bennett, The Shaping of Black America, 341.
70.
M. R. Hoover, "Community Attitudes Toward Black English," in Language In Society 1(1978): 65-87.
32
Places of Cultural Memor y: African Reflections on the American Landscape
71.
It must be remembered that those of royal lineage were not spared the Middle Passage during the devastation of slavery, and are most probably, the original sources of the popularity of this name as an official one among African Americans.
72.
Mesolect is a theorized "midpoint" between a deep creole and disparate prestige-dialect target.
SBE, Standard Black English, is defined by the use of codified standard English syntax, but with the maintenance of distinctive phonological features and stylistic devices.
73.
Holloway and Vass, The African Heritage of American English, 108.
74.
Ibid, 42.
75.
Kashif, "Generations of African Influenced Names."
76.
A. Morris, Florida Place Names (Sarasota, FL: Pineapple Press), 61.
77.
Holloway and Vass, The African Heritage of American English, 129.
78.
An analysis for "Pocosin" has not yet finalized; the Kongo word, mpakasa, is a strong possibility.
79.
P. Kenney, "LaVilla, Florida, 1866-1887: Reconstruction Dreams and the Formation of a Black Community," in The African American Heritage of Florida, D. Colburn and J. Landers, eds. (Gainesville: University of Florida Press), 185.
80.
Hall, Africans in Colonial Louisiana, 214-16.
81.
Wimby, R., Roberts, R., and Carruthers, J., Mdt rn Kmt: Kemetic Name Book (Chicago: The Kemetic Institute, 1987), 8.
82.
Sir Alfred Cornelius Moloney, West African Fisheries, (London: W. Clowes and Sons, Ltd., 1883).
83.
Holloway and Vass, The African Heritage of American English, 130.
84.
J. Covington, The Seminoles of Florida (Gainesville: University of Florida Press, 1993), 15-48.
85.
T. Tamuno, "Traditional Police in Nigeria," in Traditional Religion in West Africa, in A. Adegbola, ed. (Ibadan, Nigeria: Daystar Press, 1983), 181.
86.
F. Abate, ed., American Places Dictionary (Detroit: Omnigraphics, 1974), 151.
87.
Holloway and Vass, The African Heritage of American English, 134.
88.
D. Littlefield, Africans and Creeks (Westport, CT: Greenwood Press, 1979), 76.
89.
Covington, The Seminoles of Florida, 80-89,98-99.
90.
Ibid, 79.
91.
Kashif, Generations of African Influenced Names, 60.
92.
Diop, "A Methodology for the Study of Migrations," 92.
93.
Toponyms referring to natural features: Beech Bottoms, NC; Cedarlake, AL; Fairmount Heights; Greenwood Village, AL; Highland Beach, MD; Lakeview, AR; Lawncrest, NJ; Mound Bayou, MS; Mud Town, KS; Plateau, AL; Sandy Ground, NY; Star Hill, DE; Three Creeks, MI; Urbancrest, OH; Cow Creek, MI; Hare Valley, VA; Clearview, OK; Small Farms, AL. 94.
M. Turner, America's Black Towns, 116.
Bibliography Abate, F. ed. American Places Dictionary.
Detroit: Omnigraphics, 1974.
Akbar.
N.
"The Mummy is Out of the Tomb."
Lecture given in Washington, DC, 1989.
Algeo, T.
On Defining the Proper Name.
Gainesville: University of Florida Press, 1973.
Aptheker, H. "Maroons within the Present Limits of the United States."
In Maroon Societies: Rebel Slave Communities in the Americas, R. Price, ed. Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University Press, 1979.
Athearn, R.
In Search of Canaan: Black Migration to Kansas 1879-1880.
Lawrence, KS: Regents Press, 1978.
Bennett, Jr., L.
The Shaping of Black America.
New York: Penguin Group, 1993.
Berry, M. and Blassingame, J. Long Memory: The Black Experience in America.
Oxford and New York: Oxford University Press, 1982.
Biebuyck, D., Kelliher, S. 
New York: G. K. Hall, 1996.
Bilby, K. and N'Diaye, D. B. "Creativity and Resistance: Maroon Culture in the Americas."
In Festival of American Folklife, P. Seitel ed. Washington, DC: Smithsonian Institution, 1992.
Blount, B. "Luo Personal Names: Reference and Meaning."
Paper presented at the annual meeting of the African Studies Association.
Atlanta, GA, 1989.
Africanisms Upon the Land: A Study of African Influenced Place Names of the USA
33
Brown, C. Florida's Peace River Frontier.
Gainesville: University of Florida Press, 1991.
Cimbala, P. Under the Guardianship of the Nation.
Athens: University of Georgia Press, 1997.
Creel, Margaret W. A Peculiar People: Slave Religion and CommunityCulture Among the Gullahs.
New York: New York University Press, 1988.
Crystal, D.
The Cambridge Encyclopedia of Language and Linguistics.
Cambridge and New York: Cambridge University Press, 1991.
Covington, J.
The Seminoles of Florida.
Gainesville: University Press of Florida, 1993.
Diop, C. A.
"A Methodology for the Study of Migrations."
In African Ethnonyms and Toponyms.
Paris: United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, 1984.
Franklin, V. P. Black Self-Determination: A Cultural History of the Faith of the Fathers.
Westport, CT: Lawrence Hill 
Hall, G. Africans in Colonial Louisiana.
Baton Rouge: Louisiana State University Press, 1992.
Harris, J. Africans and Their History.
New York: Penguin Group, 1998.
Holloway, J. Africanisms in American Culture.
Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1991.
Holloway, J and Vass, W. eds.
The African Heritage of American English.
Bloomington: Indiana University Press, 1993.
Hoover, M. R. "Community Attitudes Toward Black English."
Language In Society 1(1978), 65-87.
Jeffers, R and Lehiste, I. Principles and Methods for Historical Linguistics.
Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1982.
Kashif, Annette.
"Generations of African Influenced Names Among African Americans: Forms and Meanings."
(Ph.D. dissertation, Howard University, 1991).
Kenney, P. "LaVilla, Florida, 1866-87: Reconstruction Dreams and the Formation of a Black Community."
In The African American Heritage of Florida, D. Colburn and J. Landers, eds. Gainesville: University of Florida Press, 1995.
Laemming, H. Hidden Americans: Maroons of Virginia and North Carolina.
New York: Garland, 1995.
Landers, J. Black Society in Spanish Florida.
Urbana: University of Illinois Press, 1999.
Littlefield, Jr., D. Africans and Creeks.
Westport, CT: Greenwood Press, 1979.
McCarthy, Kevin.
The Hippocrene U.S.A.
Guide to Black Florida.
New York: Hippocrene Books, 1995.
Moloney, Sir Cornelius, A. West African Fisheries.
London: W. Clowes and Sons, Ltd., 1883.
Morris, A. Florida Place Names.
Sarasota, FL: Pineapple Press, 1995.
Mufwene, S., ed. Africanisms in AfroAmerican Language Varieties.
Athens: University of Georgia Press, 1993.
Mufwene, S. "Dictionaries and Proper Names."
In International Jounral of Lexicography, 1(3)(1988): 268-283.
Obenga, T. "Who Am I?" In African World History Project: The Preliminary Challenge, J. Carruthers, and L. Harris, eds. Los Angeles: ASCAC, 1997.
Oduyoye, M. Yoruba Names: Their Structure and Meanings.
London: Karnak House, 1987.
Rivers, L. Slavery in Florida: Territorial Days to Emancipation.
Gainesville: University of Florida Press, 2000.
Robinson, R.
The Debt: What America Owes to Blacks.
New York: Penguin Group, 2000.
Rose, H.
"The All-Negro Town: Its Evolution and Function."
The Geographical Review, 55(3)(1967), 362-381.
Stewart, George.
Names on the Land, 3rd ed. Boston: Houghton Mifflin, 1967.
Stewart, W. "Acculturative Processes and the Language of the American Negro."
In Language in its Social Setting, W. Gage, ed., 1-46.
Washington, DC: The Anthropological Society, 1974.
The United States Dictionary of Places.
Somerset, New York: Somerset Publishers, 1988.
Tamuno, T.
"Traditional Police in Nigeria."
In Traditional Religion in West Africa, A. Adegbola, ed. Ibadan, Nigeria: Daystar Press, 1983.
Taylor, Q.
In Search of the Racial Frontier: African Americans in the American West, 1528-1990.
New York: Norton 
Turner, Morris.
America's Black Towns and Settlements: Vol. 1.
Rohnert Park, CA: Missing Pages Productions, 1998.
34
Places of Cultural Memor y: African Reflections on the American Landscape
Turner, Lorenzo Dow.
Africanisms in the Gullah Dialect.
Chicago: University of Chicago.
1949.
Weise, A. "Places of Our Own: Suburban Black Towns Before 1960."
Journal of Urban History, 19 (3)(1993), 30-54.
Wimby, R., Roberts, R. and Carruthers, J. Mdt rn Kmt: Kemetic Name Book.
Chicago: The Kemetic Institute, 1987.
Wilson, A. N.
The Falsification of Afrikan Consciousness.
New York: Afrikan World InfoSystems, 1993.
Wood, P. "Strange New Land."
In To Make Our World Anew, R. Kelley, and E. Lewis, eds. Oxford and New York: Oxford University Press, 2000.
Yai, O. "African Ethnonymy and Toponomy: Reflections on Decolonization."
In African Ethnonyms and Toponyms.
Paris: United Nations Educational, Scientific and Cultural Organization, 1984.
Yai, O. Rethinking Syncretism in the African Diaspora.
Lecture series.
Gainesville: University of Florida, 1993.
