Banks and Real Estate Home Page www.obre.state.il.us Rod R. Blagojevich, Governor
Agency Links Skip to Content Skip to State Links
OBRE Home Search OBRE About OBRE News Lookup Financial Literacy Consumer Information OBRE Bureaus · Banks and Trusts · Real Estate- Professions · Residential- Finance Legal Discipline Forms Customer Service OBRE Links Illinois Home Search Illinois ___________ Go [Search Tips] Inspector General Agencies, Boards 
Banks and Real Estate - Financial Literacy
diagonal image
E-mail Scams
E-mail boxes are filling up with more offers for business opportunities than any other kind of unsolicited commercial e-mail.
According to the Federal Trade Commission (FTC) that's a problem, because many of these offers are scams.
In response to requests from consumers, the FTC asked e-mail users to forward their unsolicited commercial e-mail to their agency for an inside look at the bulk e-mail business.
FTC staff found that more often than not, bulk e-mail offers appeared to be fraudulent, and if pursued, could have ripped-off unsuspecting consumers to the tune of billions of dollars.
The FTC has identified 12 scams that are most likely to arrive in consumers' e-mail boxes.
The "dirty dozen" are listed below:
1.
Business Opportunities These business opportunities make it sound easy to start a business that will bring lots of income without much work.
The solicitations declare unbelievable earnings of $140 a day, $1,000 a day, or more, and claim that the business doesn't involve selling, meetings, or personal contact with others, or that someone else will do all the work.
Many business opportunity solicitations claim to offer a way to make money in an Internet-related business.
Short on details but long on promises, these messages usually offer a telephone number to call for more information.
In many cases, after someone leaves a message with their name and telephone number a salesperson will call them back with the sales pitch.
The scam: Many of these are illegal pyramid schemes masquerading as legitimate opportunities to earn money.
2.
Bulk E-mail Bulk e-mail solicitations offer to sell a list of e-mail addresses, by the millions, to which a person can send their own bulk solicitations.
Some offer software that automates the sending of e-mail messages to thousands or millions of recipients.
Others offer the service of sending bulk e-mail solicitations on their behalf.
Some of these offers say, or imply, that they can make a lot of money using this marketing method.
The scam: Sending bulk e-mail violates the terms of service of most Internet service providers.
If you use one of the automated e-mail programs, your service provider may shut you down.
In addition, inserting a false return address into your solicitations, as some of the automated programs allow you to do, may cause legal problems with the owner of the address's domain name.
Several states have laws regulating the sending of unsolicited commercial e-mail, which will be unwittingly violate by sending bulk e-mail.
Few legitimate businesses, if any, engage in bulk e-mail marketing for fear of offending potential customers.
3.
Chain Letters A chain letter is when someone is asked to send a small amount of money ($5 to $20) to each of the four or five names on a list, replace one of the names on the list with their own, and then forward the revised message via bulk e-mail.
The letter may claim that the scheme is legal, that it's been reviewed or approved by the government; or it may refer to sections of U.S. law that legitimize the scheme.
Don't believe it.
The scam: Chain letters, traditional or high-tech, are almost always illegal, and nearly all of the people who participate in them lose their money.
The fact that a "product" such as a report on how to make money fast, a mailing list, or a recipe may be changing hands in the transaction does not change the legality of these schemes.
4.
Work-at-Home Schemes Envelope-stuffing solicitations promise steady income for minimal labor.
For example, you'll earn $2 each time you fold a brochure and seal it in an envelope.
Craft assembly work schemes often require an investment of hundreds of dollars in equipment or supplies, and many hours producing goods for a company that has promised to buy them.
The scam: A small fee is paid to get started in the envelope-stuffing business.
After spending the money and putting in the time on the craft assembly work, most likely the promoters will refuse to pay, claiming that your work isn't up to their "quality standards."
There is never any real employment to be offer.
Instead, instructions are usually given on how to send the same envelope-stuffing ad to a new bulk e-mailing list.
If any money is earned, it will be from other consumers who fall for the scheme.
5.
Health and Diet Scams Pills that are for losing weight without exercising or changing ones diet, herbal formulas that liquefy fat cells so the body absorbs them, and cures for impotence and hair loss are among the scams flooding e-mail boxes.
The scam: These gimmicks don't work.
The fact is that successful weight loss requires a reduction in calories and an increase in physical activity.
Beware of case histories from "cured" consumers claiming amazing results; testimonials from "famous" medical experts nobody's ever heard of; claims that the product is available from only one source or for a limited time; and ads that use phrases like "scientific breakthrough," "miraculous cure," "exclusive product," "secret formula," and "ancient ingredient."
6.
Effortless Income The trendiest get-rich-quick schemes are sent as `newsletters' offering unlimited profits using a variety of easy-money opportunities, such as exchanging money on world currency markets, or offering the secret to writing the perfect sales letter.
Some of these e-mails also offer the secret to making $4,000 in one day.
The scam: If these systems worked, wouldn't everyone be using them? The thought of easy money may be appealing, but success generally requires hard work.
7.
Free Goods Some e-mail messages offer free valuable goods; for example, computers, electronic items, and long-distance phone cards.
A fee is asked to join a club, and then to earn the offered goods the person must acquire additional participants.
You're paying for the right to earn income by recruiting other participants, but your payoff is in goods, not money.
The scam: Most of these messages are covering up pyramid schemes, operations that inevitably collapse.
Almost the entire payoff goes to the promoters and little or none to consumers who pay to participate.
8.
Investment Opportunities Investment schemes promise outrageously high rates of return with no risk.
One version seeks investors to help form an offshore bank.
Others are vague about the nature of the investment, stressing the rates of return.
Many are Ponzi schemes.
Ponzi schemes are when early investors are paid off with money contributed by later investors.
This makes the early investors believe that the system actually works, and encourages them to invest even more money.
Promoters of fraudulent investments often operate a particular scam for a short time, quickly spend the money they take in, and then close down before they can be detected.
Often, they reopen under another name, selling another investment scam.
In their sales pitch, they'll say that they have high-level financial connections; that they're privy to inside information; that they'll guarantee the investment; or that they'll buy back the investment after a certain time.
To close the deal, they often serve up phony statistics, misrepresent the significance of a current event, or stress the unique quality of their offering-anything to deter you from verifying their story.
The scam: Ponzi schemes eventually collapse because there isn't enough money coming in to continue simulating earnings.
To check for names and resources of a business that might be a scam, contact the Better Business Bureau (BBB).
9.
Cable Descrambler Kits A kit to assemble a cable descrambler that supposedly allows a home to receive cable television transmissions without paying any subscription fee can be bought for a small fee.
The scam: The device that is built probably won't work.
Most of the cable television systems in the U.S. use technology that these devices can't crack.
Even if it worked, stealing service from a cable television company is illegal.
10.
Guaranteed Loans or Credit (on easy terms) Some e-mail messages offer home-equity loans that don't require equity in a home, as well as solicitations for guaranteed, unsecured credit cards, regardless of credit history.
Usually, these are said to be offered by offshore banks.
Sometimes they are combined with a pyramid scheme, which offers an opportunity to make money by attracting new participants to the scheme.
The scams: The home equity loans turn out to be a list of lenders who will turn down anyone not meeting their standard qualifications.
The promised credit cards never come through, and the pyramid moneymaking schemes always collapse.
11.
Credit Repair Credit repair scams offer to erase negative information from a credit file to qualify for a credit card, auto loan, home mortgage, or a job.
The scam: The scam artist who promotes these services can't deliver.
Only time, a deliberate effort, and a personal debt repayment plan will improve credit.
The companies that advertise credit repair services appeal to consumers with poor credit histories.
Not only can't they provide a consumer with a clean credit record, but they also may be encouraging a consumer to violate federal law.
If a consumer follows their instructions on a loan or credit application, misrepresenting a Social Security number, or getting an Employer Identification Number from the Internal Revenue Service under false pretenses, it is considered fraud.
12.
Vacation Prize / Promotions Electronic certificates congratulating a consumer on "winning" a fabulous vacation for a very attractive price are among the scams arriving in e-mail boxes.
Some e-mails declare the consumer has been "specially selected" for this opportunity.
The scam: Most unsolicited commercial e-mail goes to thousands or millions of recipients at a time.
Often, the cruise ship described in the e-mail does not meet expectations.
The hotel accommodations likely are shabby, and may require more money for an upgrade.
Scheduling the vacation during a certain time also may require an additional fee.
To report a suspicious offer or file a complaint, visit our Reporting Scams page and contact one of the anti-fraud organizations listed.
Financial Literacy...
It Just Makes Cent$
Financial Literacy Main
Why Illinois Needs Financial Literacy
2002 Financial Literacy Conference
Task Force
Curricula Lookup
Press Releases
Mortgage Awareness Program
Consumer Tips
Game Icon
Copyright © 2002 OBRE Agency Site Map | OBRE Privacy Information | Illinois Privacy Information | Kids Privacy | Web Accessibility | Agency Webmaster
