Louisiana Homeland Security Threat Advisory System Protection Measures Threat Condition Critical Infrastructure Key Asset Protective Action Local Jurisdiction Actions Prepared Citizen Response A terrorist attack has occurred or credible and corroborated intelligence indicates that one is imminent.
Applies in the immediate area where a threat attack has occurred or when intelligence indicates terrorist action against a specific location is likely.
Normally, this threat condition is declared for a specific location or critical facility.
S
E
V
E
R
E
Continue all precautions from lower Threat Conditions:
0M Announce Threat Condition SEVERE and explain expected actions.
0M Augment security forces to ensure absolute control over access to facility.
0M Inspect all vehicles entering facility/compound.
0M Deploy security personnel based on threat assessments.
0M Close or restrict entry to the facility to emergency personnel only and restrict parking areas close to critical buildings.
0M Maintain a skeleton crew of essential employees.
0M Deploy emergency response and security teams.
0M Activate Operations Center and send a liaison to the county or state EOC.
0M Maintain close contact with local law enforcement.
0M Be prepared to implement mutual aid agreements with government and with other critical facilities.
0M Provide security in parking lots and company areas.
0M Report suspicious activity immediately to local law enforcement.
0M Restrict or suspend all deliveries and mail to the facility.
Emergency supplies or essential shipments should be sent to and off-site location for inspection.
Continue all precautions from lower Threat Conditions:
0M Announce Threat Condition SEVERE to employees and to the public and explain anticipated actions that should be taken.
0M Deny unauthorized access to critical facilities and infrastructure.
Continue 100% inspections of personnel, vehicles and packages.
0M Identify owners of all vehicles already within controlled areas.
0M Deploy equipment assets and ensure physical security measures be afforded to them at critical sites.
0M Assemble trained volunteers to include: CERT, VIPS, MRC and the American Red Cross.
0M Implement Mutual Aid Agreements as required.
0M Continue to assess the vulnerability of key assets and facilities.
Take appropriate action to protect them by deploying armed security forces to these sites.
0M Cancel or delay unnecessary employee travel and leave.
0M Activate the Emergency Operations Center.
0M Control release of information to the public and news media.
0M Provide security for personnel dispatched to repair or restore damaged facilities and systems.
0M Limit access to facilities and activities to those personnel with a legitimate and verifiable need to enter.
0M Conduct frequent inspections of the exterior of buildings (to include roof and subterranean areas) and parking areas.
0M Inspect all baggage, packages and briefcases brought into facilities for explosives, incendiary devices or other dangerous items.
In addition to all previously mentioned precautions, citizens are advised to:
0M Report suspicious activities and call 911 for immediate response.
0M Expect delays, searches of purses and bags and restricted access to public buildings.
0M Expect traffic delays and restrictions.
0M Take personal security precautions to avoid becoming a victim of crime or terrorist attack.
0M Avoid crowded public areas and gatherings.
0M Do not travel into areas affected by the attack or is an expected terrorist target.
0M Keep emergency supplies accessible and automobile fuel tank full.
0M Be prepared to evacuate your home or shelter in place on order of local authorities.
0M Be suspicious of persons taking photographs of critical facilities, asking detailed questions about physical security or dressed inappropriately for weather conditions.
Report these incidents immediately to law enforcement.
0M Closely monitor news reports and Emergency Broadcast Network radio/TV stations.
0M Assist neighbors who may need help.
0M Avoid passing unsubstantiated information and rumors.
Threat Condition
Critical Infrastructure Key Asset Protective Action
Local Jurisdiction Actions
Prepared Citizen Response
Credible intelligence indicates that there is a high risk of a local terrorist attack but a specific target has not been identified.
Applies when an incident occurs or intelligence indicates some form of threat action against personnel and/or infrastructure is imminent.
H
I
G
H
Continue all precautions from lower Threat Conditions:
0M Announce Threat Condition HIGH to all employees and explain expected actions.
0M Place emergency response teams on notice.
0M Activate the operations center if required.
0M Monitor world and local events.
Pass on credible threat intelligence to key personnel.
0M Ensure appropriate security measures are in place and functioning properly.
0M Instruct employees to report suspicious activities, packages and people.
0M Search all personal bags, parcels and require personnel to pass through magnetometer, if available.
0M Verify identity of all personnel entering the facility
0M Visually inspect the interior of vehicles and detailed vehicle inspections.
0M Restrict vehicle parking close to buildings.
0M Inspect intrusion detection systems and lighting, security fencing and locking systems.
0M Inspect all deliveries and consider accepting shipments only at off-site locations.
0M Remind employees to expect delays and baggage searches.
0M Increase security patrol to maximum level sustainable.
0M Consult local authorities about closing public roads and facilities that might make sites more vulnerable to threat.
Continue all precautions from lower Threat Conditions:
0M Announce Threat Condition HIGH to employees and public and explain expected actions to be taken.
0M Restrict or control access to government buildings, critical facilities and infrastructure.
0M Erect outside barricades, security checks to deny access to underground parking areas, loading docks and building entrance.
0M Erect barriers required to control direction of traffic flow and to protect facilities vulnerable to bomb attack by parked or moving vehicles.
0M Require identification, sign-in and escorts as required.
0M Remove, vehicles, trash containers, dumpsters and mailboxes located near government buildings and facilities; restrict parking areas located close to buildings or critical facilities.
0M Closely monitor available security and intel data from state and local law enforcement agencies.
0M Instruct employees to be especially watchful for suspicious or unattended packages and articles received through the mail service.
0M Inspection buildings and parking areas for suspicious packages.
0M Implement positive control on information release to avoid public panic.
0M Employ armed security at airports, dams, public utilities and critical facilities.
0M Based on threat assessment, define rules of engagement 
0M Test communication plans.
0M Secure and regularly inspect all buildings, vehicles, and parking and storage areas for intrusion.
0M Conduct 100% verification of deliveries and restrict shipments.
In addition to all previously mentioned precautions, citizens are advised to:
0M Resume normal activities but expect some delays, baggage searches and restrictions as a result of heightened security at public buildings and facilities.
0M Continue to monitor world and local events as well as local government threat advisories.
0M Report suspicious activities at or near critical facilities to local law enforcement agencies by calling 9-1-1.
0M Avoid leaving unattended packages or brief cases in public areas.
0M Inventory and organize emergency supply kits and discuss emergency plans with family members.
Reevaluate meeting location based on threat.
0M Consider taking reasonable personal security precautions.
Be alert to your surroundings, avoid placing yourself in a vulnerable situation and monitor the activities of your children.
0M Maintain close contact with your family and neighbors to ensure their safety and emotional welfare.
Threat Condition
Critical Infrastructure Key Asset Protective Action
Local Jurisdiction Actions
Prepared Citizen Response
Elevated risk of terrorist attack but a specific region of the USA or target has not been identified.
Applies when an increased or more predictable threat exists.
E
L
E
V
A
T
E
D
Continue all precautions from lower Threat Conditions:
0M Announce Threat Condition ELEVATED to employees.
0M Review vulnerability and threat assessments and revise as needed.
0M Identify and monitor governmental information sharing sources for warnings and alerts.
0M Update and test recall list for emergency response teams and key employees.
0M Review, coordinate and update mutual aid agreements with other critical facilities and government agencies.
0M Establish and monitor active and passive security measures.
0M Increase frequency of random identity checks (inspection of ID cards, security badges and vehicle decals) conducted by security force on the facility.
0M Review employee training on security precautions (bomb threat procedures, reporting suspicious packages, activities and people).
0M Conduct communications checks to ensure radio contact can be established.
0M Test attack warning system and supporting evacuation plans.
Continue all precautions from lower Threat Conditions:
0M Announce Threat Condition ELEVATED to employees and to the public.
0M Place personnel required for contingency plans on call.
0M Review physical security plans for critical facilities.
0M Assess potential terrorist targets and develop plans to counteract an attack.
0M Conduct vulnerability assessments of each critical facility and government building.
Estimate the consequence of loss and assign a priority for their protection.
0M Ensure all buildings are secured to prevent theft or tampering.
0M Conduct physical inspection of buildings for suspicious unattended packages.
0M Develop a cadre of trained volunteers such as CERT and MRC.
0M Closely monitor current news events and state and federal terrorist advisories.
0M Keep the public informed on current threat conditions and advisories.
0M Coordinate with adjacent municipalities for mutual aid support in the event of a disaster or terrorist threat.
0M Conduct tabletop and functional exercises to ensure that response plans are understood and current.
0M Review existing physical security measures employed and install intrusion detection and passive systems as funding permits.
0M Conduct weekly radio communication checks.
In addition to all previously mentioned precautions, citizens are advised to:
0M Continue normal activities, but report suspicious activities to the local law enforcement agencies.
0M Take a first aid or CERT class.
0M Become active in your local Neighborhood Crime Watch program.
0M Network with your family, neighbors and community for mutual support during a disaster or terrorist attack.
0M Learn what critical facilities are located in your community and report suspicious activities at or near these sites.
0M Attend your local emergency planning committee (LEPC) meeting to learn more about local hazards.
(Call the city/parish emergency manager to learn dates and locations of the meetings.)
0M Increase individual or family emergency preparedness through training, maintaining good physical fitness and health, and storing food, water and emergency supplies.
Threat Condition
Critical Infrastructure Key Asset Protective Action
Local Jurisdiction Actions
Prepared Citizen Response
There is a general threat of possible threat activity against personnel/infrastructure, the nature of which is unpredictable.
G
U
A
R
D
E
D
E
D
Continue all precautions from lower Threat Conditions:
0M Ensure that key leaders are familiar with the emergency response, COOP and business resumption plans.
0M Review, update and routinely exercise functional areas of plans.
0M Review and update the recall list for emergency response teams
0M Develop or review Mutual Aid agreements with other facilities and/or with local government for use during emergencies.
0M Ensure local law enforcement and security forces have immediate access to building floor plans.
0M Review physical security precautions to prevent theft, unauthorized entry or destruction of property.
Have you provided for:
0M Employee picture ID badges?
0M Background checks on employees?
0M Access control and locking of high
security areas at all times?
0M All security keys marked with "Do not Duplicate"?
0M Surveillance Cameras?
0M Backup power?
0M An alarm system?
0M Advise employees to report suspicious activity to security personnel.
0M Increase liaison with local law enforcement.
Continue all precautions from lower Threat Conditions: 0M Reduce the number of access points for vehicles and personnel to minimum levels, maintaining flow of traffic.
0M Estimate the threat vulnerability of each critical facility and countermeasures required to protect them.
0M Ensure that each department is familiar with their assigned responsibilities during a disaster as shown in plan and prepared to respond.
0M Review communications plans and ensure the recall procedures are current and accurate.
0M Conduct emergency management training and exercise emergency response plans.
0M Ensure all emergency management and response functions are adequately staffed.
Recruit and train volunteers to augment full time staff.
0M Actively support the Neighborhood Watch, Community Emergency Response Team (CERT), VIPS, MRC and Amateur Radio Emergency Service programs.
0M Remind citizen and employees to be alert for suspicious packages, activities, vehicles and to report these occurrences to the proper authority.
0M Secure buildings, unused rooms, storage areas, equipment and vehicles to prevent theft, tampering or destruction.
0M Evaluate information available on public websites that could compromise security.
0M Encourage all citizens and employees to have necessary immunizations.
In addition to all previously mentioned precautions, citizens are advised to:
· Report the following to appropriate law enforcement --
· Suspicious personnel, particularly those carrying suitcases or other containers, or those observing, photographing,
· or asking questions about local security measures.
· Unidentified vehicles parked or operated in a suspicious manner on, or in the vicinity of key facilities.
· Abandoned parcels or suitcases.
· Any other activity considered suspicious.
0M Continue normal activities but be watchful for suspicious activities.
Report criminal activity to local law enforcement.
0M Review family emergency plans.
0M Increase family emergency preparedness by purchasing supplies, food and storing water.
0M Be familiar with local natural and technological (man made) hazards in your community.
0M Increase individual or family emergency preparedness through training, maintaining good physical fitness and health, and storing food, water and emergency supplies.
0M Monitor local and national news for terrorist alerts.
0M Update immunizations and maintain records.
0M Volunteer to assist and support the community emergency response agencies.
Threat Condition
Critical Infrastructure Key Asset Protective Action
Local Jurisdiction Actions
Prepared Citizen Response
Low risk of terrorism.
Routine security is implemented to preclude routine criminal threats.
L
O
W
0M Develop emergency response, cooperative agreement (COOP) and business resumption plans.
0M Encourage and assist employees to be prepared for personal, natural and technological emergencies.
0M Develop a communications roster and recall system for emergency response and key personnel.
0M Conduct training for employees on physical security precautions.
0M Budget for and implement heightened physical security measures.
0M Identify critical facilities and key assets that may need protection.
0M Review Emergency Response Plans.
0M Conduct training, seminars, workshops and exercises using the emergency response plans.
0M Conduct emergency preparedness training for citizens and employees.
0M Encourage response agencies (fire fighters, law enforcement, EMS, public works and elected officials) to take emergency management and American Red Cross first aid and CPR training.
0M Actively Support Citizen Corps Program.
0M Provide emergency preparedness information to employees via paycheck stubs tips, newsletters, articles and posters.
0M Conduct routine inventories of emergency supplies and medical aid kits.
0M Budget for physical security measures.
0M Encourage programs for employee immunization and preventive health care.
Citizens are advised to:
· Report the following to appropriate law enforcement --
· Suspicious personnel, particularly those carrying suitcases or other containers, or those observing, photographing,
· or asking questions about local security measures.
· Unidentified vehicles parked or operated in a suspicious manner on, or in the vicinity of key facilities.
· Abandoned parcels or suitcases.
· Any other activity considered suspicious.
0M Continue to enjoy individual freedom.
Participate freely in travel, work and recreational activities.
0M Be prepared for disasters and family emergencies, develop a family emergency plan.
(See Family Emergency Preparedness Guide and American Red Cross brochures.)
0M Know how to turn off your power, gas and water service to your house.
0M Know what hazardous materials are stored in your home and how to and properly dispose of unneeded chemicals.
0M Support the efforts of your local emergency responders (fire fighters, law enforcement and emergency medical service).
0M Know what natural hazards are prevalent in your area and what measures you can take to protect your family.
