STATE OF CALIFORNIA--STATE AND CONSUMER SERVICES AGENCY Arnold Schwarzenegger, Governor C ALIFORNIA DEPARTMENT OF CONSUMER AFFAIRS DIVISION OF LEGAL AFFAIRS 400 R STREET SACRAMENTO, CA 95814-6200 Legal Guide P-3 CREDIT IDENTITY THEFT: TIPS TO AVOID AND RESOLVE PROBLEMS March 2002 "Credit identity theft," "identity theft" and "identity fraud."
All of these terms describe the theft of a consu mer's persona l identification and credit information and the thie f's use of this info rmation to gain access to the consumer's credit and bank accounts and take over the consumer's credit identity.
Credit iden tity theft is a grow ing proble m in California and nationally.
The Federal Trade Commiss ion ranks C alifornia fou rth nationally in reported identity theft cases per capita.1 The Privacy Rights Clearingho use estimates that there are approximately 500,00 0 cases of identity theft nationally per year.
The California Legisl ature has declared that identity theft is the fastest growing white collar crime in the nation.2 This Legal G uide expla ins how cre dit identity theft occurs; provides tips to avoid becoming a victim of cred it identity theft; and suggests h ow to resolve pro blems if your cr edit identity is stole n.
It is organized as follows: I. Description of Identity Theft A .
Definition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
B .
How Identity Theft Occurs . . . . . . . .
C .
Example of Identity The ft . . . . . . . . .
II.
How to Protect Against Identity Theft .
III.
What You Can Do if You Are a Victi m o Identity Theft A .
Law Enfo rcement . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
B .
Credit Reporting Agencies . . . . . . . .
C .
Credit Reports . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
D .
Credit Card Issuers . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
E .
Financial Institutions . . . . . . . . . . . . .
F. Utilities . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
G .
Driver's License/California ID Card .
H .
Social Security number . . . . . . . . . . .
I. Mail . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
J .
Passpo rt . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
K. Erroneo us Civil or C riminal Jud gment L. Uncoo perative Cr editor or C redit . . . . f . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1 2 3 3
Repo rting A gency . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
10 M .
Demands to Pay Debts Caused by the Credit Identity Thief . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
11 N .
Tools and References 1.
Copies of Applications . . . . . . . . . .
12 2.
FTC ID Theft Affidavit, Database .
12 3.
Atty.
General's ID Theft Database .
12 4.
Referenc es on De aling with Ide ntity Theft . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12 I V .
List of Resources A .
Victim Advice and Assistance . . . . . . . .
13 B .
Credit Reporting Agencies . . . . . . . . . .
14 C .
Direct Mar keting Ass ociation . . . . . . . .
14 D .
Social Security Administration . . . . . . .
15 E .
U.S. Secret Service . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15 F. U.S. Pos t Office . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
15 G .
Telephone Se rvice Provider . . . . . . . . .
15 H .
California Public Utilities Commission and Federal Communic ations Comm. . . . . .
15 I. Check Verification Companies . . . . . . .
16 Endnotes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
16 Text of Pen al Code Sectio ns 530.5-530.8 . . . . .
19 I. DESCR IPTION OF C REDIT IDENTITY THEFT
A .
Definition Credit identity theft occurs when someone (the "per petr ator ") wil lfull y acq uire s a co nsum er's personal identification information, s uch as the consumer's name, addre ss, Social Security number, date of bi rth, d river 's lice nse n umb er, m othe r's maiden name, or som e combination of these item s.
A consumer's Social Security number, along with t he consumer's name, are the keys to tapping into the consumer's credit identity.
The perpetrator also may acquire the consumer's credit or account information.
The perp etrator may use this informatio n unlawfu lly to obtain money, credit, goods, services, other t hings of value, and even medical information, in the
. . . . . . . . . . .
6 7 7 8 8 .9 .9 .9 10 10 10
. . . .
victim's name and without the victim's consent.
The perpetrato r also may use th is information to gain access to the victim's bank accounts.
The means by which the perpetrator o btains this information are discussed at B. below .
A consumer may not know that he or s he has been a victim of credit identity theft for some time after the fact.
The consumer often learns that he or she has been victimized after being refused an extension of credit.
Sometimes, the consumer learns that he or she has been victimized when a creditor or debt collec tor calls dema nding paym ent for deb ts incu rred by the perp etra tor.
T ypica lly, th e vic tim's credit standing is seriously damaged by the perpetrator, a nd the victim's credit report becomes filled with negative credit information as a result.
Consumers wh o are victims of credit identity theft have found it difficult to remove erro neous negative credit information from their credit reports and to reestablish their credit standing.
In t he past, some law e nforcement officials a nd credit reporting agencies did not c onsider the consumer to be the "victim" of cred it identity theft because the consumer's liability for credit card losses generally is limited by federal law to $50 for each card (see page 8).
They viewed the cre ditor or financial institution as the victim, although the consumer always has been the one who faces the emotional trauma a nd the often tedious task of removing erroneous i nformation fr om his or her credit repor t and re-estab lishing his or her credit standing.
The California Legislature enacted a la w, effective January 1, 1998, that created t he crime of "identity theft."3 As knowledge of this provision has spread, it has become more clear to all that the consumer is the victim of credit identity theft.
B .
How Credit Identity Theft Occurs Credit identity theft can occur in daily consumer transaction s in a variety of w ays.
For examp le:
approved credit offers and convenience checks from a consumer's mail box and use the information contained in them to ob tain credit in the consumer's name.
"Dumpster diving" ­ If a business discards papers containing its customers' personal identification information (such as loan applications) without shred ding them, a "dumpster diver" may retrieve this information from the business' dumpster (trash c ontainer).
The thief th en may sell the in formation o r use it to obtain credit in the consumer's name.
Legislation effective in January 2001 may make it more difficu lt for dumpste r divers to obta in personal identification information.
After that date, businesses must destroy or arrange f or the destruction of custome r records tha t contain personal information when the records are no longer to be retained.4 A thief also may steal personal identification information at a consume r's home.
If a consumer discards documents containing personal identification information (such as preapproved credit offers) without destroying them, a thief may steal the information from the consumer's garbage can.
"Insider access" ­ An employee of a business may wrongfully retrieve personal identification information that the business has collected for legitimate reasons, such as the consumer's Socia l Security num ber.
The e mployee the n may sell the informa tion to a crime ring or use it to obtain credit in the c onsumer's name.
"Imposter access" ­ A thief ma y fraudulently obtain a consumer's credit report by posing as someone who has a legitimate nee d and righ t to the information in it, such as a landlord or employer.
Purse or wallet loss or snatching ­ A thief may stea l, or t he co nsum er ma y lose , the con sume r's purse or wallet.
The thief then may use the consumer's stolen personal identification info rmat ion t o ob tain cred it in th e con sume r's name.
Mail theft ­ If a consumer leaves his or her credit card payment e nvelope in the mail box for the postal carrier to pick up, a t hief may steal the envelope.
The thief then may use the information from the credit card statement and the consumer's check to obtain c redit in t he consumer's name.
A thief also may steal pre-2-
Computerized information services ­ Businesses called "information brokers" sort, package and
sell persona l identification information in electronic form.
Some businesses may not safeguard this information adequately, or may sell it to purchasers that t he business has not appropriately screened.
T he purchaser or thief then may use the informatio n to obtain c redit in the names of the c onsumers to whom the information relates.
C .
Example of Credit I dentity Theft: One Victim's Experience A Consum er Repor ts article describes a typical case of credit identity theft as reported by the victim:6 An employee of a medical office where the victim received services obtained the victim's n ame and Social Security number from the victim 's medical file.
W ith this information , the thief alleg edly was able to obtain lines of credit in the victim's name worth $10 ,000, rent a n apartmen t, obtain utility service, and earn income in the victi m's na me.
P rior t o thi s, the victi m's credit report was "spotless."
The victim first learned that she was the victim of credit identity theft when she began receiving teleph one calls from lenders and collection agencies demanding payment of numerous past-due credit accounts that she had not opened.
A s reported by the victim, her bank refused to refinance her home mor tgage bec ause she w as a bad cre dit risk, and the Internal Revenue Service claimed that she owed taxes on income that the thief appare ntly had earned.
It took the victim t wo years to have the negative credit information caused by the thief's activities rem oved from h er credit report.
The victim reported that during th is time , the thief con tinu ed to use t he vi ctim 's name, and creditors c ontinued to press her for payment.
II.
HOW TO PROTECT A GAINST CREDIT IDENTITY THEFT It is impossible fo r a consum er to preven t all distribution of his or her pers onal identification and credit information, or to exercise meaningful control over all of the possible uses of that info rmation.
Nonetheless, a consumer can take steps to reduce the risk of theft a nd misuse of his or her personal identification and credit information.
For e xample:
Internet ­ Personal identification information that is available on the Internet can be intercepted or accesse d by a thief and misused to obtain credit in the victim's name.
Having obtained the c onsumer's personal identification information, the perpetrator then may app ly for a new drive r's lic ense in th e con sume r's name, order new credit cards in the c onsumer's name to be sent to the perpetrator's address, obtain a copy of the consumer's credit report, and otherwise assume the con sumer's c redit ide ntity.
Neglect by some retailers and creditors may contribute to a perpetrator' s successful use of the victim's credit identity.
For example, some retailers may not carefully check photographs and signatures on identification given by perpetrators in check and credit card transactions.
When perpetrators apply for new cred it, some cred itors may not ch eck to see if the date of b irth or mothe r's maiden nam e is correct, or if the driver's license is valid.
Sometimes, a creditor may ignore a recent change of address, which can be an indication of identity theft (because a perpetrator often diverts the victim's mail to a n address used by the perp etrator).
Legislation effective January 1, 2002, addresses some aspects of this problem.
If the address a consumer gives when requesting or being offered cred it do es no t matc h the add ress in th e con sume r's credit report, the retailer or other creditor must take steps to verify the consumer's address an d confirm that the cred it transaction is not the resu lt of identity theft.
If a credit report clearly shows that information has been b locked as th e result of ide ntity theft (see page 7), the user of the credit report must take steps to verify the consumer's identity a nd confirm that the transaction is not t he result of identity theft before it extends credit or lends money.
5
Do not routinely carry your Social Security card, your birth c ertificate, your passport or more than one or two credit cards.
W hen you must carry
-3-
some or all o f these, take s pecial prec autions to reduce the risk of loss or th eft.
Security number whe n you pay by check.)
~
8
Always t ake credit card, d eb it card and ATM receipts with you.
Never th row them in a public trash container.
Tear them up or shred t hem at home when you no longer need them.
Do not leave bill payment envelopes at your mailbox fo r the postal ca rrier to pick u p. Install a lock on your mailbox if you live in an area where mail theft has occurred.
Tear up o r shred unu sed pre-app roved cred it card solicitations and convenience checks.
Carefully review your credit card statements and utility bills (including cellular telephone bills) for unauthorized use as soon as you receive them.
If you suspect unauthorized use, contact the provider's customer service and fraud depart ments im mediate ly.
If a business re quests your S ocial Secu rity number, ask to use an alternate number.
Some businesses have systems that do not use Socia l Security num bers to iden tify their customers.
If the business doe s not have such a n alternate system, ask to use an alternate identifier that you will remember (for example, a combination of the letters of your last name a nd numbers).
You can lawfully refuse to give a private business your Social Security number, but the business then can refuse to provide you service.
New legislation addresses several problem uses of So cial Security n umbers by p rivate businesse s, such as p rinting Soc ial Security numbers on cards needed to access the business' pro ducts or ser vices, intentio nally making S ocial Secu rity numbers a vailable to the genera l public, and other uses.
A busi ness that uses your Social Security number in a prohibited manner after July 1, 2002 must notify you that you may stop it from using your Social Security number in t hat manner by sending it a written request.
The business must comply within 30 days, and cannot c harge you a fee to i mplement your request or d eny you service s because of it.
9 Health care service plans , health care providers, in surers and pharmacy b enefits managers and contractors are subject t o a later timeline.
State and local agenc ies are not subject to this new l aw.
Order your credit report each year from each of the three major credit reporting agencies (see the List of Resou rces, page 14).
Chec k each cre dit report carefully for accuracy a nd for indications of fraud, such as credit accounts that you did not open; a pplications f or credit t hat you did not authorize; credit inquiries that you did not initiate;7 charges that you did not incur; and defaults and deli nquencies that you did not cause.
Check t he i dentifying information in your credit repor t to be sure it is ac curate (esp ecially your name, a ddress, an d Social S ecurity number).
Never give out your credit card, bank account or Social Security number over the telephone unless you placed the call and you have a trusted business relationship with the business or organization.
~
Guard a gainst overu se of your So cial Security number.
Release it only when necessary ­ for example, on tax forms and employment records, or for banking, stock a nd property transactions.
~ Do not have your Social Security number printed on your checks.
D o not a llow a merchant to write your So cial Security number on your check.
(California la w does not specific ally allow or pro hibit mercha nts from requesting and recording your Social -4-
If a government a gency asks for your Social Security number, a Privacy Act notice should ac company th e request.
10 This notice will explain w hether your S ocial Secu rity number is required or merely requested; the use that will b e made of yo ur Social S ecurity number; and what will happen if you refuse to provide it.
If you do not receive your credit card statement on time (or if you do not receive a new o r renewed credit card when you expect it), your mail may have b een stolen.
It also is possible that an identity thief has filed a c hange of
address request in your name with the creditor or the post office.
Identity thieves do this to divert their victims' mail to the thief's address.
~ Call the creditor to see if a change of address request has been filed in your name, or if additional or replacement credit cards have be en requ ested o n your ac count.
If either has happened, i nform the creditor that you did not make the request and instruct the creditor not to honor it.
Call the post office to see if a change of address request has b een filed in your name.
If this has happened, immediately notify the Postal Inspector (see List of Resources, page 15, under "U.S .
Post Office").
specified by potential creditors.
You can request that your credit information not be used for these purposes.12 Doing this will limit the numb er of pre-app roved cred it offers that you receive.
~ Credit card issuers often c ompile lists of marketing information ab out cardholders based on their purch ases.
Und er Californ ia law, you can request your cred it card issuers not to disclose t o marketers of goods and services any marketing information about you whi ch disc loses you r identity.
13 The D irect M arketing Association (D MA) maintains lists o f people w ho do no t want to receive mail, telephone a nd e-mail solicita tions from national marketers.
You can request that your name be a dded to the DMA's Mail Preference Service, Telephone Preference Service and E-Mail Preference Service name-removal lists.
See the List of Resources, page 14.
~
~
If you shop on the Internet, use a cred it card rather than a debit card, a nd shop o nly with reputable companies that you know.
One Internet expert recommends t hat you use a single, distinct, credit card with a low limit when you shop online.
Make sure that you are using a secure browser that co mplies with industry security standards, such as Secure Sockets Laye r (SSL), before you provide any sensitive personal information.
These standards help e nsure the security o f your transaction by encrypting or scrambling the purchase information (including your credit card number) that you send over the Internet.
Look for symbols of a n unbroken lock or key at the bottom of your brow ser window, a Web address that includes an "s" (for example, "https://), or the words "Secure Sockets La yer (SSL)" in the browser's and merchant's privacy statements.
Alternatively, you can place your order by telephone or ma il. Never send payment information by e-mail.
11
~
Consider not listing your residence telephone number in the telephone book, or consider listing your name and residence telephone number without a n address.
If you decide to list your name a nd telephone number, c onsider not l isting your professional qualification or affiliation (for example, "Dr.," "Atty.," or "Ph.D .").
Make a list o f, or photoc opy, all of your c redit and debit cards.
For each card, include the account number, expiration date, credit limit a nd the telephone numbers of customer service and fraud departments.
Keep this list in a safe place (not your wallet or purse) so that you can contact each issuer quickly if your cards are lost or stolen.
Make a similar list for your bank accounts.
Check your Social Security Earnings and Benefits statement each year to make sure that someone else is not usin g your Soc ial Security number fo r employmen t.
The Soc ial Security Administr ation now mails these sta tements annually to all eligible workers age 2 5 and older.
Cancel your unused credit cards so that the accounts will not a ppear as being "open" or "active" on you r credit repo rt.
(If an identity thief obtains your credit report, the thief may access an d use these accounts.
To help av oid this problem, some credit reporting agencies "truncate" account num bers on credit reports.)
Ask the c redit card issu er to tell the cred it reporting agency that the account was closed at your reques t. -5-
Consider having your name removed from marketing lists.
~ The t hree major credit reporting agencies use informa tion from cre dit reports to develop lists o f consume rs who mee t criteria
When creating passwords and PINs (personal identification numbers) do not use any part of your Social S ecurity numb er, birth date, middle name, spouse's name, child's name, pet's name, mother's maiden name, address, telephone number, c onsecutive numbers, o r anything tha t a thief could easily deduce or d iscover.
Memorize all your passwords and PINs; never write them i n your wallet, purse, Palm Pilot or Rolodex.
telephone conversations regarding the theft.
The log also should include the name, title and telephone number of each p erson to whom the victim sp eaks.
The victim sh ould follow up each tele phone ca ll with a letter that confirms the conversation and any agreed-up on action.
T he victim sho uld send a ll correspondence by certified mail, return receipt requested, and keep each return receipt a nd a copy of each letter and any enclosures.
The follow ing tips are o ffered to he lp a victim report and documen t the theft of his or her credit identity a nd to help the victim begin to re build his or her credit standing.
Each case of credit identity theft involves unique facts and circumstances, and other than repor ting the crime to the police , one victim w ill not necessarily take the same step s as other victims.
If your credit ide ntity has been stolen, you sh ould review all of the following tips a nd choose those that are appropriate to your situation.
A .
Law Enforcement Report the crime to the po lice immediately.
California Penal Code s ection 530.5 classifies identity theft as a crime ­ either a misdemean or or a felony.
14 You can initiate a law enforcement investigation by contacting the local law e nforcement agency having jurisdiction over your a ddress.
The a gency must take a police re port, give you a copy of it, a nd begin an i nvestigation.15 If the crime was committed in a different jurisdiction, the a gency may refer the matter to a law e nforcement agency where the crime was committed for investigation.
Some law enforcement agencies charge for copies of the police report.
The laws on identity theft neither permit nor prohibit this practice.
Beginning January 1, 2002, a D epartment of Motor Vehicles investigator with peace officer status can take an investigative re port which you can use to block reporting of inform ation in your credit report (see page 7).
16 Give the police or DMV investigator as much information and doc umentation as you can.
Creditors, banks, credit reporting agencies and insurance companies may require you to provide a police report to verify that you are a victim of the crime of iden tity theft.
Shield the keypad when punching in your PIN at an ATM or when placing a ca lling card call.
This helps protect against "shoulder surfers" learning your code.
Install a lock on your mailbox at home, or use a post office b ox.
This w ill reduce the risk of mail theft.
When you order new checks, pick them up at the bank instead of having them mailed to your home.
When you fill out a loan or credit application, be sure that the business either shreds these applications or stores them in lock ed files.
These applications often contain a ll of the information that a dumpster diver or an unscrupulous em ployee needs to assume your credit id entity.
If you have a good reason to believe that you are the target of a n identity thief, consider placing a security alert or s ecurity freeze on your cred it report (see page 7).
You also can reque st that a victim's statement b e placed in your credit file (see page 7).
III.
WHAT T O DO IF YO U ARE A VICTIM OF CREDIT IDENTITY THEFT Anyone can beco me a victim of c redit identity theft.
You must act quickly upon discovering that you are the victim of credit identity theft.
Acting quickly will help prevent the thief from making further use of your credit identity, and may make the process of restoring your credit standing less burdensome.
A victim of identity theft should keep a log of the date, time and substance of all personal and
-6-
The full text of Penal C ode sections 530.5 -530.8 is reprinted a t the end of th is Legal Gu ide.
Not all law enforc ement officia ls will be awa re that identity theft is a crime, or that they are required to take a police report, give you a copy of it, and begin an investigation.
If necessary, show this Legal Guide and the text of sections 530.5-530.8 to law enforcement officials when you request a police report and an investigation.
B .
Credit Reporting Agencies Call the frau d units of the three major c redit reporting agencies (see the List of Resources, page 14).
Inform each credit reporting agency of the theft of your credit cards, account numbers or identifying information.
· You can request that a victim's statement be added to your credit r eport ­ for example: " My identification has been u sed to app ly for credit fraudulently.
Call me at ________ to verify a ny application for credit."
The credit reporting agency will re quire you to ve rify your identity (for example, by submitting your ph one bill).
Beginning July 1, 2002, you can call or write the credit repor ting agenc ies to reque st that a "security alert" be placed in your credit reports.
The security a lert notifies recipients of your credit report that your identity may have been used fraud ulently to obta in goods o r services in your name.
T he security ale rt will remain in effect for at least 90 days, and you may request that it be renewed.17 Beginning January 1, 2003, you can request a free cop y of your credit report at the time that the 90-day alert period expires.18 Beginning January 1, 2003, you can place a "security freeze" on your credit reports by sending written requests by certified mail to each of the credit re porting ag encies.
A security freeze prev ents the cred it reporting ag encies, in most instances, from releasing you r credit report or information in it without your prior express authorizatio n.
The cre dit reporting agency will provide you a unique personal identifier that you can use to temporarily lift the security freeze.
Otherwise, the freeze remains effective until you request that it be removed.
Credit reporting agencies c annot cha rge a fee for th ese services if you are a victim of identity theft an d submit a -7-
valid police report or DM V investigative report.
19 C .
Credit Rep orts Request a copy of your credit report from each credit reporting agency.
The credit reporting agency must give you a free copy of your credit report if you have been denied cre dit. 20 If you certify to the cr edit reporting agency in writing that you believe that your file contains inaccurate information due to fraud, t he credit reporti ng agency must give you a free copy of your credit rep ort. 21 In other circumstances, each credit reporti ng agency can c harge you $8.00 for your credit rep ort. 22 Check each credit report carefully when you receive it.
Look for accounts that you have not applied f or or opened; c harges that you have not incurred; inquiries that you have not initiated; and defaults and delinque ncies that you have not caus ed. Check your identifying information carefully ­ especially your name, add ress and S ocial Secu rity number.
The report will list all variations of your Social Security number and other identifying information re ported t o the credit reporting agency by creditors and other users of your credit reports.
Send each credit reporting agency a written request to re move all info rmation that a ppears in your credit report as a result of the theft of your person al identi fication and cre dit infor mation .
It may take some time to have all of this erroneous information removed fro m each of yo ur credit reports.
Ask each credit reporting agency to send you a copy of your corrected credit report.
When you receive your corrected credit reports, check to see that all of the erroneous information has been removed from each re port, and that each repo rt contains a s ecurity alert or a v ictim's statement, if you reques ted one.
It's a goo d idea to sen d a letter to each credit reporting agency e very two-three months explaining that you are the victim of credit id entity theft and asking that you be provided a free copy of your credit report.
This will enable you to c heck your credit reports for new erroneous information, a nd for previously-deleted erroneous i nformation that may have reappeared.
· Credit reporting agencies must block reporting of any information that a victim of identity theft
·
·
alleges appears in his or her credit report as a result of the crime of identity theft.
The victim must su bmit to th e credit reportin g agen cy a copy o f a valid police report or D MV investigative report filed under Penal Code section 530.6 (see pa ges 6, 19).
23 · Credit reporting agencies must delete from your credit repor t those inqu iries based o n credit requests that the agency verifies were initiated a s a result of ide ntity theft.
24 D .
Credit Card Issuers Call each of your credit card issu ers to report that you are the victim of credit identity theft.
Ask each credit card issuer to cancel your card a nd provide a replacement card with a new account number.
Ask that a password be required before a ny inquiries or changes ca n be made on the a ccount.
Immediately f ollow up each telephone call with a letter that confirms the conversation and the action the credit card issuer has agreed to take.
Send the letter by certified mail, return receipt requested, and keep a copy.
Ask each credit card issuer about t he status of your account.
Ask if the card issuer has received a change of address request, or a request for a dditional or replacement credit cards.
If you have not filed a change of address request or requested additional credit cards, instruct the card issuer not to honor these requests.
· Credit card issuers who receive a notice of change of the cardholder's billing address, and within 10 days also receive a request for additional credit cards, must verify the change of address before activating additional cards or issuing additional cards to the n ew address.
Also, card issuers must verify addresses on accepted credit card s olicitations or applications that differ from the address in the solicitation or application.25 A consumer's liability for unauthorized use of a credit card cannot be more than $50.26 The consumer must notify the credit card issuer promptly upon learning o f the unauthorized use .
Most creditors will waive (forgive) the $50 if the consu mer not ifies the credito r within two days after learning of the unauthorized use.
Also call (and then write) each c re dit card issuer or creditor that has opened a new account that you did not auth orize or app ly for.
These a ccounts probably will be listed in your credit reports, along with the cred itor's or issuer's add ress, and of ten, its customer service number.
Explain that you are the victim of credit identity theft and that you did not open the a ccount, an d ask each issuer and c reditor to close the account imme diately.
Some credit card issuers and creditors ma y ask you to sign an affidavit or to submit a copy of the police rep ort on the theft of your personal identification information.
Some issuers and creditors may accept the Federal Trade Commission's ID Theft Affidavit (see page 12).
Ask each issue r and credito r to inform ea ch credit reporting agency that the account was opened fraudulen tly and has be en closed a t your reques t. E .
Financial Institutions If your bank account inform ation or checks have been stolen, or if a fraudulent bank account has been opened using your identification information, i mme diately notify the bank and the check verification companies listed in the List of Res ources on page 16.
Do this both by telephon e and in writing.
· · Close your c hecking and savings accounts and open new acco unts with new acco unt numbers.
Report lost or stolen ATM a nd debit cards immed iately by calling the financial institution.
Then send a follow -up letter by certified mail.
It's important to act immediately because a thief with your car d and PIN can drain yo ur accoun t, and because your lia bility for loss depends on how quickly you re port that your card has been lost or stolen (described in note 2 7, page 17).
27 Ask the bank to use a new unique identifier for your accounts.
Request that a password be required for access to the new accounts.
Do not use your mother's maiden name as a unique identifier or a p assword, s ince this info rmation is available in public records.
Call the payees of any outstanding checks that you are not certain you wrote.
The payee is the person or business to whom you wrote the check.
Explain to each payee that you are the victim of identity theft and that you have closed your c hecking account for that reason.
Ask each payee to waive (forgive) any late payment or
·
·
·
-8-
returned c heck fee.
Then send each payee a replacement check d ra wn on your n ew account and stop payment on th e check that it replaces.
It's a good idea to enclose a note with each check explaining why you are sending a replacement check and reminding the payee that the payee has agreed to waive the late payment or returned check fee (if the payee has ag reed to do so).
· Get a new ATM card and PIN.
Do not use your old password or P IN.
obtai n a new accoun t number a nd PIN.
If you have trouble getting fraudulent telephone charges removed from your account, you can c ontact the California Public Utilities Commission (regard ing local service providers) and the Federal Communications Commission (regarding longdistance and cellular providers).
(See the List of Resources, pag e 15.)
G .
Driver's License/California ID Card The Ca lifornia driver's lice nse and C alifornia identification card are primary identification documents in Ca lifornia.
Therefore, they often are targets for identity thieves.
If you have lost your driver's license or California identification card, or if you suspect that someo ne may b e using your driv er's licens e or ID card number, immediately call your local Department of Motor Vehicles office for an a ppointment (listed under "State Government" in the white pages of t he telephone directory) or call the DMV's toll free fraud hotline num ber, (866) 6 58-5758 .
It is possible to obtain a new driver's license or ID card number under limited circumstan ces (describ ed in endn ote 28, page 17).
28 H .
Social Security number If you can prove that you are being disadvan taged bec ause som eone use d your So cial Security number, it is possible, in e xtreme cases, to obtain a new Social Sec urity number.
29 In order to obtai n a new So cial Security number, your situatio n must fit the Social Security Administration's criteria for issuing a second Social Security number.
See endnote 30 (page 18) for a general overview of these criteria.30 If you suspect that someone else is using your Social Security number for employment purposes, request a copy of your Social Security Earnings a nd Benefits statement.
(The Social Security Adminis tration now mails these s tatements a nnually to a ll eligible workers who are 25 and older.)
If the statement c onfirms this use of you r Social Se curity number, contact the Social Security Administration immediately.
(To order your statement, or to contact the Social Security Administration, see the List of Resources, pag e 15.)
A merchant may refuse to take your check on the advice of a check verification company (because the thief has written bad checks in your name).
The merchant w ill refer you to on e of the che ck verifi cation companies in the List of Resources on page 16.
Call the check verific ation comp any and ex plain the situation.
You can ask the che ck verification company to notify retailers using its database not t o accept checks from your o ld account.
Some banks w ill take the initiative to notify the c heck verification company it does busine ss with that your checks have been stolen or that a fraudulent bank account has been opened in your name.
· If you cannot open a checking account because of the t hief's activities, call Chex-Systems (see the List of Resources, pag e 16).
Be prepared for banks and credit grantors to ask you to fill out fraud affidavits to be notarized or signed un der penalty o f perjury.
Yo u can ask to have the fees for notarizing documents waived or reduce d. Ask ba nks and c redit granto rs if they w ill ac cept the Fe dera l Tra de C omm issio n's ID Theft Affidavit (see pa ge 12).
F .
Utilities Notify your gas, electric, water and trash utilities that you are the victim of identity theft, and alert them to the p ossibility that the th ief may try to establish accounts using your identification information .
Provide sim ilar notice to you r local, long distance and cellular telephone services.
Ask the utility and telephone services to use a new unique identifier for your accounts.
Do not use your mother's maid en name, sin ce this inform ation is available in public records.
If your long distance calling card or PIN has been stolen, cancel it and -9-
·
I.
Mail
standing.
For e xample: · The victim m ay notify a credito r that he or sh e is the victim of credit identity theft, and may provide the creditor appropriate documentation, but the cred itor continu es to report d ebts incurred by the thief to the credit reporting agencies; or The victim may provide a credit reporting agency appropriate documentation and request the credit re porting agency to remove i nforma tion from the victim's credit report that appears due to the th eft of the victim's pe rsonal iden tifi cation and credit inform ation, but the credit reporting agency does not remove the erroneous information from the victim's credit report.
If you suspect that an identity thief has stolen your mail or ha s filed a chan ge of addr ess reques t in your name, notify the Postal Inspector (see the List of Resources, pag e 15, under "U .S. Post Office").
J. Passport
If you have a passport, notify the passport office that the identity thief may apply for a new passp ort (see the List of Resources, page 15, under "U.S. Post Office").
K .
Erroneous Civil or Criminal J udgment The action s of an iden tity thief sometime s result in civil or criminal judgments being entered against the victim.
If you are a victim of identity t heft, and have had an erroneous civil or criminal judgment entered a gainst you, you should consult an attorney about vaca ting the judg ment.
A victim of identity theft whose identity was used by the th ief to commit a nother crim e can seek to have his or h er record cle ared und er certain circumstan ces.
If an iden tity thief has willfu lly obtained another pers on's personal identification information without that person's authorization, has used t hat information to c ommit a crime in a ddition to the crime of identity theft, and is convicted of that additional crime, the court records must reflect that the person whose ide ntity was falsely us ed to comm it the crime did not commit the crime.31 Effective Ja nuary 1, 200 1, a victim of ide ntity theft can petition a court for a determination of factual innocence (1) where the perpetrator of t he identity theft was arrested f or or convicted of a crime under the victim's identity or (2) where the victim's identity mistakenly has been associated with a record of criminal co nviction.
(Th is court proc edure is described at endno te 32, page 18.)
32 Once you have obtained such a court order, you can a pply to register with the California Attorn ey General's ID Theft Database (see page 12), if you wish.
L .
Uncoo perative Credito r or Cre dit Reporting Agency Occasionally, a victim of credit identity theft may encounter a creditor or credit reporting agency that unreas onably doe s not coop erate with the victim as the victim se eks to restore his or her cre dit -10-
·
Hopefully, the requirement that local law enforcem ent agenc ies must take police repo rts will make it easier for victims of identity theft to use police reports as one means of convincing an uncooperative creditor or credit reporting agency t hat the victim's i dentity has been stolen, and that the victim is not resp onsible for th e charges or credit information at issue.
Also, as described under the preceding heading, a victim whose identity has been used or associated with a crime can seek a j udicial determination of factual innocence of the crime, which may help whe n dealing with an unc ooperative credito r or cred it report ing age ncy. 33 The credit reporting laws also may offer some help to a victim faced with a n uncooperative credit or or credit rep orting agen cy: · A creditor who prov ides informa tion to a cred it reporting agency regarding its transactions a nd experiences with c onsumers is called a "furnisher" of information.
If a consumer notifies a furnisher that the c onsumer disputes the completeness or accuracy of information that the furnisher has provided to a credit reporti ng agency, the furnisher must include a notice that the information is disputed if it provides the informa tion to a credit re porting agenc y.34 A furnisher is prohibited from providing information to a credit reporting agency on a specific transaction if the furnisher knows, or should kn ow, that the information is incomplete or inaccurate.35 If the furnisher determines that reported information is incomplete or inaccurate,
·
it must promptly notify the credit reporting agency of its d etermination, a nd must provide the agency c orrections to make the information complete and accurate.
Thereafter, the furnisher cannot provide the credit reporting agency a ny of t he i nformati on that remains i ncomplete or inaccurate.36 To invoke these protections, the victim should send the furnisher a letter that clearly explains and documents why t he reported information is incomplete or inaccurate.
The letter should be sent to the address specified by the furnisher for this purpose.
If you are a victim o f credit identity th eft, and if you believe that a creditor or a credit reporting agency unreasona bly or carelessly continues to report erroneous information that is the result of the theft of your personal identification and credit information, consider seeking assistan ce from an attorney.
M .
Demands to Pay Debts Caused b y the Credit Identity Thief Since the victim of credit identity theft did not incur the de bts caused by the thief, the v ictim ordinarily will have a complete defense to the collector's demand for payment of those debts.
The victim ordina rily should no t pay any debt w hich is the result of t he theft.
If a debt collector demands that the victim p ay such a de bt, the victim sh ould explain why he or she does not owe the debt.
The victim should dispute the d ebt in a follow -up letter to the debt collector, which also should include the victim's e xplanation why h e or s he does not owe the debt and a copy of the victim's police or D MV report or ID Theft Affidavit (see p age 12).
37 The victim should send the letter by certified mail, return receipt requested, and keep a copy of the letter and enclosures.
In an effort to convince the debt collector that the victim did not incur the debt, the victim may decide to provide personal identification information to the collector.
For example, the debt collector may requ est th e vic tim's S ocia l Sec urity num ber, drive r's license number and addresses for the last several years.
Disclosing some or all of this information entails a loss of privacy, which the victim must balance against the possible benefit of c onvincing the debt collector that the victim did not incur the debt.
The victim should keep t he originals of a ny documents provide d to the debt collector.
-11-
The victim may find it helpful to c onsult an attorney if the vic tim receives d emands to pay debts caused by the identity thief.
The victim should consult an attorney if the victim receives notice o f a legal action based on d ebts incurred by the thief.
(See the List of Resource s, page 14.)
As a practical matter, the victim s hould contact the original creditor to e xplain why he or she does not owe t he debt, and as k the creditor to i nform the debt c ollector that the victim is not responsible for the debt.
The victim should send the creditor a follow-up letter, including the victim's police or DMV report or ID Theft Aff idavit, by certified mail, return receipt requested.
The victim s hould keep a copy of the letter and enclosures.
See Legal G uide DC -4, "Check list for Identity Theft Victims Who are Contacted by a Debt Collector," for steps a victim should take when the victim learns of the theft of his or her identity a nd when the victim is first contacted by a deb t collector.
(See the List of Resource s, page 13.)
Two new laws may help protect victims of identity theft from being pursued b y debt collectors and creditors for claims incurred by the identity thief.
Beginning January 1, 2002: · A creditor cannot sell a consumer's debt to an outside de bt collector if (1) that particula r debt is blocked in the c onsumer's credit report (see page 7), or (2) t he c onsumer has provided the creditor sufficient written information to s how that the consumer is not obligated on the claim because the consu mer is the victim o f identity theft.
38 A victim of id entity theft can file a lawsuit against a pe rson who purports to h ave a claim for money (o r an interest in p roperty) in connection with a transaction procured by identity theft.
If the claimant has already filed suit against t he victim, the victim can file a cross-comp laint against th e claimant.
T he victim must prove th at he or she is the victim of ide ntity theft as to the p articular claim .
If the victim proves this, the court can a ward the victim a broad range of relief as appropriate to the case, including a declaration, injunction, dismissal of the claimant's claim, damages, and costs and attorneys fees.39 In order to recover damages or attorneys fees,
·
the victim must have sent the claimant, at least 30 days before the victim files his or her action, a written notice explaining that the victim is a victim of identity th eft.
This no tice should include a c opy of the victim's police report or DMV investigative report.
If the victim files a cross complaint, this notice can be part of the cross comp laint.
40 This new law also provides for award of a substantial civil penalty against the claimant in limited circumstances.41 N .
Tools and References 1.
Copies of Applications
can result from identity theft, and refers victims to other government and private agencies for assistance.
T he FTC d oes not ha ve authority to bring criminal cases against perpetrators.
The FTC holds c omplaint information in a secure consumer fraud database, and may, when appropria te, share victim s' information w ith other law en forcemen t agencies a nd private entities.
(See the List of Resources, p age 13.)
3.
Attorney General's ID Theft D atabase
Beginning January 1, 2002, many kinds of lenders, creditors, financial institutions and utilities must provide you (or a law enforcement officer specified by you) copies of application forms and application information containing identifying information submitted in your name by the identity thief.
In some instances, you may be able to obtain a record of transactions or charges a ssociated w ith the loan o r account.
Your request must be accompanied by a polic e report issued under P enal Code section 530.6 and proper identifying inform ation.
Credit card issuers, most financial institutions and finance lenders must provide you copies without charge.42 2.
Federal Trade Commission ID Theft Affidavit and Database The Federal Trade Commission (FTC) has created an ID Theft Affidavit that victims can use to notify some companies where new accounts were op ened in the victim's name.
Using this form allows the victim to complete a single, standard f orm to submit to the companies that have agreed to accept it.
These companies will use the in formation th at the victim sub mits to i nvestigate and decide the victim's claim.
The Affidavit form a nd instructions for c ompleting and using it are available at ww w.consumer.go v/ idtheft/ affidavit, or through the FTC's Web site, www.ftc.gov.
The victim m ay decide to file a complain t with the FTC.
The FTC collects complaints about identity t heft from consumers who have b een victimized, provides them information to assist in resolving financial and other problems that -12-
The California Attorney General's office has created an Identity Theft D atabase to h elp victims of identity theft who have been wrongfully accused of, or associated with, crimes.43 Beginning September 1, 2001, if you have been charged with a crime committed by another pe rson using your stolen ide ntity, or if your identity has been mistakenly associated with a record of criminal conviction, you can apply to register your name with this database.
In order to apply to the database, you must first obtain a c ourt order verifying that you are the victim of identity theft (see page 10).
Once you r information has been c onfirmed, it is entered into the databa se and can be used to show oth ers that you w ere not actu ally responsible for the crime.
In addition, your information is s ubmitted to the Automated Criminal History System, identifying you as a victim of identity theft, and directing law enforcem ent and crim inal justice ag encies to contact the Attorney General's office for further information concerning your registration.
(See the List of Resources below under "California Attorney Ge neral's Office," page 13.)
4.
Reference s on Dealing W ith ID Theft
"Coping With Identity Theft: What to do When an Imposter S trikes" (Priva cy Rights Clearingh ouse); "Iden tity Theft: Wh at to do if it Happens to You" (California Public Interest Research Group a nd Privac y Rights Clearinghouse); "I D THEFT: When Bad Things Happen to Your Good Name" (Federal Trade Commission).
(See the List of Resources below.)
I V .
L IST OF R ESOURCES A .
Victim Advice and Assistance Privacy Rights Clearinghouse 3100 5th Avenue, Suite B San Diego, CA 92103 Tel: (619) 298-3396 FAX: (619) 298-5681 Email: prc@privacyrights.org Web: www .privacyrights.org Publicatio ns include "Coping with Identity Theft," "Identity Theft: What to do if it Happens to You" (co-authored by CalPIRG), "My Social Security number: How Secure is It?" and "How Private is My C redit Report? " Identity Theft Resource Center P.O. Box 26833 San Diego, CA 92196 Tel: (858) 693-7935 Email: voices 123@a tt.net Web: www.idtheftcenter.org Publications i nclude i nformation on prevention, financial and criminal identity theft, facts and statistics, contacting credit reporting agencies and starting local support groups.
California Public Interest Research G roup (CalPIRG) 3435 Wilshire Blvd., Suite 380 Los Angeles, CA 90010 Tel: (213)-251-3680 Email: watchdog@pirg.org Web: www .pirg.org/calpirg Publicatio ns: "Identity The ft: What to d o if it Happens to You" (co-authored by the Privacy Rights C learingho use), "Wh at to do to A void Becoming a V ictim of Identity Theft."
Federal Trade Commission 600 Pennsylvania Avenue N .W. Washington, DC 20580 Identity Theft Hotline: (877) 438-4338 Web: www.consum er.gov/idtheft www.ftc.gov Publications: "ID THEFT: When Bad Things Happen to Your Good Name;" Online Complain t Form; ID Th eft Affidavit -13-
California Department of Consumer Affairs Office of Privacy Protection 400 R Street, Suite 3000 Sacramento, CA 95814 Tel: (800) 952-5210 (916) 323-0637 (Sacramento area calls) F A X : (916) 323-8451 Email: priva cypr otection@dca.ca.gov We b: www.privacyprotection .ca.gov www.dca.ca.g ov Advice an d informatio n regardin g credit iden tity theft; referrals to other resources.
Department publications include Legal Guides DC-1 " What to do if You Receive a Demand of Payment from a Creditor or a Debt Collection Agency," DC-2 "Summary o f the Fair Debt Collection Practices Statutes," DC-3 "Debt Collectors' Wrongful C onduct: Some T ort Remedies for Debtors," DC-4 "Checklist for Identity T heft Vi ctims W ho are C ontacte d by a Debt Collector."
California Attorney General's Office Public In quiry U nit P.O. Box 944255 Sacramento, CA 94244-2550 (800) 952-5225, (916) 322-3360 www.ag.ca.gov/contact/index Genera l advice rega rding cred it identity theft.
California Attorney General's Office Identity Theft Registry P.O. Box 903417 Sacramento, CA 94203-4170 Attn: ID Theft Reg istry (888) 880-0240 (toll free) www.ag .ca.gov/idth eft California Department of Motor Vehicles P.O. Box 825389 MS# H217 Sacramento, CA 94232-3890 Attn: Drive r License Frau d Unit (866) 658-5758 (toll free) (916) 657- 7489 (out of state) DLFraud@dm v.ca.gov www.dmv.ca.gov For appointment: (800) 77 7-0133 or www.dmv.ca.go v
Local Police Department Look in the white pages of your telephone book under the "Government" listings.
Local County Bar Referral Service Referral to lo cal attorneys.
Lo ok in the wh ite pages of your telephone book under "[ _____ County] Bar Association" in the "Business" listings.
B .
Credit Reporting Agencies [The following add resses and telephone numbers are accurate as of January 2002, but may c hange in the future.]
Experian (formerly TRW) To report fraud: ( 888) EXPERIAN [(888) 397- 3742 ] (toll free number) Fax: (800) 301-7196 Write: Experian Consumer Fraud Assistance, P.O. Box 2002, Allen, TX 75013-0949 To request report : (888) EXPERIAN [(888) 397-3742 ]
-14-
30374-0241 To dispute information: Call numb er in credit report.
Write: E qu ifax, P. O. B ox 105873, A tlanta, GA 30384 To opt out of pre-app roved offers : (888) 567- 8688 (toll free) Write: Equifax Options, P.O. Box 740123, Atlanta, GA 30374 www.credit.equifa x.com Trans Union To report fraud: ( 800) 680-7289, FAX (714) 447-6034 Write: Trans Union Fraud Victim Assistance Division, P.O. Box 6790, Fullerton, CA 92634 To request report : ( 800) 888-4213.
Write: Trans Unio n, P.O. Box 1000, Chester, PA 19022 To dispute information: Write: Trans Union, P.O. Box 34012, Fullerton, CA 92831 To opt out of pre-app roved offers : ( 888) 567- 8688 (toll free).
Write: Trans Union, P.O. Box 97328, J ac kson, MS 39288-7328 www.tuc.com C .
Direct Marketing Association 1120 Avenue of the Americas New York, NY 10036-6700 Tel: (212) 768-7277 FAX: ( 212) 302-6714 We b: www.the-dma.org /consumers Mail Preference Service c/o Direct Marketing Association P.O. Box 9008 Farmingdale, NY 11735-9008 Telephone Preference Service c/o Direct Marketing Association
P.O. Box 9014 Farmingdale, NY 11735-9014 You may complete the appropriate forms online at www.the-dma.org/consumers.
You must pay $5.00 (charged to your credit card) for each online registration.
D .
Social Security Administration
passport applications.
P ostal inspectors are responsible for investigating these crimes.
You can locate your local postal inspection service office by looking in the " Post Office" listing under "U nited States Governm ent" in the wh ite pages of the telephone directory, or by visiting the Postal Service's web site at www.us ps.gov/we bsites/depa rt/inspect.
G .
Telephone Service Provider
To order your Social Security Earnings a nd Benefits sta tement: (800) 772 -1213 or w ww.ssa.g ov/mystatemen t.
Or visit your local Social Security office.
(The Social Security Administration now sends these statements automatically to eligible workers age 25 and older each year near their birthdays.)
To repor t that your Soc ial Security nu mber is being used by another person to obtain credit or for employment purposes, call the Social Security Administration's Fraud Hotline, (800) 269-0271.
To locate y our local S ocial Secu rity Administration office, call (800) 772-1213, use the Social Security Office Locator at www.ssa.gov/reach.htm, or see the "Social Security Administration" listing under "United States Government" in the white pages of the telephone directory.
E .
U.S. Secret Service The Secret Service has jurisdiction over financial fraud cases, but usually does not investigate individual cases unless the dollar amount is high, or the victim is one of many people victimized by the same perpetrator or a fraud ring.
See the "Secret Service" listing under "United States Government" in the white pages of the telephone directory, or visit t he website at www.treas.g ov/usss.
F .
U.S. Post Office The Po st Office ha s jurisdiction o ver stolen ma il, falsified change of address forms, and falsified -15-
Many white pages telephone directories provide information on identity thef t and steps to take if you becom e a victim.
Ch eck your loc al white pages to se e if this kind o f information is included.
For example , the SBC Pacific B ell white pag es includes information on identity theft in its Customer Guide .
Telephone service providers' websites also may have information on identity theft and prevention.
For e xample, see www.pacbell.com.
If another pers on has established telephone service in your name with your telephone servic e provider, call the provider' s fraud hotline number (often listed a s part of the d irectory's identity theft informa tion).
For exam ple, SBC Pacific Bell's fraud hotline numbers are (877) 202-4558 (English) and (888 ) 615-0743 (Span ish).
H .
California Public Utilities Commission a nd Federal Communications Commission The California Public Utilities Commission (CPU C) may be ab le to assist victims of identity theft who h ave been u nable to co nvince their local telephone service provider that telephone charges were in curred by the thief.
The CPUC may interced e on the victim 's behalf in appropriate cases, but do es not have regulatory authority in this area.
California Public Utilities Commission 505 Van Ness Avenue San Francisco, CA 94102 Tel: ( 800) 649-7570 www.cpuc.ca.gov
The Federal Communications Commission regulates interstate and international communications by radio, television, wire, satellite and cable.
The Commission can be reached a t: Federal Communications Commission Consumer Information Bureau 445 12th S treet, S.W. Room 5A863 Washington, DC 20554 Tel: (888) 225-5322 (toll free number) www.fcc.gov I. Check Verification Companies To report that your checks have been stolen or that bank accounts have been opened in your name with out your con sent: CheckRite ChexSystems Equifax (888) 276-0625 ext. 113 (800) 428-9623 ( 800) 437-5120
Consumer Affairs; and all copies are distributed free of c harge.
ENDNOTES 1.
"Identity-T heft Victims Struggle Again st Risi ng T ide of Abuse," San Francisco C hronicle, February 11, 2001.
2.
"Stealing People is W rong," The Economist, March 10, 2 001; Civil Code section 1786(e) (S tatutes 2001, chapter 3 54 (AB 655 (W right)).)
3 .
P e n a l C o d e section 530.5 (enacted by S tatutes 1997, chapter 768 (AB 156 (Murray)), amended by Statutes 1998, chapter 4 88 (SB 1374 (Leslie)), Statutes 2 000, chapter 631 (AB 1862 (Torlakson)), Statutes 2000, chapter 956 (AB 1897 (Davis)), Statutes 2001, chapter 478 (AB 245 (Wyland)), a nd S tatutes 2001, ch apter 493 (SB 12 5 (Alpert)) .
The full text of se c tion 530 .5 is reprodu ced belo w .
4.
C ivil Code section 1798.80 (Statutes 2000, chapter 1039 (A B 224 6 (Wa yne)).)
5.
C ivil Code section 1785.20.3 (Statute s 2001, chapter 354 (A B 655 (Wright)) .)
6.
" Are You a Target f or I dentity Theft?" Consumer Reports, Se ptember, 1997.
7.
Credit inq u iries that you did not initiate will normally be legitimate ­ such credit i nquiries are part of the normal credit granting and revie wing process.
Y ou should focus on inquiries that you do not recognize, and check to b e certain that they d i d not result in cre dit being exten ded to an identity thief.
8.
C ivil Code section 1725.
9.
C ivil Code section 1798.85 (Statutes 2001, chapter 720 (SB 168 (B owen)).)
10.
T he Privacy Act of 1974, S ection 7, Pub.L 9 3-579 (set out i n the Historical and Statutory Notes following 15 United States Code section 552a).
11.
"Shop Safely Online," Federal T rade Comm ission, 2001; Direct Marketing Association Action Line Reports " Is Your C redit Card Number Secure When Shopping Online?" (February, 1999), "Tips for Cybershoppin g" ( November, 1999), "Top 7 Tips for Smart C ybershopping" (November, 2 0 00).
National Processing Company (800) 526-5380 SCAN Telecheck (800) 262-7771 ( 800) 710-9898 ***** NOTICE: We attempt t o make our legal guides accurate as of the date of publication, but they are only guide lines and not def initive statements of the law.
Questions about the law's application to particular cases should be directed to a specialist.
Prepared by: John C .
Lamb, Lega l Services U nit March 2002 This docu ment is availab le at www.d ca.ca.gov .
This document may be c opied, if all of the following condition s are met: the m eaning of th e copied te xt is not changed; credit is given to the Department of -16-
12.
15 United S tates Code section 1681b(e).
To opt out of pre-ap p roved offers, call (888 ) 567-86 88 (toll free number).
T his n umber serves the three major credit reporting agencies.
(See List of Resources, page 14.)
13.
C ivil Code section 1748.12.
23.
C ivil Code section 1785.16(k ).
24.
C ivil Code section 1785.16.1 ( Statutes 2 001, chapter 3 54 (AB 655 (W right)).)
2 5 .
Civil Code sections 1747.06(a),(c).
2 6 .
12 C o d e o f F e d eral Regulations section 2 26.12(b).
14.
P enal Code section 530.5 creates the crime o f "identity theft," define d as the willful ob t aining of a consumer's personal i dentification information by another who uses that information for any unlawful purpose, i ncluding to obtain, or attempt t o obtain, credit, goods, services or medical i nformation in the consumer's name without t he consumer's consent.
T he full text of section 5 30.5 is rep rinted on p age 19.
The federal " The I dentity T heft and A ssumption Deterrence Act of 1998" prohibits t he knowing and unlawful transfer or use of personal identifying information, such as a Social Sec urity or driver's license number, w ith intent to violate a federal law o r a state felony law.
Vio lation of this law is pu n ishable by u p to 15 years in federal prison a nd a n unspecified fi ne. (18 United S t ates Code section 10 28.)
As req u ired by this Act, the Federal Trade Commission has established a centralized complaint and consumer education servic e for victims of ide n tity theft (see page 12).
15 .
Penal Code section 530.6(a) (Statutes 2000, chapter 956 (AB 1897 (Davis)).
16.
C ivil C ode section 1785.16(k) (Statutes 2001, chapter 3 54 (AB 655 (W right)).)
17.
C ivil Code section 1785.11 ( Statutes 2001, chapter 720 (SB 168 (B owen)).)
18.
C ivil Code section 1785.11.3(b) ( Statutes 2001, chapter 7 20 (SB 168 (B owen)).)
19.
C ivil Code sections 1785.11.2­1785.11.6 ( Statutes 2001, c hapter 72 0 (SB 1 68 (Bo w en)).)
20.
C ivil C ode section 1785.17(b).
In order to receive a free cop y of your cred it report, you m u st request it within 60 days after receiving the notice of denial.
21.
15 United States Code section 1681j(c).
(L i m i t e d to one free c opy in any 12 - month per iod.) 22.
C ivil Code section 1785.17(a)(1) .
27.
If you report the lost A TM o r debit card within t wo business da ys of discove ry, you can be held respo nsible for up t o $50 in losses, if an y have occu rred.
If you do not give n otice within t he t wo b usiness d ays, yo u can b e held responsible for up to $500 in l osses, provided that you report the lost card within 60 days of a statement showing an u nauthorized electronic fund transfer.
Y ou are liable fo r loss only to t he extent that g iving notice within the two d ays would ha ve avoide d the loss.
However, you can be held re sponsible f or a ll the money that the thief takes from your account if you wait more than 60 days after the statement and the loss could have been prevented if you h ad given n otice during the 6 0 days.
( 12 Code of Federal Regulations sections 205.6(b)(1),(2),(3).
S ee Civil Code sections 1783.301748.3 1.
Some debit card issuers may vo luntarily limit liability for unautho rized use to $ 50 per c ard.) 28.
If you discover t hat yo u have become the victim o f identity theft as a resu lt of driver's license or identity card theft, immediately contact your local D epartment of Motor Vehicles office for an appointment.
A t the time of the appointment, you must complete a statement describing the facts of the fraud, submit a copy of the police report (or a written statement explaining w hy you did not file a police report), and submit copies of canceled check, b ills or letters from businesses or banks proving the fraud.
Y ou also will need to prove your identity w ith a document that has not expired , such as a US or C an adian p assport, a resident alien card or a US military photo identity card.
You may also use a California d river's li cense or i dentity card, even if it has expired.
Contact yo ur local D MV o ffice for information on other acceptable d ocuments.
If yo u meet a ll of the requirements, D MV headquarters can issue yo u a new driver's license or i dentit y card.
("Identity Th e ft: Have you Becom e a Victim o f Identity Theft?" Fast F acts p ublication number FFDL 24 (2001) available at your l ocal DMV o ffice or a t www.dmv.ca.gov/pubs/brochures/fast_facts/ffdl24.)
-17-
29.
" When Someone Misuses Your N umber," SSA Publication No. 05-10064 (June, 2001).
See also "New Numb e rs for Do m estic Vio lence Victim s and Othe rs," SSA Pub lication No. 05-100 93 (June, 199 9).
T hese publication s are availab l e at www.ssa.go v /pubs.
3 0 .
To be assigned a new Social Security number, t he number holder m ust prov ide evidence to t he Social Security Administration showing that he or she is being disadvantage d by misuse of his or her Soc ial Security number, such as: ·Misuse of t he Social Security number t hat has caused the numb e r holder to be su bjected to nega tive econom ic or personal hardship; or, ·The number has been misused by another w ith criminal intent that has cau sed the num ber holder pro blems.
Generally, the evidence required is from one or more third parti es documenting actual Social Security number misuses, as well as evidence documenting that the individual is being d isadvantaged by the misuse.
For exam ple, the num ber holder m ight be asked to submit a letter or other documentation from one or more creditors clearly stating that someone else is using the numbe r holder's Socia l Security num ber to obtain cre d it, and a recen t letter denying the number holder credit.
The evidence must show t hat t he disadvantage is recent or ongoing (that is, the disadvantage has affected the individual within the past year or happened further in the past but continues).
The evidence can show t hat the Social Security number misuse occurred in the past, but the disadvanta ge must be recent.
Third party know ledge must includ e the b asis fo r the th ird par ty's knowledg e.
The num ber holder also must provid e evidence as is required for o btaining an origin al Social Sec urity number.
( Social Security Administr ation, P rogram Operations Manual System ("POM S"), RM 00205.001, 00205.25.)
31.
Penal C ode section 530.5(c) .
32.
P enal Code section 530.6(b) (Statutes 2000, chapter 956 (AB 1897 (Davis)).)
The court may hear and decide the petition based on written evidence such as a police re port, affidavits a nd other re liable information submitted by the parties.
I f the court finds -18-
that the petition is m eritorious an d that no rea s onable cause exists to believe that the victim committed the offense for which t he p erpetrator w as arrested or convicted , the court mu st find the victim factu a lly innocent o f the offense and issue an ord e r certifying this determination.
A c ourt that has issued a determination of factual i nnocence may vacate it a t any time if the victim's petition o r supportin g information is found to contain a ny material misrepresentation or fraud.
33.
P enal Code sections 5 30.6(a),(b) (Statutes 2000, chapter 956 (AB 189 7 (Davis)).
34.
15 United States Code section 1681s-2(a)(3).
35.
C ivil C ode section 1785.25(a).
36.
15 United States Code section 1681s-2(a)(2).
37.
If the deb t collector ha s reported the debt to a credit reporting agency, t he debt collector must inform t he credit reporting agency that t he debt i s disputed once the debt co llector receiv es the victim's written d i spute.
(15 USC § 1692e(8 ).
S ee 15 USC §§ 1682 s- 2(a)(2),(3 ).)
38.
C ivil Code section 1785.16.2 (Statutes 2001, chapter 3 54 (AB 655 (W right)).)
39.
C ivil Code sections 1798.92 ­ 1798.97 (Statutes 2001, chap ter 354 (AB 655 (W right)).)
S ee these sections for notice requirements and other im portant details.
40.
C ivil Code section 1798.93(c)(5).
41.
C ivil Code section 1798.93(c)(6).
42.
C ivil Code section 1748.95, Financial Code sections 40 02, 224 70, Pen al Code s ection 53 0.8 (Statutes 2001, chapter 493 (SB 125 (Alpert)).)
43.
Penal Code section 530.7 (S tatutes 2000, c hapter 631 ( AB 186 2) (Torlakson)).)
TEXT OF P ENA L CO DE SE CTIO NS 53 0.5-530 .8 530.5(a) Every person who wilfully obtains personal id entifying informa tion, as defined in subdivision (b ), of another person, and uses that information for any unlawful p urpose, inc l uding to obtain, o r attempt t o obtain, credit, goods, services or medical information in the n ame of the other pers on without the co nsent of that pe rson is guilty of a pu b lic offense, a nd upon conviction therefor, shall be punished either by im prisonment i n a county jail not t o exceed one year, a fine not t o exceed one thousand dollars ($1,000), or b oth that i mprisonm ent and fine, or b y imprisonment in the state p rison, a fine not t o exceed ten thousand dolla rs ($10,000), or both that imprisonment and fi ne. (b) "Person al identifying inform ation," as use d in this section, m eans the name, address, t elephone number, d river's license num ber, Socia l Security number, place of employment, employee identification number, m other's maide n name, de m and de posit account number, savings account number, or credit card number o f an individua l person.
(c) In any case in w hich a person willfu lly obtains personal identifying information of another person without t he authorization of t hat person, and uses that information to commit a crime in addition to a v io lation of subdivision (a), and is convicted of that crime, the court reco rds shall reflect tha t the person w hose identity was falsely used to comm it the crime did not comm i t the crime.
530.6(a) A person who has lear ned or rea s onably suspects that his or her personal identifying information has been u n lawfully used b y another, as d escribed in subdivision (a ) of Section 530.5, m ay initiate a law enforcement i nvestigation by contacting the local law enforcement agency t hat has j urisdiction over h is or her actual residence, w hich shall take a police report of the matter, provide the complainant w ith a copy of t hat report, and begin an investigation of the facts or, i f th e suspected crime w as committed in a different jurisdiction, refer the matter to the law enforcement agency where the suspected crim e was committed for an investigation of the facts.
(b) A person who reasonably believes that he or she is t he victim of identity t heft m ay petition a court for an expedited judicial deter mination of h is or her factual innoce nce, where th e perpetra tor of the iden tity theft was arrested for or convicted of a crime under the victim's i dentity, or where the vi ctim's i dentity has been mistakenly associated with a r ecord o f crim inal -19-
conviction.
Any judicial determination of f actual innocence made pursuant to this section may be heard and determined upon declarations, a ffidavits, police reports, or o ther material, re levant, and re liable information submitted by the parties.
W here the court determines that t he petiti on is m eritorious and that there is no reasonable cause to believe t hat t he petitioner committed the offense for which the perpetrator of t he identify theft was arre sted or co nvicted, the co urt shall find the petitioner factually innocent of that offense.
I f the petitioner is fo und factually inno cent, the cou rt shall issue an order certifying this determination.
The Judicial Council of C aliforn ia shall develop a f orm for use in issuing an o r der pursu ant to these pr ovisions.
A court issuing a determination of f actua l innocence pursuant t o th is section may at any ti me vacate that determination if the petition, or any in formation submitted in su pport of the petition, is found to contain any material m isrepresenta tion or fraud .
530.7(a) In order for a victim of identity t heft t o be included in th e data base established p u rsuant to subdivision (c), he or she shall submit t o the Department of Justice a court order obtained pursuant to any provision of law a full set of fingerprints, and any other inform ation presc ribed by the departm ent. (b) Upon receiving infor m ation pu rsuant to subdivision (a), the Dep a rtment of Ju stice shall verify the identity of the victim against a ny d rivers license or other identification record maintained by the Departm ent of Mo t or Vehicle s . (c) The Department of Justice shall establish and maintain a data base of i ndividuals who have been victims of i dentity t heft.
The department s hall provide a victim o f identity theft or h is o r her authorized representa tive access to th e data base in order to establish that the ind i vidual has be en a victim of id entity theft.
Access to th e data base shall be limited to criminal justice agencies, v ictims of identity theft, and individuals and agencies autho rized by the victims.
(d) The Department of Justice shall establish and maintain a toll free number to provide a ccess to information under subdivision (c). (e) This section shall be o perative September 1, 2001.
530.8 .
If a person discovers that an application in his o r her name for a loan, credit line or account, credit card, charge card, or utility service has been filed with any person b y an unautho rized pers on, or that an a ccount in his or her name has bee n opened with a ba nk, trust
company, savings association, credit union, or utility by an unauthorized person, then, upon presenting to t he person or entity w ith which the application was filed or the account was opened a copy of a police report prepared pursuant to Section 530.6 and identifying information in the categories of information that the unauthorized person u sed to complete the application or to open the account, the person sha ll be entitled to receive information related to the loan, credit line o r account, credit card, charge card, utility service, or acc oun t, inc lud ing a cop y of t he u nau tho rize d pe rso n's application or application information for, and a record of transactions or charges associated with , the loan, credit line or a ccount, cre dit card, cha rge card, utility service, or ac count.
Up on reque st by the perso n in whose na me the application w as filed or in w hose name the account was opened, t he person or entity w ith which the application was filed shall inform h im or her of the categories of identifying information that the unauthorized person used to complete the application or to open the account.
-20-
