[npshd.gif] Fredericksburg and Spotsylvania National Military Park [bluelin.gif]
This webpage (see below) contains information on the special park programs and other Civil War tours and lectures in the Fredericksburg area that are not park programs.
Many of these other programs are led by the park staff of historians.
A second section is for the regular park programs which vary depending upon the time of year.
From now until April 1 we are in the Winter Schedule.
If the activity occurs within the park, there is a $4 entrance fee for those over 16, unless otherwise noted.
Please purchase tickets ahead of time at one of the following locations: Chatham Manor The Fredericksburg Battlefield Visitor Center The Chancellorsville Visitor Center
Three local organizations sponsor Civil War programs on a regular basis.
All Rappahannock Valley Civil War Round Table programs, unless otherwise noted, are held at Uncle Sam's Restaurant in Central Park.
Dinner is at 7:00 and the meeting at 7:45.
The cost for dinner is $17, there is no charge for those who just come to the meeting and guests are always welcome.
For more information contact Mac Wyckoff at: mwyckoff@adelphia.net
The Friends of the Fredericksburg Area Battlefields (FoFAB) programs are free except for the bus tours.
For more information on their activities call Kevin Leahy at (540) 374-9223 or e-mail ranger_key@hotmail.com
The Friends of the Wilderness Battlefield programs are free to the public unless otherwise stated.
For a complete listing of their programs and to contact them, see their website.
SPECIAL EVENTS INCLUDE: [purdot.gif] December 12.
"Privation and Joy: Wartime Christmas at Chatham," 6:00-8:30 p.m.
The National Park Service invites the public to participate in a special program on Christmas during the Civil War in 1862.
Presentations will include Civil War soldier and civilian living history and will feature the appearance of a Civil War-era Santa Claus, based on Thomas Nast's 1860s representation.
The program will be held at Chatham, located in Stafford County, opposite the City of Fredericksburg.
The program will include a visit with Federal soldiers around a fire, who will not only tell of missing loved ones at home, but of coping with the disastrous defeat of the Battle of Fredericksburg fought just days earlier.
Inside of Chatham, a southern lady and a slave will tell of Christmas in 1862 from their perspectives, amid greenery and candles similar to way homes were decorated during the Civil War.
Visitors will then have the special treat of meeting with an 1862 Santa Claus, whose dress will be noticeably different from what is worn by Santa Claus today.
Santa Claus will be portrayed by Kevin Rawlings, the nation's foremost expert on Christmas during the Civil War.
Children of all ages will be invited to visit Santa Claus after he addresses each group.
After the presentations, visitors are welcomed to enjoy refreshments and an open house of Chatham with the chance to see some of the rooms not normally open to the public.
To reach Chatham from downtown Fredericksburg, travel east on Business Route 3 or William Street, and take the Chatham Bridge across the Rappahannock River.
At the first traffic light turn left from the left-most lane onto Route 218 or Chatham Heights Road.
Travel one block and turn left at the brown sign for Chatham.
For further information, please call one of the park visitor centers at 540-373-6122 or 540-786-2880.
In case of inclement weather and potential cancellations or the need for alternative parking arrangements, please call the weather closing information line at 540-654-5532.
[purdot.gif] December 13 and 14.
Anniversary of the Battle of Fredericksburg Re-enactment.
This event is held in the city, not in the park.
This is not a park program.
See below for the park programs.
Three battle scenarios, living history camps, period music and firing demonstrations For more information see battle re-enactment or call Eric Powell at (540) 710-1247.
[purdot.gif] December 14.
Anniversary of the Battle of Fredericksburg.
The National Park Service will sponsor an anniversary program at the Richard Kirkland Memorial in commemoration of the 141st anniversary of the Battle of Fredericksburg on Sunday, December 14, 2003, at 2:00 p.m. Matthew J. Kelly, an elected official on the Fredericksburg City Council and a member of the 28th Massachusetts, Company B, living history unit, will be the featured speaker.
The program will include color guards, Civil War period field music, the presentation of wreaths, and the playing of taps.
Among the organizations which will be participating in the ceremony are the 47th Virginia Infantry and the 28th Massachusetts Infantry Civil War living history units, the United Daughters of the Confederacy, the Ancient Order of Hibernians, the Sons of Confederate Veterans, the Order of the Southern Gray, the 18th Massachusetts Infantry Historical Preservation Society, the Military Order of the Stars and Bars, and the Sons of Union Veterans.
Also, a guided tour following the route of the Federal Irish Brigade will begin at noon at the city dock, on the south end of Sophia Street in downtown Fredericksburg.
Historian Frank O'Reilly will lead this tour, which will end at the Kirkland Memorial just prior to the 2:00 p.m. ceremony.
In the event of inclement weather, the program will be held in the Fredericksburg Battlefield Visitor Center, 1013 Lafayette Boulevard.
For additional information, please call 540-373-6122 or 540-373-6124.
[purdot.gif] January 12.
Terry Thoman speaking on "Researching a Civil War Artifact."
Rappahannock Valley Civil War Round Table program.
Dinner at 7:00 with meeting at 7:45.
For more information contact Mac Wyckoff at: mwyckoff@adelphia.net
[purdot.gif] February 9.
Tony O'Connor speaking on "The Assassination of Abraham Lilncoln."
Rappahannock Valley Civil War Round Table program.
Dinner at 7:00 with meeting at 7:45.
For more information contact Mac Wyckoff at: mwyckoff@adelphia.net
[purdot.gif] March 8.
Dr. Betsy Estilow speaking on Women in the Civil War.
Rappahannock Valley Civil War Round Table program.
Dinner at 7:00 with meeting at 7:45.
For more information contact Mac Wyckoff at: mwyckoff@adelphia.net
[purdot.gif] April 12.
Dr. Steven Cushman speaking on "Thoughts on the Battle of the Wilderness."
Rappahannock Valley Civil War Round Table program.
Dinner at 7:00 with meeting at 7:45.
For more information contact Mac Wyckoff at: mwyckoff@adelphia.net
[purdot.gif] April 30.
Friends of Wilderness Battlefield annual dinner with guest speaker, specifics to be announced at a later date.
[purdot.gif] May 1.
Central Virginia Battlefields Trust annual meeting, afternoon conference with speakers on the Battle of the Wilderness, annual dinner with tentative guest speaker Gordon Rhea, specifics to be announced at a later date.
[purdot.gif] May 1.
Friends of Wilderness Battlefield anniversary activities in conjunction with the National Park Service, specifics to be announced at a later date.
[purdot.gif] May 2.
Central Virginia Battlefields Trust annual meeting, tentative bus tour of sites preserved by CVBT, specifics to be announced at a later date.
[purdot.gif] May 2.
Friends of Wilderness Battlefield anniversary activities in conjunction with the National Park Service, specifics to be announced at a later date.
[purdot.gif] May 7-9.
Battle of Spotsylvania Court House anniversary reenactment held at Belvedere Plantation, specifics to be announced at a later date on the website Spotsylvania County Tourism Department.
[purdot.gif] May 15-16 2004.
Battle of Spotsylvania Court House 140th Anniversary weekend, Living History tours and commemorative ceremony, National Park Service, specifics to be announced at a later date.
[bluelin.gif]
Go To
Table Of Contents For The Park Website
Or To The Individual Sections Of The Website
Visiting The Park | The Battles | Tours and Lectures | Civil War Research | What's New | Miscellaneous
Return the the NPS Homepage Created by Mac Wyckoff Technical Advisor T.E. Dickinson Last updated 12/09/03 Fredericksburg and Spotsylvania National Military Park
http://www.nps.gov/frsp/special.htm
