[final1header.gif] The Flag Banner History of the Stars and Stripes: The American flag is the result of a resolution adopted by the Second Continental Congress at Philadelphia on June 14, 1777.
That resolution stated: "Resolved, that the flag of the United States be thirteen stripes, alternate red and white; that the union be thirteen stars, white in a blue field representing a new constellation.".
The Betsy Ross Flag There were no specific instructions as to how the stars and stripes were to be arranged, nor how many points there should be on the stars.
It wasn't until the early 1790's that the "Betsy Ross Flag" became the popular design.
The Executive order by President Taft dated June 24, 1912 established proportions of the flag and provided for the arrangement of the stars in six horizontal rows of eight each.
The stars were to be five pointed and a single point of each star pointed upward.
To learn more about Betsy Ross, click here.
Of course the thirteen stars and stripes of the original flags represented the original 13 colonies.
They are Delaware, Pennsylvania, New Jersey, Georgia, Connecticut, Massachusetts, Maryland, South Carolina, New Hampshire, Virginia, New York, North Carolina and Rhode Island.
When two new States (Kentucky and Vermont) were admitted to the Union a new resolution was adopted to expand the flag to 15 stars and 15 stripes.
This flag was the official flag of our county from 1795 to 1818.
You can imagine how big the flag would become if we had continued to add a star and stripe every time there was a new Sate!
50 Star Flag Captain Samuel Reid of the U.S. Navy suggested that maybe we should keep the number of stripes at thirteen to represent the original colonies and add one star for each new State.
In 1918 President Monroe signed a bill to make the suggestion law.
By 1960 we had a fifty star flag and on July 4, 1960 the flag was newest flag was raised at the Fort McHenry National Monument in Baltimore, MD.
Fort McHenry
Located in Baltimore, Maryland, Fort McHenry overlooks the entrance to Baltimore harbor.
It is here that Americans defended the city against British naval attack in 1814.
It was during this battle that Francis Scott Key began drafting "The Star-Spangled Banner".
He was inspired on seeing the flag still flying after a day and night of bombardment and began to write on the back of an envelope.
The song was soon printed on a handbill and was soon re-printed in many newspapers, magazines, and books.
It was a popular song evoking strong emotions of courage and patriotism.
President Herbert Hoover signed Public Law 823 on March 3, 1931, making "The Star-Spangled Banner" the national anthem for the United States.
Fort McHenry, Baltimore, Maryland Today, Fort McHenry is a national monument and historic shrine consisting of 43 acres managed by the National Park Service.
The flag is flown over the fort twenty-four hours a day.
You can visit the fort on the internet by clicking here.
Flag Laws and Regulations
Congress passed a joint resolution June 22, 1942 which was amended on December 22, 1942.
This resolution became Public Law 829 and stated exacting rules for use and display of the flag..
The laws relating to the flag of the United States of America are found in detail in the U.S. Code.
Title 4, Chapter 1 pertains to the flag and seal, seat of Government and the States.
The laws have, over the years, been supplemented by Executive Orders and Presidential Proclamations.
Coloring Pages (click,print,color)
"Betsy Ross Flag"
50 Star Flag
U. S. Map
Puzzle: Solve Slide Puzzle
Here is a partial list of some of the rules.
How many did you know? Flag Displayed from Building
*
The flag is usually displayed from sunrise to sunset on buildings and on flagpoles in the open.
It should be raised briskly and lowered ceremoniously.
The flag may be displayed 24 hours a day if properly illuminated during the hours of darkness.
It should not be displayed in bad weather unless you have an all weather flag.
The flag should be displayed during school days in or near every schoolhouse and public institution.
No other flag or pennant should be placed above or to the right of the U.S. flag.
The flag should never be displayed upside down except as a signal of extreme danger.
The flag should never be used as a covering for a ceiling.
* A flag pin should be worn on the left lapel near the heart.
*
The flag should never be used as wearing apparel, bedding, or drapery.
* No disrespect should be shown to the Flag of the United States of America.
*
When displayed from a car, the flagstaff should be fixed firmly to the vehicle on the right side.
It should not be draped over the hood, top sides or back of the car.
A number of rules regulate the display of the flag at various public ceremonies and its display when mixed with state and city flags and in churches.
Laws dealing with proper respect for the American flag are supplemented in most of the U.S. by laws prohibiting the use of the flag for advertising purposes.
The armed services have detailed regulations for military and naval uses of the flag.
Flags at the United States Capitol
U.S. Flag at east and west front of Capitol No record has been found for the first date the flag was flown over the east and west fronts of the Capitol.
Photos taken in the 1850's show flags flying over both the House and Senate wings and the central east and west fronts.
During World War I the custom of flying the flag 24 hours a day was started in response to requests from all over the country.
The flags flown on the east and west front are 8 x 12 feet and are replaced as they become worn and unfit for further use.
Further Reading
The study of the history and symbolism of flags is known as Vexillology from the Latin word, Vexillum which means a square flag or banner.
The Library of Congress prepared the following list for use by students interested in learning more abut the flag of the United States.
These publications may be found in school and public libraries.
* Behrens, June.
A New Flag for a New Country: The First National Flag; A Play.
Chicago: Childrens Press, 1975.
* Crouthers, David.
Flags of American History.
Maplewood, NJ: Hammond, 1978.
* Fradin, Dennis B.
The Flag of the United States.
Chicago: Childrens Press, 1988.
* Key, Francis Scott.
The Star Spangled Banner.
Garden City, NY: Doubleday, 1973.
* Quaife, Milo Milton.
The History of the United States Flag, From the Revolution to the Present, Including a Guide to Its Use and Display.
New York: Harper, 1961.
* Rivers, Anderson Man.
History of the American Flag.
New York: Vantage Press, 1967.
* Weil, Ann.
Betsy Ross, Girl of Old Philadelphia.
New York: Aladdin Books, 1983.
* Williams, Earl P. What You Should Know About the American Flag.
Lanham, MD: Historical Press, 1987.
