News From Congressman Dennis Cardoza 18th Congressional District of California Cardoza Continues Fight For California Ratepayers FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE January 9, 2003 CONTACT: JENNIFER WALSH (202) 225-6131 WASHINGTON Congressman Dennis Cardoza (D-Atwater) today stood strong with the California Congressional Delegation in calling on Patrick Wood, III, Chairman of the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission, to substantially increase the refund amount proposed on December 12, 2002, by Administrative Law Judge Bruce L. Birchman in the California Refund Case (EL00-95-045). (see letter attached below)
"
The gouging has got to stop.
I have been involved in this fight from day one and Californians have waited entirely too long to be repaid for the illegal actions of the companies responsible for the energy crisis in California," stated Cardoza in response to Birchmans proposed refund
.
As a Member of the California Legislature, Cardoza led the State Assembly in testifying before FERC regarding the manipulation of Californias energy market and served as one of the Assemblys chief advocates for California ratepayers.
January 9, 2003
The Honorable Patrick Wood, III, Chairman
Federal Energy Regulatory Commission
888 First Street, NE
Washington, D.C. 20426
Dear Chairman Wood,
We write to urge you to increase substantially the refund amount which was proposed by FERC Administrative Law Judge Bruce L. Birchman in the California refund case (EL00-95-045) on December 12, 2002.
Judge Birchman found that suppliers overcharged California power purchasers by $1.8 billion during the 2000-2001 energy crisis.
The judge also reported that California power buyers owe $3 billion to suppliers, so if the Commission approves Judge Birchmans proposed findings, Californians will owe $1.2 billion.
In our view, given the manipulation of energy supplies and prices in the West, it is unacceptable for the Commission to approve findings that will leave Californians in debt to the energy suppliers that gouged them.
At the very least, Judge Birchmans proposed findings are incomplete because they do not reflect consideration of the full scale of corruption in the California energy market.
The judge was constrained by the instructions the Commission provided when it initiated the refund proceedings on July 25, 2001.
The Commissions instructions failed to allow the consideration of information that was discovered after the instructions were handed down.
Since July 2001, weve learned (and we continue to learn) a great deal about the malfeasance that influenced the price of energy in California and the West.
If this information had been a factor in Judge Birchmans findings, it would have led to a higher proposed refund.
Specific allegations and admissions of market manipulation include, among others: * May 6, 2002 -
The release of internal Enron documents, describing how the company manipulated the California electricity market to increase prices artificially.
* September 17, 2002 - The release of a California Public Utilities Commission study indicating five major generators withheld power, causing rolling blackouts in California.
* September 23, 2002 - Administrative Law Judge Curtis Wagners finding that El Paso Corp. withheld natural gas capacity during the California energy crisis.
* September 24, 2002 - The Securities and Exchange Commission fine of Dynegy for $3 million for illegal round-trip trades and other illegal activities.
* October 17, 2002 -
The guilty plea of former Enron energy trader Timothy Belden on wire fraud charges in connection with his actions to manipulate prices in the California electricity market.
* November 18, 2002 - The testimony of Michelle Markey, former director of energy research at Gas Daily before a California State Senate committee, stating that energy companies made false submissions about the price they purchased and sold gas for.
* December 3, 2002 - The indictment of a former El Paso Corporation gas trader on charges that he fabricated natural gas transactions and reported them to a price index publisher.
* January 6, 2003 - The release of a report from the California Independent System Operator, identifying companies that followed the deceptive practices described in the Enron memos.
These allegations and admissions, particularly the manipulation of natural gas price indices, should have been part of the record and the basis for Judge Birchmans proposed findings.
They were not.
In determining refunds, Judge Birchman estimated the fair price of electricity in large part on the cost of natural gas, which is used to fuel many power plants.
In so doing, he relied on industry- compiled indices.
The manipulation of these indices described above creates serious doubts about the accuracy of Judge Birchmans proposed findings.
We also think that Judge Birchmans proposed findings unfairly exclude the overcharges suffered by the California Department of Water Resources.
Since retail consumers in California ultimately pay these overcharges, its irrelevant which agency or utility served as the purchaser and distributor of power.
Consumers should be made whole by the Commissions decision.
Finally, were concerned that Judge Birchmans proposed findings rely heavily upon data provided by energy suppliersthe very suppliers who have been accused of and in some cases admitted to wrongdoing in the California energy market.
Their submissions are tainted by their actions.
Even if there isnt an alternative source for the data, the Commission should consider the information with a grain of salt.
Again, we urge the Commission in the strongest way possible to increase substantially the refund recommendation before it and we ask for a timely response to our call for this policy direction.
Thank you for your attention.
Sincerely,
Members of Congress
Anna Eshoo Brad Sherman
Dennis Cardoza Mike Thompson
Henry Waxman Lynn Woolsey
Xavier Becerra Nancy Pelosi
Mike Honda Howard Berman
Robert Matsui Jane Harman
Adam Schiff Diane Watson
Joe Baca George Miller
Zoe Lofgren Tom Lantos
Lois Capps Sam Farr
Maxine Waters Lucille Roybal-Allard
Cal Dooley Susan Davis
Bob Filner Ellen Tauscher
Grace Napolitano Barabara Lee
Hilda Solis Juanita Millender-McDonald
Loretta Sanchez Linda Sanchez
Pete Stark
###
Next Previous Press Release Press Release List Press Release
