Washington State Department of Transportation WSDOT News Site Index Contact WSDOT WSDOT Home Traffic 
Needles are flat, up to just over an inch long, dull green above, striped below with stomata; needles end abruptly to a fine point, arranged in 2 rows in flat sprays.
Pollen is released from inconspicuous male cones (bearing a stalked cluster of 4-8 stamens) from a male tree to a female tree's cones where the seed ripens in two seasons in September.
The yew is a conifer but it produces a single bony seed almost completely surrounded by a bright red, fleshy cup (aril) that looks like a large red huckleberry with a hole in the end (poisonous).
Since the seed is not completely enclosed by the red aril the tree is classified as a conifer or gymnosperm (gymno=naked, sperm=seed).
Yew Bark Habitat
Moist mature forest at low to middle elevations often with Douglas-fir and western hemlock in productive old-growth forests as a small understorey tree.
Grows from sea-level to near 5,000' in Cascades and mountains of northeast Washington.
Although very widespread as scattered individuals its optimum range is west of the Cascades.
Use
The hard wood is ideal for carving and takes on a high polish.
Many implements were made from yew wood, including bows, wedges, clubs, paddles, digging sticks, adze handles, harpoon shafts, spears, mat-sewing needles, awls, dip-net frames, knives, dishes, spoons, boxes, dowels and pegs, drum frames, snowshoe frames, canoe-spreaders, bark scrapers, fire tongs and combs.
The needles are chewed and put onto wounds to promote healing.
Peeled bark is made into a tea for the lungs and for internal pains.
Western yew seeds are poisonous and humans should avoid the fleshy 'berries', although a wide variety of birds consume them and disperse the seeds
Notes
A new, potent and apparently very promising anti-cancer drug, taxol, has been identified in the bark and other parts of this tree.
It is being tested against a variety of types of cancer, including ovarian, breast and kidney cancers.
There are, however, concerns that the slow-growing western yew may be endangered by overharvesting of this tree for this purpose.
[Hitchcock 
Contact for this page: Sandie Turner (TurnerS@wsdot.wa.gov)
[Environmental Services] [Ethnobotany Home]
[spacer.gif] Copyright WSDOT © 2001 Traffic 
