Link to DiscoveringMontana.com Return to Governor's Homepage TEXT ONLY About the Governor Lt. Governor Goals 
News Release
For immediate release: January 9, 2001 Contact: Jim Duncan Inaugural Ball Publicity (406) 657-4643
"Blazing New Trails"
Montana Governor's 2001 Inaugural Ball
Billings, MT - Exciting plans are taking shape for the Montana Governor's 2001 Inaugural Ball scheduled for February 10, 2001 in Billings, Montana.
Governor Judy Martz, Lieutenant Governor Karl Ohs, elected officials, and other dignitaries will join Montanans in Billings for this celebration which occurs only once every four years.
"We're are really looking forward to celebrating with Montanans as we begin our journey to Blaze New Trails for this great state," said newly elected Governor Judy Martz.
"The Inaugural Ball is a way for people from across the state to come together with elected officials from both parties and demonstrate that we are united in our efforts."
The Ball is once again being held in Billings because there are facilities in one general location that have the capacity to accommodate a crowd that could exceed five thousand and because it was so well received four years ago when Governor Racicot held the event in Billings for the first time in history.
Festivities begin at 7:30 p.m. at the Holiday Inn Grand Montana and the neighboring Billings Hotel and Convention Center.
Governor Martz, Lieutenant Governor Ohs, and other elected officials will make appearances at six Ball venues in the two hotels.
Guests will enjoy light hors d'oeuvres and dancing to some of Montana's favorite bands, which will play simultaneously in different areas of the hotel complexes.
Rob Quist and The Great Northern from Kalispell will play their unique blend of music for dancing and entertainment.
The 15-piece Spirit of Butte Swing Band will have guests on their feet with the sounds of big band music.
The Andy Larson Band from Butte will play classic and current rock and roll hits.
The Bucky Beaver Ground Grippers from Billings will feature popular country music and other favorites for dancing.
Finally, the Yellowstone Brass Quintet from Billings will perform in the atrium of the Holiday Inn.
The cost to attend is only $15.00 per person, which includes entrance to all venues.
Ball patrons will be able to mingle throughout the complex.
The Hibernian Bagpipe band from Butte and Anaconda will lead the entourage of dignitaries from ballroom to ballroom.
For more information and to purchase tickets by phone call toll-free (Montana only) 1-866-866-1234.
Outside Montana call 1-406-533-0323.
To order tickets by mail send $15 per ticket and a self addressed stamped return envelope to Inaugural Ball, 2001 P.O. Box 1596, Helena Montana, 59624.
Ball proceeds after expenses will benefit youth programs of Montana's Promise.
-END-
[USEMAP:footer-gov.gif]
