Ron Roberts - Supervisor, Fourth District [topheaderfiller.jpg] [sealheader.jpg]
The vast majority of these commuters travel by themselves in a car.
It is estimated that only two percent of those traveling to and from work use mass transit.
Fortunately, San Diego has some mass transit options - like our Trolley, the Coaster, and our bus system.
The trick is getting San Diego County residents who might not use or even think of these options to give them a try.
That is why the San Diego Regional Chamber of Commerce has worked with State Senator Dave Kelley to develop legislation that provides a financial incentive in the form of tax credits for employers and employees to encourage use of mass transit.
The recommended actions ask the Board to support Senate Bill 1754.
Mass transit is by no means the only solution to traffic in San Diego.
Furthermore, it will not work for everyone.
The fact is that many San Diegans will continue to rely on their cars and that increased road capacity must be a major part of any long-term plan to alleviate traffic congestion.
However, mass transit certainly can be part of the solution.
Recommendations: SUPERVISOR RON ROBERTS: Direct the Chief Administrative Officer to do the following: 1.
Direct the County's Sacramento representative to convey the Board's support for Senate Bill 1754 to all appropriate State legislative members and committees.
2.
Examine the feasibility of providing County pool cars for County employees who use mass transit to commute to and from work to access in case of emergency.
Examine the feasibility of establishing incentive programs for companies within San Diego County to offer pool cars to their employees who use mass transit to commute to and from work.
Fiscal Impact: There is no fiscal impact associated with this action.
BACKGROUND While finding solutions to our growing traffic problem presents a complex challenge, figuring out where this problem comes from is not very difficult.
Every day in San Diego County, more than 1.1 million people travel to and from work.* The vast majority of these commuters travel by themselves in a car.
It is estimated that only 2 percent of residents in the San Diego region use mass transit to get to and from work.
Fortunately, San Diego has some mass transit options - like our Trolley, the Coaster, and our bus system.
The trick is getting San Diego County residents who might not use or even think of these options to give them a try.
That is why the San Diego Regional Chamber of Commerce has been working diligently with State Senator Dave Kelley to develop incentives to use mass transit in San Diego County.
Senate Bill 1754, authored by Senator Kelley and supported by the Chamber, would create a five-year pilot project to provide incentives in the form of tax credits for employers and employees to use mass transit in San Diego County.
Specifically, AB 1754 would allow a tax credit for an employer in redevelopment areas and areas of high employment density for 40 percent of the amount sold or incurred for providing subsidized public transit passes to an employee.
For employees, this measure would allow for a tax credit of up to 40 percent of the transit pass cost for using any of a variety of transit programs, depending on the number of days they use public transit.
The idea is to give a bigger incentive for more frequent ridership.
An employee will receive a credit of 20 percent of the transit pass cost if they use mass transit at least 40 days per year.
If an employee uses mass transit at least 80 days per year, they will receive a 40 percent tax credit.
The recommended actions ask the Board to support Senate Bill 1754.
In order to further encourage and facilitate County employees' use of mass transit, the Chief Administrative Officer will be directed to examine the feasibility of providing County pool cars that can be used in case of emergency by County employees who commute via mass transit.
The Chief Administrative Officer will also be directed to examine the feasibility of establishing incentive programs for companies within the County to offer pool cars to their employees who use mass transit.
In developing this legislation, the San Diego Chamber of Commerce and Senator Kelley have found that many people simply do not think of mass transit.
In addition, many people never try commuting via mass transit because they have simply never been presented with enough of an incentive to break the habit of using their car.
It is hoped that a well-publicized financial incentive in the form of a tax credit will provide sufficient encouragement for some San Diego County residents to try mass transit.
Additionally, for some who might be willing and able to use mass transit, one of the reasons for not doing so is concern about being able to leave the job site during the workday to attend meetings or in case of emergency.
For example, let's say a working mom with two children in school lives in Carlsbad and works in Sorrento Valley is willing to try the Coaster to get to and from work in order to avoid the I-5 commute.
If an emergency were to happen and she needed to get to her children during the day when no Coasters are running, she would have to have another option.
In such cases, a car provides more flexibility than mass transit.
That is why an essential part of this pilot program is encouraging employers to provide pool cars for employees to use while at the office, so that they have a range of options in case of emergency or meetings outside the office.
Mass transit is by no means the only solution to traffic in San Diego.
Furthermore, it will not work for everyone.
The fact is that many San Diegans will continue to rely on their cars and that increased road capacity must be a major part of any long-term plan to alleviate traffic congestion.
However, mass transit certainly can be part of the solution.
By providing people with a financial incentive to get out of their cars and give mass transit a try, we may be able to have a favorable impact on traffic and show some San Diego County residents a workable alternative to daily gridlock.
By providing pool cars to employees who use mass transit, we can make it that much more attractive for those who want to give public transportation a try, but are concerned about getting stranded in case of an emergency.
I urge your support.
RON ROBERTS Supervisor, Fourth District
* Statistics Source: San Diego Association of Governments
District 4 Staff Media Center Policy Initiatives Special Projects Meeting Webcast Meeting Agenda District 4 Map Contact Us En Espanol [bb-blank2.jpg] [bb-blank3.jpg]
