Chapter III Components of Florida's Commercial Intracoastal and Navigable Waterway System Florida has the longest coastline of all the states excepting Alaska.
The coastline is about 1,350 miles long, but, including all indentations and islands, it measures 8,426 miles.
The Atlantic Coast has few such indentations.
There is an outer arc of sandy barrier islands, many of which have been developed as tourist resorts.
Behind the beaches lie long, narrow saltwater lagoons.
The longest such lagoon is the Indian River near Cape Canaveral; it is sheltered from the ocean by the offshore barrier islands and forms part of the Atlantic Intracoastal Waterway.
The Gulf Coast, or western coastline of the peninsula, is deeply indented.
Mangrove swamps and ecologically sensitive areas abound; particularly from Naples, south.
A number of sandy barrier islands extend from Fort Myers to Tarpon Springs.
The islands reappear farther north, just west of Apalachee Bay, and they continue westward to the Alabama state line.
Behind them lie extensive stretches of swamp and marsh.
The Tampa Bay region forms the best commercially navigable harbor on the Gulf Coast as evidenced by the three major seaports of Tampa, Manatee, and St. Petersburg being located on this bay.
It is protected from the open waters of the Gulf of Mexico by a long line of offshore sand bars and islands.
Other Gulf Coast harbors similarly protected behind the barrier islands include Pensacola Bay, Apalachicola Bay, Saint Joseph's Bay, West Bay, and Escambia Bay.
Florida's navigable waterway system for commercial purposes can easily be categorized by three major components: 1) the Atlantic Intracoastal Waterway inshore system, 2) The Gulf Intracoastal Waterway inshore and offshore system, and 3) the navigable portions of the State's inland river systems.
Given the State of Florida's extensive shoreline, there are numerous points of ingress and egress used by recreational boaters and fishermen, but for commercial navigable purposes, the system in use today is relatively easy to identify.
From the western panhandle to the eastern Atlantic shore, the following six major navigable waterways comprise the core of Florida's present day commercial navigable inland waterway systems.
3-1
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
The Atlantic Intracoastal Waterway Inshore System; The Gulf Intracoastal Waterway Inshore and Offshore System; The Apalachicola-ChattahoocheeFlint River System; The Okeechobee Waterway System; The Miami River; The St. Johns River System;
Hathaway Bridge components being loaded to barge for shipment to job site.
South Dock - Port of Panama City, Fl. March 2003
3-2
The Atlantic Intracoastal Waterway Inshore System(AIWW) Originally known as the "Florida Coastline Canal" and initially constructed by a private company known as the Florida Coast Line Canal and Transportation Company in 1881, the waterway connects the Saint Johns River, Matanzas River and Indian Rivers through Lake Worth with the waters of Biscayne Bay.
The original draft design was 3 feet mean low water and 25 feet wide.
However in 1889 the Florida Legislature, through Chapter 3995 Laws of Florida, required canals constructed by the Company to be not less than 50 feet wide and not less than 5 feet deep at mean low water for the entire distance of the project.
Approximately 1 million acres of public lands were granted by the State of Florida to the Company to aid in completing the requirements for the full length of the Canal.
The total cost of the Canal through 1914 was estimated to be $3.5 million dollars.
Problems with shoaling and continuing maintenance caused the Florida Coast Line Canal and Transportation Company to go bankrupt in 1923.
Public outcry for public acquisition and responsibility for its continued maintenance and upkeep prompted Congress in 1920 to pass the River and Harbors Act requiring the U.S. Army to investigate the economics and feasibility of assuming public federal ownership of the Canal.
Six years later, a report from the Secretary of War supported the economic feasibility of maintaining the waterway, conditioned on the lands and resources associated with it being deeded free of charge to the United States Government and that suitable spoil disposal locations must be identified and provided by local interests in order for the Federal Government to assume maintenance responsibilities.
Exhibit 3-1
3-3
The Atlantic Intracoastal Waterway Inshore System from Nassau County to its terminus in Dade County traverses a distance of 365 nautical miles; including tributaries of the system (some navigable, some not) an additional 340 miles for a total of 715 miles (Exhibit 3-1).
The Florida portion of the total system, which is federally maintained from New Jersey to the Biscayne Bay Canal in Miami-Dade County ( a total of 1,263 miles), supports 70 Federal Navigation Projects, over 105,000,000 annual tons of cargo, 800,000+ registered recreational vessels, over 124,000 commercially related jobs, and 6,500 recreational marine related businesses.
Personal wages directly associated with waterway activities total over $2.6 billion dollars and property owned/ maintained by the Florida Inland Navigation District totals in excess of $38.4 billion dollars ( Source: Florida Inland Navigation District, unpublished data).
are estimated to increase approximately 18% from existing numbers.
The District indicates that $7.8 million dollars per year dedicated from any source, would satisfy the proper maintenance of the entire Jacksonville to Miami reach of the waterway to its design depth of 12 feet for commercial navigation.
The Florida Inland Navigation District estimates that with neglect and cessation of maintenance dredging to the system (return to a 3 foot controlling depth) the economic contribution of the waterway would be adversely reduced by almost 54% from the numbers previously cited.
Likewise, if maintenance dredging expenditures were increased to maintain the design depth of 10-12 feet and 125 wide, economic contributions
3-4
Chapter III
The Gulf Intracoastal Waterway Inshore and Offshore System(GIWW) Exhibit 3-2
The middle 1930s saw the federally authorized Atlantic Intracoastal Waterway System and the connecting of the Okeechobee Waterway nearing completion.
With the logical connection of the east coast commercial trade routes to the west coast of Florida at Ft. Myers, commercial barge and short shipping operations began pressuring the political establishment for an extended protected passage northward to major consumption and distribution points along the United States Gulf Coast.
The population centers of Tampa, St. Petersburg, Sarasota, Ft. Myers, Clearwater, Bradenton and Tarpon Springs all supported and pushed for federal and state improvements to the west coast trade route; the purpose being to enhance commercial activity and to support jobs and economic development.
The region produced (and still does) many perishable items including citrus, vegetables, livestock, lumber products, fish, lime and phosphate rock.
In 1935, Congress authorized the first examination and survey for an intracoastal waterway from the Caloosahatchee River north to Apalachicola Bay.
On August 30th of that year the Rivers and Harbors Act was passed to provide a waterway exit to the north for craft using the Okeechobee Cross Florida Canal.
Between the Caloosahatchee River 148 miles north to the Anclote River, a chain of inlets and passes between barrier islands provides a relatively protected "inside passage" of the Gulf Coast waterway system.
From the Anclote River North, however, the Waterway is fully exposed to the open waters of the Gulf of Mexico.
Because these waters are relatively shallow and gradually deepen for many miles wave action is, in most cases,
3-5
dissipated far offshore allowing for relatively safe passage of smaller shallow draft commercial or recreational vessels during calm weather conditions.
Inclement weather affords refuge for these vessels in the Homosassa, Crystal, and Withlacoochee Rivers.
constructed; a channel 12 feet deep and 150 feet wide was authorized in 1968 from St. Marks to Tampa Bay but has never been constructed due to environmental concerns.
Because of these environmental concerns, the State has to-date elected not to sponsor this remaining segment from Carrabelle to Tampa Bay.
Several smaller projects were conducted on the waterway between 1935 and the early 1940s.
The Second World War delayed funding for Florida's Gulf Intracoastal Waterway until 1945 when Congress authorized the west coast system and included a provision that local interests must furnish all lands needed for the project.
The West Coast Inland Navigation District was created by the Florida Legislature in 1947 with power to levy taxes for land procurement.
Modifying federal legislation in 1948, 1950, 1954, 1957 and 1959 resolved terms of local compliance and in June 1960 dredging began and was completed in 1967 of the 151 mile western leg of the waterway .
The entire system, some 300 miles, from the Caloosahatchee River to Carrabelle, Florida was essentially complete.
Within two years the Florida Gulf Intracoastal Waterway (Exhibit 3-2) carried 418, 268 tons of freight-more than twice the tonnage estimated when the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers first recommended the project.
Commerce has risen steadily totaling 1,568,618 tons in 1978 and 2,000,000 + tons in 2002.
The Gulf Intracoastal Waterway segment between Carrabelle and St. Marks, authorized in 1937 still has not been
Vessels continue to ply the open waters of the Gulf south of St. Marks to Tampa.
The waterway is subdivided into five Corps of Engineers districts responsible for Waterway maintenance and operation of navigable structures.
The Galveston District oversees the Gulf Intracoastal Waterway from the Mexican border to Louisiana; the New Orleans District encompasses it throughout Louisiana, the Vicksburg District touches the waterway, the Mobile District begins in Western Mississippi and ends just east of Tallahassee, Florida; and the Jacksonville District covers the Waterway from the latter point over to the vicinity of Fort Myers.
Since the completion of the waterway in 1967, it has become a major artery of commerce for the State of Florida.
Millions of tons of cargo are transported annually on the waterway.
Principal commodities include oil, phosphate, construction, and industrial materials (Appendix A).
The major ports served include: Port Boca Grande on Gasparilla Island; Port Manatee on Tampa Bay; and Port Tampa on Old Tampa Bay.
3-6
The ApalachicolaChattahoochee-Flint River System (ACF) The Apalachicola, Chattahoochee and Flint River System (Exhibit 3-3) provides a link from the upper Chattahoochee and Flint River basins to the Gulf of Mexico at Apalachicola Bay, Florida.
The system is linked to the nation's inland navigation system by the Gulf Intracoastal Waterway.
It consists of a channel 9 feet deep and 100 feet wide from the mouth of the Apalachicola River to the head of navigation at Columbus, Georgia (for the Chattahoochee River) and at Bainbridge, Georgia (for the Flint River).
The total waterway distance is 290 miles with a lift of 190 feet accomplished by three locks and dams, the Walter F. George Lock, the George W. Andrews Lock, and the Woodruff Lock and Dam located at the north end of Lake Seminole in Georgia.
River to Bainbridge, Georgia.
Extreme
drought and recent water management issues involving
Alabama, Georgia, and Florida, may affect the future navigable aspects for commercial navigation.
Exhibit 3-3
In 1953, a resolution was adopted by the House Committee on Public Works for the development of the Apalachicola, Chattahoochee and Flint River Basin.
Projects were authorized for navigation
improvements, power generation and stream flow regulation.
Recreational facilities at Walter F. George Lake, George W. Andrews Lake, and Lake Seminole were authorized by the Flood Control Act of 1944.
All three lakes have been operational since 1963.
The United States Army Corps of Engineers has been improving navigation along the Apalachicola River since the early 1800's.
Between 1828 and 1831, the Corps removed obstructions from the river to provide for shallow draft vessel traffic.
In 1874, the project was modified to provide for improvements of the Apalachicola River to secure a channel 6 feet deep at mean low water and 100 feet wide throughout its length.
Passage of the 1945 River and Harbors Act authorized a 9 foot by 100 foot channel to be constructed on the Apalachicola and Chattahoochee River segments to Columbus Georgia and on the Flint
The Jim Woodruff Dam was the initial project of the authorized federal plan for improvement of the Apalachicola, Chattahoochee and Flint River System.
It is located on the Apalachicola River about 1000 feet below the confluence of the Chattahoochee and Flint Rivers which unite to form the Apalachicola River, and is at the Georgia-Florida state line.
It is
approximately 3,200 feet up stream from the U.S. Highway 90 Bridge over the Apalachicola River and is visible from the bridge.
The dam is accessible by road and is located approximately 1 mile northwest of Chattahoochee, Florida.
3-7
The Okeechobee Waterway System Lake Okeechobee is Florida's largest freshwater lake and the second largest freshwater lake in the United States.
There are presently ten recreational areas located along the east/ west waterway which offers excellent boating, fishing, and waterfowl hunting.
This convenient link with the Florida coast also offers recreational boaters protected waters, anchorages, and numerous shore stop opportunities.
Covering 730 square miles, its name is derived from the Seminole Indian words meaning "big water."
The Lake's average depth is 10 feet and it provides drinking water for over 6 million Florida residents and serves as a source of irrigation for a $1.5 billion dollar a year agricultural industry that produces sugar cane, winter vegetables, citrus, and rice.
In 1999, it carried 850,000 short tons of commercial cargo, mostly distillate and residual fuel oils destined for Florida Power and Light power plants in the Ft. Myers area ;
these shipments represented over 96% of total shipments.
This total has fallen somewhat to about 728,000 short tons for year 2000 (last availiable reporting year).
The Okeechobee Waterway (Exhibit 3-4) running from the Gulf Intracoastal Waterway Inlet near Ft. Myers some 152 miles to the Atlantic Intracoastal Waterway Inlet near Stuart, has 5 lock systems (WP Franklin, Ortona Lock, Moore Haven Lock, Port Mayaca Lock, and St. Lucie Lock) used to raise and lower recreational boat traffic to and from the Lake.
There are 14 separate clearance restriction locations along the waterway with controlling maximum clearance at 14.5 feet through the eastern St. Lucie Canal to the Atlantic, these restrictions greatly affect use of the waterway for commercial navigation purposes.
In 1847, two years after Florida was granted statehood, a plan was proposed to reclaim the Everglades and attract thousands of settlers to South Florida.
Promoters believed that to do this was only a matter of dredging a few canals to drain off excessive water.
It would be 30 more years before this concept was actually attempted.
During this time, the Kissimmee River was connected to the Gulf of Mexico via Lake Okeechobee and the Caloosahatchee River.
In the early 1900's, Florida's Legislature responded
Exhibit 3-4
to public demands for better flood control in the
3-8
region by creating the Everglades Drainage District.
Unfortunately, in 1926 and again in 1928, devastating hurricanes hit the region driving water over the Lake dikes and flooding the region claiming over 3,200
The Miami River The 5.5 mile Miami River has a long and colorful history evolving over thousands of years from a tidal channel into a freshwater spring fed stream that carried water from the Everglades to Biscayne Bay.
It is the oldest natural landmark in Southeast Florida.
The word "Miami" is an Indian word meaning "sweet water".
The region from the river's headwaters near today's Northwest 27th Avenue to Biscayne Bay(at that time, a natural spring) was inhabited by Tequesta Indians and was a major trading area during the 1500's and 1600's for Indian and Spanish explorers.
lives.
To prevent reoccurrence, the Florida Legislature created the Okeechobee Flood Control District which was authorized to cooperate with the United States Army Corps of Engineers in flood control project development.
A long-term system was designed for flood control, water conservation, prevention of saltwater intrusion, and wildlife preservation.
As the City of Miami grew in the early 1900's, the Miami River quickly became a major transportation artery in the development of the City.
The Florida East Coast Railway built warehouses and docks to serve the demand for growing trade.
Winter
vegetables came into the City by boat from Biscayne Bay and were loaded on railroad freight cars for shipment north.
Boat building and marine repair businesses began and flourished during this period and some remain today.
Today, the Lake and the Waterway are part of a complex water management system including the Cross-State Canal, known as the Central and Southern Florida Flood Control Project.
The project covers 16,000 square miles beginning just south of Orlando and extending southward through the Kissimmee River Basin to the Everglades National Park to Florida Bay.
Responsibility for its continued maintance rests with the Florida Inland Navigation District.
From 1903 to 1933, the River was lengthened and widened by the federal government and the once clear rapids stopped in 1909 when the Miami Canal was built.
When the Miami Canal construction began, the water table dropped sharply, and Everglades muck slid into the River's once clear spring fed waters.
By the 1930's the River was in its present
3-9
configuration as a navigable 5.5 mile channel where the Miami Canal connects south to Biscayne Bay.
impeding economic growth along the river.
The river has not been dredged since 1933, although efforts are currently ongoing to correct this problem.
World War II saw the River become a center of industrial and heavy marine use, when it became a major construction location for wartime PT boats.
The Miami River is the fourth largest port development area in the State of Florida, with an estimated $4 billion in trade annually as reported by In the 1960's several local civic organizations and political leaders undertook studies to document the neglect and need to improve the river conditions.
Code enforcement crackdowns by the City cleaned up part of the river area; In the period 1976-1986, the Miami River Comprehensive Zoning Ordinance recognized the river as a special district.
contiguous businesses, owners and operators along the river.
Sediment buildup severely impacts
shipping commerce, as vessels must "lighter" their loads (reduce their mean low water drafts) in order to traverse the river.
Larger vessels can only traverse the river during periods of high tide.
The Commission believes that dredging the river will: improve the marine environment of the river and Biscayne Bay;
In January 1998, the Miami River Study Commission publicly urged a forceful, community wide effort to clean up the river and bring it to its potential.
The Miami River Commission was formed and began to fulfill its mission to unite all governmental agencies, businesses and residents to speak with one voice on river issues, and to develop coordinated plans, priorities, programs, projects and budgets that will substantially improve the River.
The Commission is to act as the principle advocate and watchdog to ensure that river projects are funded and implemented in a proper and timely manner.
The major impediment to enhanced commercial use of the river and a priority of the Commission is to dredge the entire 5.5 mile commercial zone to remove the build up of contaminated sediments that are damaging the marine environment and significantly
improve the marine industry allowing ships to fully load and improve the economy of the region; and act as a catalyst for riverside development and neighborhood improvement.
To date, the
Commission has been authorized and appropriated a total of $6,800,000.00 by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers for the required $40,000,000.00 project.
3-10
The Saint Johns River System The Saint Johns River System in East Central Florida is 285 miles long beginning north of Lake Okeechobee and meandering north to Jacksonville where it turns abruptly east and enters the Atlantic Ocean some 28 miles away (Exhibit 3-5).
It is Florida's longest river.
The river system passes through eight lakes and receives many tributaries; the Oklawaha River being the most important.
The dredged river system is maintained under the jurisdiction of the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers and is navigable for 170 miles upstream.
The lower one-third of the river forms part of the Atlantic Intracoastal Waterway System.
The water hyacinth was accidentally introduced to the region in the 1880s, and it quickly spread throughout the upper reaches of the river system.
In the nineteenth century, the Saint Johns River was a busy commercial waterway for the greater part of its course.
Now,
Over the next few years, the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers in cooperation with the Jacksonville Port Authority, will be deepening more than 14 miles of the Saint Johns River in proximity to the port using the beach quality dredge material to improve Jacksonville beaches.
The project will involve both channel and harbor deepening from 38 feet in key locations to over 40+ feet.
The project is aimed at increasing the capacity and ability of cargo vessels to call at Jacksonville bringing additional commerce and jobs to the region.
This project is currently estimated at $31,000,000.00 with the federal government to contribute $5,300,000.00 and local government and the state the rest.
It is estimated that it will take approximately two years to complete.
Exhibit 3-5
however, dense mats of water hyacinth render commercial navigation almost impossible on the river's upper course.
3-11
