EXECUTIVE SUMMARY MYSTERY SHOPPER EVALUATION OF CUSTOMER SERVICE AT THE DEPARTMENT OF HUMAN SERVICES 2/21/01 BACKGROUND As part of the Texas Department of Human Services' comprehensive effort to assess and improve customer service, the agency contracted with Business Resources, a company that sends mystery shoppers to evaluate customer service delivery at public and private institutions.
From November 10 through December 25, 2000, Business Resources had mystery shoppers call 204 Texas W orks offices in eleven regions to evaluate the automated phone answering system (when present) and the staff answering the phones.
Spanish-speaking individuals made fifty-three of those calls.
Callers presented scenarios requesting assistance and information from DHS staff such as: · I lost my job and have no income, and I have a small child.
What help is available? · My daughter's husband has left her with two small children ­ what help is available for her? · I ran out of money and I don't have any food for my family to make it through the month.
Is there anything available to help me? How long will it take? In addition, mystery shoppers visited 100 Texas Works offices in eleven regions to assess the facilities and the delivery of customer service.
Evaluators requested assistance and information from DHS staff, such as: · Can I apply for food stamps for my mother? She's bedridden and on Social Security.
She can't come in for an appointment.
· My daughter works as a secretary.
She makes very little money and she has no health insurance for her children.
Is there anything available to help her? Information gathered by these mystery shoppers is not statistically valid; however, it does present an objective snapshot on what is happening as clients call or visit our offices seeking assistance.
In addition, the results of this study can be used to target areas of improvement and provide a benchmark for future evaluations.
HIGHLIGHTS Overall, the agency rated high on both the telephone evaluations and the inperson visits.
The agency compared favorably to other public and private
1
organizations in Business Resources' institutional database in the evaluation of the automated answering system and telephone customer service professionals.
In addition, the department's scores for the facilities was consistent with the institutional database of other governmental entities.
KEY FINDINGS Telephone Evaluations The department received an overall average score of 88.8% for the delivery of customer service over the telephone that includes an evaluation of the automated answering system and the telephone customer service professional.
Automated Answering System: The department received relatively high scores for the automated answering system with average ratings of: 98.3% for friendliness; 95.06% for clear instructions; and 88.3% for options clearly explained.
The overall average score for the automated answering system is 89.65% Problems Identified: · A lack of consistency in recorded messages between offices · Frustration with options offered · Confusion over the frequent use of acronyms One evaluator noted, "The automated service was very understandable except for the description of `If you need information about EBP.'
(I think he said EBP)."
Another wrote, "The automated answering system was very informative, but if a person is not familiar with their acronyms, it is hard to understand what the voice is saying.
Another acronym that I'm not sure of is TANF."
· No option given to reach a live person 10.04% of the time · No option given to reach a Spanish language system 29.03% of the time · A disparity in treatment between Spanish and English speakers Spanish and English callers rated the automated systems differently and received a different level of customer service.
When Spanish speakers were asked to hold by the automated system, their hold time averaged 3.2 minutes, compared to an average hold time of 1.6 minutes for English speakers.
Telephone Customer Service Professional: The department received relatively high scores for the performance of telephone customer service professionals with average ratings of: Courtesy and friendliness 87.83% Ability to answer questions 89.26% Speed of service 86.87%
2
The overall average for telephone customer service professional is 87.33%.
One evaluator noted, "My call was answered after only a few seconds (about 1015) by the receptionist.
She was friendly and thorough.
I heard other voices in the background that indicated the office was busy, but I felt I had her undivided attention."
Problems identified: · A minority of callers were treated in an abrupt, and in some cases, a rude manner One evaluator wrote, "I felt like these two individuals had no time for my problems or me.
The first female employee was abrupt and kept putting me on hold.
When I was not on hold, she was not listening to me as I had to keep repeating my scenario to her each time she picked up the phone.
Then she transferred me without even telling me she was doing so.
I had no opportunity to ask her name or get any information from her, as she appeared to be too busy.
The second female employee just wanted to pass me off on someone else.
She had no time for me either."
· Lack of consistent information provided "The person I spoke with told me all I needed to bring was a picture ID.
I felt she should have given me additional information on what to expect."
· Focus on the zip codes "My inquiry was well-handled but for one point.
I did not realize when I called that a zip code could put me at the `wrong' office.
The lady was reluctant to give any information and almost hung-up on me when I gave the same zip code I had given the office of 6th Street."
· Refusal to mail applications or other materials · Focus on the specific problem discussed without a referral to other support services that might be available One evaluator called in trying to help a friend who needed rental assistance, and they noted, "The clerk was pleasant and helpful.
She explained who I needed to contact and why, but I did have to ask for it directly after she said this office couldn't help."
Another evaluator calling in with the same scenario remarked, "The person who came on the phone sounded like she wanted to be helpful with a housing issue even though it wasn't something they could help with directly.
She could have offered other DHS services."
Another caller stated that they had run out of money and did not have any food for their family.
They wrote, "When I explained the situation the woman said she was not sure what was available because she did did not handle those cases...She put the phone down and went to get information.
After returning she gave me some organizations around town that could offer immediate assistance...It seemed DHS did not have any emergency assistance."
· A disparity in treatment between Spanish and English speakers
3
In nine of the eleven categories in which the telephone customer service professional was ranked, English speakers scored the service higher than the Spanish speakers did.
The overall telephone customer service scores for English speakers averaged 90.57%, while the same score for Spanish speakers was 84.09%.
In-Person Customer Service The department received an overall average score of 89.77% for the delivery of in-person customer service that includes the average score for facilities, receptionists and caseworkers.
Facilities: Relatively high scores with average ratings of: Facilities are functional 97.78% Facilities are well-maintained 93.61% Overall average for facilities: 84.84% Problems identified: · Outdoor signs identifying DHS offices were inadequate 23.22% of the time · 13% of the facilities lacked adequate parking · There were no accommodations for people with children (such as small chairs, tables, etc) 30.6% of the time Receptionist/Front Desk Clerk: Evaluators were greeted in a friendly prompt manner 91.7% Evaluators were helped in an efficient and orderly way 95.1% Evaluators said the person who helped them was knowledgeable and competent 96.2% Evaluators felt they were treated with dignity and respect 96.8% Wait times averaged 3.28 minutes Average: 94.61% One evaluator wrote, "I was treated with dignity and respect, and Mary seemed more than willing to take the time to assist me...She gave me factual information in a direct and straightforward manner.
She seemed to be a concerned employee willing to go the extra mile to do a good job."
Problems identified: · A minority of front-desk workers treated clients in an abrupt and, in some cases, a rude manner One evaluator wrote, "The woman I spoke with seemed bothered by my presence.
I had to ask someone where to go to get paperwork and speak with someone.
When I asked where to get paperwork, I was rudely told `over there'."
4
·
Some front-desk workers lacked adequate information to be helpful "I found the receptionist to be willing and trying to assist, but she was not overly knowledgeable about the programs available.
It seems that the procedure is designed to assist people who actually have applied, but little help is available to those wanting to apply.
It would have been helpful if she had given me some information about the application processing time, the procedures, and the time to come in.
Also, I thought there must be more assistance available than what she told me."
5
