Source Reduction and Recycling Program Newsletter JAMES E. (JIM) NUGENT, Chairman MARY SCOTT NABERS, Commissioner BARRY WILLIAMSON, Commissioner RAILROAD COMMISSION OF TEXAS OIL AND GAS DIVISION SEPTEMBER 7, 1993
REPORT OF THE PROCEEDINGS OF THE POLLUTION PREVENTION WORKSHOP THE COMMISSION'S SOURCE REDUCTION AND RECYCLING PROGRAM The Railroad Commission of Texas is developing a program to encourage pollution prevention through source reduction and recycling of oil and gas wastes.
This goal will be accomplished by providing oil and gas operators with training and technical assistance, assisting oil and gas operators in auditing their own operations and developing waste minimization plans, and establishing incentives for and eliminating barriers to the minimization (i.e., source reduction and recycling) of oil and gas wastes.
The Commission was successful in obtaining federal funds for our program from the Office of Solid Waste of the U.S. Environmental Protection Agency (EPA).
The operations of the oil and gas industry typically produce large volumes of waste.
The volumes of waste are not likely to decrease in the future without increased efforts toward waste minimization by the industry as a whole.
In the past, both industry and government have taken an "end of pipe" approach to waste management.
However, increased regulations and increased costs of waste management make it almost mandatory that both take a different approach.
The solution to the problem is to re-focus our view of oil and gas operations and the resulting wastes.
One way to begin is to adopt EPA's waste management hierarchy of preference: Most preferred SOURCE REDUCTION RECYCLING TREATMENT DISPOSAL Least preferred
Through its Source Reduction and Recycling Program the Commission will encourage the use of the most preferred options available in the management of oil and gas wastes.
The benefits of participating in the program and successfully implementing a Waste Minimization Plan include: Reduced expenses.
Decreased liability.
Increased operating efficiency.
Decreased concerns for regulatory compliance.
Improved public relations.
Decreased need for additional regulations.
In order to ensure the success of this program, the Commission recognized the need to solicit help from the oil and gas industry during its development.
Your company has shown an interest in, and has been active in, waste management using waste minimization options, and, therefore, was invited to participate in a Pollution Prevention Survey and Workshop.
POLLUTION PREVENTION SURVEY The Pollution Prevention Survey was mailed to twenty-six (26) companies and fourteen (14) associations and state agencies (states in EPA Region 6).
The response of oil and gas companies to the survey was excellent.
We received twenty-four responses from various operators and one association.
The respondents' areas of operations included the following general distribution: Integrated oil companies 42% E
Many respondents gave examples of source reduction projects or processes implemented by their companies that resulted in cost savings or other benefits.
The respondents indicated that the greatest potential for success was found in implementing good operating procedures, spill and leak prevention, and more efficient cleaning and degreasing.
The respondents identified numerous waste types found in each area of operations (e.g., drilling, production or gas plant processing) that offered the greatest opportunities for source reduction and recycling.
The most common types of waste materials that the surveyed companies were recycling were solvents, used oils, and drilling fluids.
A total of forty-four (44) wastes types were being recycled.
The respondents expressed a wide range of opinions regarding regulatory barriers such as existing statutes and regulations and uncertainties in proposed or future regulations.
The respondents agreed that the potential generator liabilities for improper activities of recyclers was a significant barrier.
Respondents also felt that technology was a moderately significant barrier, because technology either does not exist or is not proven.
The respondents agreed that the most significant economic barrier to source reduction and recycling is inadequate economic incentives.
The respondents offered a wide variety of opinions regarding the barriers posed by excessive cost/benefit relationships.
Most respondents stated that the Commission would be most effective in assisting industry in its pollution prevention efforts through workshops, seminars, newsletters, and case studies of successful and cost-effective programs.
Many companies also indicated great interest in having the Commission develop and make accessible directories of recycling facilities.
Industry associations and environmental publications were indicated to be the best way for the Commission to spread the word about source reduction and recycling opportunities.
Many respondents expressed great concern that the Commission might adopt regulations to "require" implementation of source reduction and recycling.
We received a positive response to the survey request that respondents indicate their willingness support the Commission's program.
A majority of respondents indicated that their company would be interested in sponsoring workshops, and providing training material, research material and other pertinent information.
This kind of cooperation will enable the Commission to present the Source Reduction and Recycling Program to a much larger audience and will enhance the program's success.
POLLUTION PREVENTION WORKSHOP The Commission also invited the survey respondents to attend a Pollution Prevention Workshop.
The workshop was held on June 4, 1993, at the Commission's Austin headquarters.
The purpose of the workshop was to bring Commission staff and industry representatives together to discuss the results of the survey and how to make the source reduction and recycling program a success.
An overview of the proceedings of the workshop is provided below: A majority of the workshop participants responded favorably to the idea of an "Electronic Bulletin Board" (EBB).
The EBB would be set up and maintained by the Commission, but available to industry.
The suggestion was made that funds be solicited from industry to subsidize the expense of creating and maintaining the EBB.
Suggestions for information to be contained in the EBB included current compliance status of waste management facilities, regulatory requirements, success stories, and new technology.
Possible incentives for the implementation of waste minimization plans were discussed.
These incentives included economic reward, public news releases, a Commission booth at conferences to publicize a list of names of companies/operators active in the program, tax breaks on oil and gas produced from facilities using source reduction and recycling and grants to develop technologies (e.g., EPA's NICE3 program).
These incentives should be designed to attract companies (and their employees) that may be more concerned with short-term problems, such as immediate operating or budgetary problems, and production goals, rather than long-term liabilities.
The workshop participants discussed the Commission's plans for visits to exploration and production facilities.
Many participants expressed concern that enforcement action may result from these pollution prevention assessment visits.
We would reemphasize that the Commission's Source Reduction and Recycling Program is non-regulatory and non-enforcement.
The sole purposes of the program's assessment visits to facilities will be to gather information on successful source reduction and recycling practices and to help operators in identifying source reduction and recycling opportunities.
Workshop participants agreed that a "Pollution Prevention Advisory Committee" should be organized for input into the structure and function of the Commission's Source Reduction and Recycling Program.
Ideas for subcommittees included the Electronic Bulletin Board Subcommittee, the Incentives Subcommittee, the Funding Subcommittee, and the Training and Education Subcommittee.
Several workshop participants volunteered to serve on a committee.
The Source Reduction and Recycling Program will continue to require the participation of the oil and gas industry beyond the accomplishment of the goals discussed in the workshop.
New waste problems and new technologies will arise.
The ultimate goal of the program is the maximum possible reduction of the volume and toxicity of oil and gas wastes that are generated and recycling of wastes that are unavoidably generated.
The success of the Commission's Source Reduction and Recycling Program will be measured by the number of companies and individuals active in the program, attendance at the training workshops, and the number of case studies of successful source reduction and recycling activities gathered by the Commission.
SOURCE REDUCTION AND RECYCLING MANUAL The development of the Source Reduction and Recycling Manual is well underway at this time.
Your assistance is welcomed.
A section of the manual will be devoted to case histories of successful source reduction and recycling projects.
The industry's efforts toward source reduction and recycling of wastes were shown by the survey responses and the workshop discussions to be significant.
We would appreciate your submission of narratives of your source reduction and/or recycling projects that have proven to be both successful and cost effective.
To submit a case study, simply prepare a two-page summary of the project that gives a description of the project or process, an explanation of any innovative application of technology, a description of the environmental impact, and a discussion of the financial benefits.
Those case studies not included in the manual will provide valuable information to be included in subsequent newsletters.
The Commission's goal is to complete the first draft of the manual in the fall of 1993.
In keeping with the workshop participants' expressed interest in reviewing the draft of the manual, copies will be provided.
Please communicate your interests regarding a committee assignment, narratives of case histories, or other program activities to: Bart Sims Railroad Commission of Texas Oil and Gas Division Source Reduction and Recycling Program P.O. Box 12967, Austin, TX 78711-2967 (512-463-5405).
The success of the program will depend largely upon the involvement of the industry, including both large and small companies.
Therefore, your participation is greatly appreciated.
