INTELLIGENT TRANSPORTATION SOCIETY OF THE MIDAMERICAN STATES ("ITS Mid-America") BYLAWS I-PURPOSE A.
General Description.
ITS Mid-America broadly consists of its membership, which is open to organizations interested in ITS activities within Ohio, Kentucky or any adjacent state.
Overall direction of ITS Mid-America is vested in the Governing Board.
Reporting to the Governing Board is an Executive Committee organization designed to carry out the specific technical and program related objectives and functions of ITS Mid-America.
The Executive Committee oversees and coordinates the activities of individual committees and working groups.
These committees and groups are established on an "as-needed" basis and can be disbanded or integrated into other committees and groups as determined necessary by the Executive Committee.
Although referred to herein as "technical committees" the scope of committee subjects is broad and may range from technical to institutional considerations.
Membership on committees is open to any organization that is a member of ITS Mid-America.
B.
Purpose.
The ITS Mid-America organization will be made up of interested parties from government, the private sector, and academia who will pursue, as a team, the following mission: Coordinating and fostering a public, private, and academic partnership to make the urban and rural surface transportation system in the geographical area covered by ITS Mid-America significantly safer, more productive, and more efficient by defining the requirements and accelerating the identification, communication, research, development, integration, and deployment of ITS technologies.
Page 1
Rev. 9/7/00
II - MEMBERSHIP
A.
Membership.
Membership shall be open to organizations whose interest is in All members shall have the same
advancing the purposes of ITS Mid-America.
rights, privileges, duties, and obligations.
Organizations are defined as the following groups: 1.
Corporations (a) (b) 2.
3.
4.
5.
For profit Nonprofit/Not-for-profit
Partnerships Sole proprietorships Institutions of higher education Governmental Agencies including but not limited to: (a) (b) (c) Federal agencies State agencies Regional organizations, including, but not limited to MPOs, transit authorities and port authorities (d) (e) (f) County agencies City agencies Township Agencies
6.
Associations
Each organization shall have an ITS interest in the geographic area.
The Governing Board may create additional classes of organizations.
B. Voting rights.
Each member of ITS Mid-America shall have one vote to the extent authorized by law in all matters to be voted on by the members.
C.
Applications.
Any organization desiring to become a member of ITS Mid-America must apply on forms approved and supplied by ITS Mid-America.
Applications must be accompanied by the dues required for the year of membership.
Applications for membership shall be reviewed and approved by the Executive Committee
Page 2
Rev. 9/7/00
D.
Dues. 1.
Amounts.
The Governing Board shall establish the amount of any dues or other charges required to be paid by members.
2.
Delinquency.
Members whose dues are more than sixty (60) days in arrears will be referred to the Executive Committee for consideration/action.
E.
Meetings of the Membership.
1.
Annual meeting.
There shall be an annual meeting of the membership of ITS Mid-America, to be held at a time and place to be determined by the Executive Committee.
2.
Special meetings.
A special meeting of the members shall be held upon the call of the Governing Board, the Executive Committee or the written request signed (w ithin any 60-day per iod) by on e-third of the members, a t the time and place stated in the call.
The call or request for the meeting shall state its purpose or purposes.
3.
Notice.
The Secretary to the Governing Board of ITS Mid-America shall notify all members of each meeting in written or electronic format, sent to each member at his/her address or fax number as shown by the records of ITS Mid-America not more than sixty (60) days nor less than ten (10) days before the date of the meeting.
In the case of a special meeting, the notice shall state the purpose or purposes for which the meeting is called.
During such special meeting, no other business will be acted upon.
F.
Termination of membership.
1.
Resignation.
Membership in ITS Mid-America shall terminate upon the resignation of a member or upon failure to pay dues.
2.
Termination.
The Executive Committee may recommend to the Governing Board termination of the membership of an organization, with or without cause.
The Executive Committee shall provide 30 days written notice to the member after concurrence of the Governing Board.
The written notice shall state the effective date of the termination.
Page 3 Rev. 9/7/00
3.
Forfeiture.
Upon termination of membership in ITS Mid-America, any and all rights and privileges of membership, and any interest in the property or other assets of ITS Mid-America, shall be forfeited by the member.
4.
Liability for dues.
Termination of any membership shall not relieve the former member from liability for any unpaid dues or other duly assessed fees.
No former member having any outstanding charges for unpaid dues or fees shall be re-admitted to membership without payment of those amounts.
Page 4
Rev. 9/7/00
III - GOVERNING BOARD
A.
General Powers.
The property, affairs, and business of ITS Mid-America shall be managed and controlled by its Governing Board.
The Governing Board may, by general resolution, delegate to Board Members, Subcommittees of the Governing Board, the Executive Committee and any officers thereof, such powers as are provided for in these Bylaws.
B.
Functions and Responsibilities.
As defined in these bylaws, the duties of the
Governing Board shall include, but are not limited to the following: 1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
Management of the direction of the affairs of the organization; Election of the Officers of the Governing Board; Consideration and approval of the budget of the organization; Consideration and approval of organization strategic objectives; Consideration and approval of organization policies and policy advice arising from reports of the committees of the organization as necessary; 6.
Other functions and responsibilities of the Governing Board including membership, meetings, duties, committees and officers of the Governing Board, as specified in these Bylaws.
C.
Membership.
Members of the Governing Board shall be affiliated with organizations that are members of ITS Mid-America.
The membership of the Governing Board shall consist of not less than 26 members, nor more than 30 members, to be elected or appointed as follows: 1.
Two (2) members shall be appointed by the Director of each member state Department of Transportation, who shall be employees or officials of the Department.
These members shall be non-voting members and shall not stand for election by the membership under the process described below.
2.
Three (3) members shall be the President of the Executive Committee, Secretary and Treasurer of ITS Mid-America selected pursuant to the byPage 5 Rev. 9/7/00
laws of the Governing Board.
These members shall not stand for election by the membership under the process described below.
These members shall be non-voting, ex officio members.
3.
The remaining members shall be elected by the general membership in accordance with a procedure adopted by the Governing Board.
4.
It shall be the policy of ITS Mid-America to maintain a representational balance on the Governing Board of the various interests and viewpoints represented within the ITS program.
Overall membership will be maintained with representatives from public, private and academic groups with approximately one-half representation from corporate members and trade and industrial associations, and with the other half representing governmental agencies, universities, professional associations and other nonprofit organizations.
5.
The elected Governing Board membership shall be selected by a Leadership Nominating Committee ("LNC") which shall be established by the Governing Board to recommend candidates for available terms.
The LNC shall be chaired by the Secretary to the Governing Board and consist of the current President of the Executive Committee and one member each representing public, private and academic membership.
The Governing Board shall either approve or disapprove the recommendations of the LNC.
The recommended candidates will be elected to the Governing Board by the general membership.
D.
Terms.
The members of the Governing Board shall serve for a three-year term and may be elected for additional three-year terms.
Members shall serve on staggered terms with approximately one-third of the members being elected annually.
The terms for new officers and members shall begin on January 1.
E.
Election.
The Governing Board shall be elected by ballot of the membership of ITS Mid-America.
Each candidate shall stand for election independently.
The candidates who receive the most votes shall be elected to the Governing Board.
Page 6 Rev. 9/7/00
F.
Officers.
The officers of the Governing Board shall be the Chairperson, Vice Chairperson, Secretary to the Board and Treasurer to the Board.
The Officers shall be elected from the members of the Governing Board and their terms shall last for one (1) year.
The duties of the officers are as follows: 1.
Chairperson for the Board.
(a) (b) (c) Shall be a voting member of the Board.
Plan, lead, and direct the activities of the Board.
Call and conduct Board meetings in conjunction with the Secretary to the Board.
(d) (e) (f) Appoint interim members of the Board when a vacancy occurs.
Establish ITS Mid-America goals.
Promote ITS Mid-America and coordinate its affiliation with ITS America.
(g) Act to assure ITS Mid-America activities are in compliance with ITS Mid-America Bylaws and ITS -America Antitrust Guidelines.
2.
Vice Chairperson for the Board.
(a) (b) Shall be a voting member of the Board.
Preside over meetings of the Governing Board in the absence of the Chairperson.
(c) 3.
Perform other duties as assigned by the Chairperson.
Secretary to the Board.
(a) (b) (c) (d) Assist the Chairperson with planning meetings and activities.
Notify Board members of meetings.
Attend all meetings of the ITS Mid-America Governing Board Distribute agenda and materials for the meeting at least two weeks prior to the meeting.
(e) Prepare, submit and present reports on the Executive Committee activities and resolutions to the Governing Board.
(f) Serve as an ex-officio, non-voting member of the Governing Board.
Page 7
Rev. 9/7/00
(g)
Prepare and distribute meeting minutes, including attendance rosters.
Minutes should be distributed within 30 days of the meeting.
(h) (i)
Maintain official files for ITS Mid-America.
Serve as the primary liaison between the Executive Committee and the Governing Board.
(j) 4.
Perform other duties as assigned by the Chairperson.
Treasurer to the Board.
(a) Shall keep correct and complete records of account, showing accurately at all times ITS Mid-America's financial condition.
(b) Shall immediately deposit all funds of ITS Mid-America coming into his/her hands in an approved fund, and shall keep such account in the name of ITS Mid-America.
(c) Upon request by the Governing Board, he/she shall furnish a statement of the financial condition of ITS Mid-America, and shal l perform such other duties as these Bylaws may require or the Governing Board may prescribe.
(d) Shall be responsible for maintaining the financial records and may be required to furnish bond in such amount as shall be determined by the Governing Board.
(e) Board.
Shall serve as an ex-officio, non-voting member of the Governing
5.
Secretary to the Governing Board.
The Secretary to the Governing Board may serve as the Treasurer to the Governing Board.
6.
Resignation.
A member may resign from the Governing Board by written notice to the Board.
Unless another time is specified in the notice or determined by the board, the resignation shall be effective upon receipt by the Board.
Page 8
Rev. 9/7/00
7.
Removal.
Any member of the Governing Board may be removed from the Governing Board, for any reason, upon a vote of two-thirds (2/3) of the Board members.
8.
Vacancies.
(a) Appointed Members.
Any vacancy of an appointed member state DOT member of the Governing Board shall be filled by appointment from that state's DOT. (b) Elected Members.
Any vacancy of an elected member of the Governing Board will be filled by the Chairperson of the Governing Board within 60 days of receipt of the notice of vacancy.
Any member of the Governing Board may nominate a candidate to fill an unexpired term of an elected member on the Board.
Candidates shall reflect the desire of ITS MidAmerica to maintain the representation from public, private and academic groups.
9.
Meetings of the Governing Board.
(a) Meetings shall be held at the call of the Chairperson for the Governing Board or the Secretary to the Governing Board with at least thirty (30) days notice.
At least two meetings shall be held annually.
No meeting shall take place where an agenda has not been distributed at least fourteen (14) calendar days before the scheduled date.
(b)
Special meetings of the Governing Board may be called by either the Chairperson or upon the written request of one-fourth (1/4) of the Board Members.
The Chairperson, or the Board Members who call the meeting, shall fix the time and place of any special meeting.
10.
Notice.
Notice of the regular meetings of the Governing Board shall be given at least thirty (30) days before the meeting by the Secretary to the Governing Page 9 Rev. 9/7/00
Board.
Notice of any special meeting of the Governing Board shall be given at least fourteen (14) calendar days before the meeting by the Secretary of the Governing Board.
In both cases, the notice shall be in writing and delivered personally, sent by first class mail, overnight mail, facsimile, or electronically to each Board Member at his address as shown by the records of ITS Mid-America.
The business to be transacted at any special meeting of the Governing Board must be specified in the notice of such meeting.
11.
Waiver of Notice.
Notice shall be deemed to be waived by any Board member who attends and participates in any meeting other than to object to the transaction of any business because the meeting is not lawfully called or convened.
Notice may be waived, in writing, by a Board member either before, at, or after such meeting.
All such waivers shall be filed with the organization records.
12.
Quorum.
The presence of one-half of the voting members of the Governing Board, then in office, shall constitute a quorum for the transaction of business at any meeting of the Board.
13.
Voting.
Each voting member of the Governing Board shall have one vote.
Alternates, designated by the Board member in writing in advance of the Governing Board meeting, shall be allowed to attend and vote for the member.
The act of a majority of the Board members, or their properly designated alternate, present at a meeting in which a quorum is present shall be the act of the Governing Board, unless the act of a greater number is required by law, by these Bylaws, or by Robert's Rules of Order.
14.
Unanimous Consent.
Any act of the Governing Board or of any committee of the Board may be taken without a meeting if consent, in writing, setting forth the act is signed by all Board members or all members of the committee, as applicable, and eligible to vote.
The consent shall have the same force and effect as a unanimous vote of the Governing Board or the committee, as applicable.
15.
The Department of Transportation of any member state reserves the right to Page 10 Rev. 9/7/00
refuse to participate in any activity or program of ITS Mid-America if it determines that its involvement in the activity or program would be beyond its legal authority or otherwise contrary to law.
16.
Rights of Inspection.
Each Board member and Officer shall have the absolute right at any reasonable time to inspect and copy all organization books, records and documents of every kind and to inspect the physical properties of the organization, except as otherwise prohibited by law.
17.
Honorary Designations.
The Governing Board may establish such additional class or classes of persons entitled to participate in Board meetings.
The Board shall prescribe the manner of selection and privileges for such class or classes.
18.
Reimbursement of Expenses.
Board members shall receive no compensation from ITS Mid-America for their services to ITS Mid-America in these capacities.
However, Board Members, Officers, employees, if any, and agents of ITS Mid-America may receive reimbursement for necessary and reasonable out-of-pocket expenses, as determined by the Governing Board.
Page 11
Rev. 9/7/00
IV - EXECUTIVE COMMITTEE
A.
Executive Committee Functions.
The Executive Committee oversees the activities of the ITS Mid-America committees and shall have the power to transact all regular business of and manage ITS MidAmerica, subject to any restriction established by the Governing Board, during the interim between meetings of the Governing Board.
The Executive Committee, subject to the oversight, review, or approval of the Governing Board as defined herein, performs the following functions: 1.
Defines the strategic objectives, necessary technical activities, special committees, and administers the ITS Mid-America technical function.
2.
Consideration and approval of the program and the Committee structure of the organization; 3.
4.
Establishes, organizes and oversees committees and ad hoc groups.
Reviews and approves, for submission to the Governing Board and the ITS Mid-America membership as appropriate, reports, recommendations, and other products from its committees.
Specific products include: (a) Election/Recommendation of the President, Vice-President, Secretary and members of the Executive Committee; (b) (c) (d) (e) (f) 5.
Budget preparation; Organizational Structure 
Coordinates committee activities with other agencies, organizations, and interest groups.
Page 12
Rev. 9/7/00
B.
Membership.
The membership of the Executive Committee shall be limited to
a maximum of 30 members.
Membership and participation on the Executive Committee shall be open to any individual affiliated with an organization that is a member of ITS Mid-America.
Participation and attendance at Executive Committee meetings requires membership in ITS Mid-America.
Experts, not members of ITS Mid-America, may be invited to participate in specific activities when determined by the Executive Committee President to be necessary in performing the Executive Committee's assigned activities, but the non-member experts shall not have voting privileges.
(1) It shall be the policy of ITS Mid-America to maintain a representational balance on the Executive Committee of the various interests and viewpoints represented within the ITS program.
Overall membership shall be maintained with representatives from public, private and academic groups with at least one-half representing governmental agencies, universities, professional associations and other non-profit organizations.
(a) The Executive Committee membership shall be comprised and selected as follows: the number of members shall be determined on an annual basis by the Executive Committee and approved by the Governing Board.
Members will serve for a three-year term and can be appointed for additional three-year terms.
The Executive Committee shall serve on staggered terms with approximately one-third of the members being appointed annually.
(b)
An Executive Nominating Committee ("ENC") shall be appointed by the President of the Executive Committee to recommend candidates for available terms.
The ENC shall be chaired by the President and consist of the current Secretary to the Executive Committee and one member each representing public, private and academic membership as selected by the ENC Chairperson.
The Governing Board shall either approve or disapprove of the recommendations of the ENC.
Page 13 Rev. 9/7/00
The recommended candidates, approved by the Governing Board, shall be appointed to the Executive Committee.
The terms for new officers and members shall begin on January 1.
(c) The Department of Transportation from each of the member states shall appoint one official to the Executive Committee.
(d) Chairpersons of the standing committees as recommended by the Executive Committee and approved by the Governing Board.
C. Officers.
The Officers of ITS Mid-America Executive Committee shall consist of a President, Vice President, and Secretary.
The President and Vice President and Secretary shall be members of the Executive Committee and shall be elected for a one year term by the Executive Committee with Governing Board approval.
D. Duties of the Officers.
1.
President.
The President of the Executive Committee shall be the chief executive officer and shall exercise general supervision over the affairs of ITS Mid-America consistent with policies established by the Governing Board.
The President shall preside at all meetings of the Executive Committee members, and attend all meetings of the Governing Board; shall be the principal spokesperson for ITS Mid-America; shall appoint the chairpersons of all Executive Committee designated committees, and in general shall perform all duties incident to the office of President and such other duties as may be prescribed by the Governing Board.
The President's duties shall be as follows: (a) (b) Plan, lead, and direct the technical activities of ITS Mid-America.
Establish Executive Committee objectives in consonance with ITS Mid-America goals.
(c) (d) Call and conduct Executive Committee meetings.
Prepare agendas.
Form committees as necessary, appoint committee chairs, and oversee committee activities with voting approval of the Executive Committee members.
(e) Coordinate, with the Secretary to the Governing Board, the Page 14 Rev. 9/7/00
preparation, submission and presentation of reports on Executive Committee activities and resolutions to the Governing Board.
(f) (g) Serve as non-voting member of the Governing Board.
When a vacancy occurs, appoint interim members of the Executive Committee who are ratified by the Governing Board.
(h) (i) 2.
Act on appeals, as necessary.
Perform other duties as assigned by the Governing Board.
Duties of the Vice President (a) (b) Preside over the Executive Committee in the absence of the President.
Perform other duties as assigned by the President.
3.
Duties of the Secretary for the Executive Committee (a) Assist the President with planning Executive Committee meetings and activities.
(b) Distribute agenda and materials for the meetings at least two weeks prior to the date of the meeting.
(c) (d) Participate in meetings.
Maintain official files for the Executive Committee and other committees and subcommittees.
These files shall include, but not be limited to, the following: (1) (2) Charter for committees and subcommittees.
Minutes and attendance rosters for each Executive Committee and other committee meetings.
(3) (4) (5) (6) Correspondence.
Reports.
Operating Procedures and Committee Organization.
Maintain official ITS Mid-America calendar.
E.
Appointment.
Each officer of the ITS Mid-America Executive Committee shall be nominated and elected by the Executive Committee.
Upon consideration and approval by the Governing Board, they become appointed for a one-year term of office.
Page 15
Rev. 9/7/00
F.
Resignation.
Any member of the Executive Committee may resign by written notice to the Executive Committee and Governing Board.
Unless another time is specified in the notice or determined by the Executive Committee, a member's resignation shall be effective upon receipt by the Executive Committee.
G.
Removal.
The President of the Executive Committee may be removed from office, for any reason, upon a vote of two-thirds (2/3) of the Governing Board members.
Any other officer of the Executive Committee may be removed by the President of the Executive Committee, with concurrence of the Chairperson of the Governing Board for any reason.
Any member of the Executive Committee may be removed from the Committee, for any reason, upon a vote of two-thirds (2/3) of the Executive Committee Members.
H.
Vacancies.
A vacancy in any office on the Executive Committee will be filled by election by the Executive Committee with the Governing Board concurrence.
I.
Meetings.
Meetings shall be held at the call of the President or Vice President with at least fourteen (14) calendar days notice.
At least four meeting shall be held annually.
No meeting shall take place where an agenda has not been distributed before the scheduled date.
J.
Quorum.
All members of the Executive Committee shall have one vote.
Mail ballots will be allowed on specific issues when determined by the President.
A quorum of onehalf of the voting members must be present at an authorized meeting to transact official business.
A voting member is defined for quorum purposes as an Executive Committee member, a designated alternate or a voting member who has assigned his/her vote to another Executive Committee member by proxy.
Alternates may be allowed to attend and vote for a member.
Action of Executive Committee shall be by majority vote of those present.
K
Voting.
Each member of the Executive Committee shall have one personal vote and one vote for each proxy assigned to him or her.
Alternates, designated by the Executive Committee member in writing, in advance of the Executive Committees meeting, shall be allowed to attend and vote for the member.
The act of a majority of the Executive Committee members, or their properly Page 16 Rev. 9/7/00
designated alternate, present at a meeting in which a quorum is present shall be the act of the Executive Committee, unless the act of a greater number is required by law, by these Bylaws, or by Roberts Rules of Order.
L. Minutes and Record Keeping.
A record shall be officially prepared by ITS MidAmerica of all business, transactions, and decisions at official Executive Committee meetings.
These records shall be certified as correct by the President and shall be mailed to the Executive Committee members within twenty (20) calendar days following an official meeting.
M. Member Duties.
Executive Committee members function as individuals to promote the ITS Mid-America mission and not as agents or representatives of any organization with which they may be associated.
N. Reimbursement of Expenses.
Executive Committee officers and members shall receive no compensation from ITS Mid-America for their services to ITS MidAmerica in these capacities.
However, Executive Committee officers and members of ITS Mid-America may receive reimbursement for necessary and reasonable outof-pocket expenses, as determined by the Governing Board.
Page 17
Rev. 9/7/00
V - COMMITTEES A. 1.
Authority.
The President of the Executive Committee or the Chairperson of the Governing Board may designate such standing and ad hoc committees as are considered to be necessary to carry out the purposes of ITS Mid-America.
2.
The Governing Board may, by resolution, designate one or more committees from among the Board members and other persons, which, to the extent provided in the resolution, shall have and may exercise the powers of the Governing Board and the management of the business and affairs of ITS MidAmerica.
However, no such committee shall exercise the authority of the Governing Board with regard to: (a) (b) (c) the election of Board members or Officers of the Executive Committee; the establishment of or appointment of members to, any committee; the amendment of these Bylaws.
Officers of the Executive Committee shall be ex-officio, voting members of each committee designated by the Board.
Each Governing Board designated committee shall serve at the pleasure of the Board and shall keep regular minutes of its meetings and report its activities to the Board as the Board shall determine.
3.
The Executive Committee may, by resolution, designate one or more committees from among Executive Committee Members and other persons.
B. Vacancies.
Vacancies in the membership of the committee may be filled by appointments made in the same manner as provided in the case of the original appointments.
C. Resignation.
A committee member may resign by written notice to the Committee Chairperson.
Unless another time is specified in the notice or determined by the Committee Chairperson, a member's resignation shall be effective upon receipt by the Committee Chairperson.
D. Removal.
A member of a committee may be removed from the committee, for any reason, upon a vote of two-thirds (2/3) of the committee members Page 18 Rev. 9/7/00
E.
Manner of Acting.
Unless otherwise provided in the resolution of the Governing Board, once the Executive Committee designates a committee, the act of a majority of the members present at a meeting shall be the act of the committee.
Each committee may adopt rules for its own governance not inconsistent with these Bylaws or with rules adopted by the Governing Board.
Page 19
Rev. 9/7/00
VI - CONTRACTS, CHECKS, DEPOSITS, FUNDS
A.
Contracts.
The Governing Board shall authorize any officer of the Executive Committee to enter into any contract or execute and deliver any instrument in the name of and on behalf of the organization and such authority may be general or confined to specific instances.
B.
Checks.
All checks, drafts, orders for the payment of money, notes, or other evidences of indebtedness issued in the name of ITS Mid-America, shall be signed by two officers, or agents of ITS Mid-America and in such manner as shall from time to time be determined by resolution of the Governing Board.
In the absence of such determination by the Governing Board, these instruments shall be signed by the Treasurer to the Governing Board.
C.
Deposits.
All funds of ITS Mid-America shall be deposited to the credit of ITS MidAmerica in such banks or other depositories as the Treasurer to the Governing Board may select with the approval of the Governing Board.
Page 20
Rev. 9/7/00
VII - BOOKS AND RECORDS
ITS Mid-America shall keep correct and complete books and records of account and shall also keep highlight minutes of the proceedings of its Governing Board, Executive Committee and any committees.
VIII - FISCAL YEAR
The fiscal year of the Organization shall begin on the first day of January and end on the last day of December.
IX - LIMITATION ON ORGANIZATION ACTIVITIES
The Organization shall not rate, endorse, or certify any product or service of suppliers.
X ­ INDEMNIFICATION
ITS Mid-America assumes no responsibility for the actions of its Governing Board, Executive Committee or members.
XI ­ PROCEDURE The rules contained in the most recent edition of Robert's Rules of Order shall provide the rules of procedure for ITS Mid-America where they are not inconsistent with the provisions of these Bylaws.
Page 21
Rev. 9/7/00
XII ­ PROVISIONS FOR ANTITRUST COMPLIANCE
A.
Antitrust Policy.
It is the policy of ITS Mid-America to comply strictly with the letter and spirit of all federal, state and applicable international trade regulations and antitrust laws.
Any activities of the Society or Society-related actions of its staff, officers, directors, or members which violate these regulations and laws are detrimental to the interests of the Society and are contrary to Society policy.
B.
Meeting Guidelines.
All meetings will be conducted in strict compliance with the ITS AMERICA Antitrust Guidelines.
Any discussion or activities which appear to violate these guidelines shall not be permitted and if they continue, the meeting will be adjourned and the appropriate action taken.
Page 22
Rev. 9/7/00
XIII ­ AMENDMENTS TO BYLAWS
These Bylaws may be altered, amended, or repealed; and new Bylaws may be adopted by the affirmative vote of two-thirds of the members of ITS Mid-America present in person at any meeting called for that purpose, if at least thirty (30) days' written notice, setting forth the proposed changes, is given of intention to alter, amend, or repeal, or to adopt new Bylaws at such meeting.
Page 23
Rev. 9/7/00
