ASSISTED LIVING ADVISORY WORKGROUP Assisted Living Definitions by State Extracted from the National Academy for State Health Policy's State Assisted Living Policy: 2002 by Robert Mollica, Senior Program Director of the NASHP Alabama - Assisted living facility "means a permanent building, portion of a building, or group of buildings (not to include mobile homes and trailers) in which room, board, meals, laundry, and assistance with personal care and other services are provided for not less than twenty-four hours in any week to a minimum of two ambulatory adults not related by blood or marriage to the owner and/or administrator."
Alaska - The law creates "Chapter 33.
Assisted Living Homes" to emphasize that assisted living serves as the resident's home.
The statute applies to residential facilities serving three or more adults who are not related to the owner of the residence by blood or marriage; that provide housing and food service; and that provide, obtain, or offer to provide or obtain assistance with activities of daily living, personal assistance (help with IADLs, obtaining supportive services [recreational, leisure, transportation, social, legal, et. al.], awareness of the resident's whereabouts when traveling in the community, and monitoring activities), or a combination of ADL assistance and personal assistance.
Arizona - Assisted living facility means a residential care institution, including adult foster care, that provides or contracts to provide supervisory care services, personal care services, or directed care services on a continuing basis.
Supervisory care services mean general supervision, including daily awareness of resident functioning and continuing needs, the ability to intervene in a crisis, and assistance in the self-administration of prescribed medications.
Personal care services mean assistance with activities of daily living that can be performed by persons without professional skills or professional training and include the coordination or provision of intermittent nursing services and the administration of medication and treatments by a nurse who is licensed pursuant to Title 32, Chapter 15, or as otherwise provided by law.
Directed care services mean programs and services, including personal care services, provided to persons who are incapable of recognizing danger, summoning assistance, expressing need, or making basic care decisions.
Assisted living homes serve ten or fewer residents and assisted living centers serve eleven or more residents.
The Arizona Long Term Care Systems (ALTCS) Program contracts with adult foster care (four or fewer in which the provider lives in the home), assisted living homes (ten or fewer, owner is not a resident), and assisted living centers, but only centers that offer residential units (apartments).
Arkansas - Residential long-term care facility means a building or structure which is used or maintained to provide, for pay on a 24-hour basis, a place of residence and board for three or more individuals whose functional capabilities may have been impaired, but who do not require hospital or nursing home care on a daily basis but could require other assistance with activities of daily living.
An Assisted Living Facility (ALF) is any building or buildings, section, or distinct part of a building, boarding home, home for the aged, or other residential facility whether operated for profit or not that undertakes through its ownership or management to provide assisted living services for a period exceeding 24 hours to more than three adult residents of the facility who are not relatives of the owner or administrator.
Assisted living facility means facilities in which assisted living services are provided either directly or through contractual arrangements or in which contracting in the name of residents is facilitated.
An assisted living facility provides, at a minimum, services to assist residents in performing all activities of daily living on a 24-hour basis.
An Alzheimer's Special Care Unit is a separate and distinct unit within an assisted living or other long term care facility that segregates and provides a special program for residents with a diagnosis of probable Alzheimer's disease or related dementia, and that advertises, markets, or otherwise promotes the facility as providing specialized Alzheimer's or related dementia care services.
Page 2 of 15 State Definitions of Assisted Living California - A residential care facility for the elderly is defined as a housing arrangement chosen voluntarily by the resident--or the resident's guardian, conservator, or other responsible person--where 75% of the residents are 60 years of age or older, or, if younger, have needs compatible with other residents, and where varying levels of care and supervision are provided, as agreed to at time of admission or as determined necessary at subsequent times of reappraisal.
Colorado - The new law rules describe "assisted living residence" or "residence" as a residential facility that makes available to three or more adults not related to the owner of such facility, either directly or indirectly through a resident agreement with the resident, room and board and at least the following services: personal services; protective oversight; social care due to impaired capacity to live independently; and regular supervision that shall be available on a 24-hour basis, but not to the extent that regular 24-hour medical or nursing care is required.
The term "assisted living residence" does not include any facility licensed in this state as a residential care facility for individuals with developmental disabilities, or any individual residential support services that are excluded from licensure requirements pursuant to rules adopted by the department.
A personal care boarding home is "a residential facility that makes available to three or more adults not related to the owner of such facility, either directly or indirectly through a provider agreement, room and board and personal services, protective oversight, and social care due to impaired capacity to live independently, but not to the extent that regular 24-hour medical or nursing care is required."
Connecticut - Assisted living services means nursing services and assistance with ADLs provided to clients living within a managed group-living environment having supportive services that encourage clients primarily age 55 or older to maintain a maximum level of independence.
Routine household services may be provided as assisted living services or by the managed residential community.
These services provide an alternative for elderly persons who require some help or aid with ADLs and/or nursing services.
A managed residential community means a facility consisting of private residential units that provides a managed group living environment, including housing and services primarily for persons age 55 or older.
Delaware - Assisted living is a special combination of housing, supportive services, supervision, personalized assistance, and health care designed to respond to the individual needs of those who need help with activities of daily living and/or instrumental activities of daily living.
Rest residential home is an institution that provides resident beds and personal care services for persons who are normally able to manage activities of daily living.
The home should provide friendly understanding to persons living there as well as appropriate care in order that the resident's self-esteem, self-image, and role as a contributing member of the community may be reinforced.
District of Columbia - An assisted living residence means an entity, whether public or private, for profit or not for profit, that combines housing, health, and personal assistance--in accordance with individually developed service plans--for the support of individuals who are unrelated to the owner or operator of the entity.
A community residence facility is one that provides safe, hygienic sheltered living arrangements for one or more individuals aged 18 years or older (except in the case of group homes for mentally retarded persons, no minimum age limitation shall apply), not related by blood or marriage to the residence director, who are ambulatory and able to perform the activities of daily living with minimal assistance.
The definition includes facilities, including halfway houses and group homes for mentally retarded persons, which provide a sheltered living arrangement for persons who desire or require supervision or assistance within a protective environment because of physical, mental, familial, or social circumstances, or mental retardation.
The definition does not include facilities providing sheltered living arrangements to persons who are in the custody of the Department of Corrections of the District of Columbia.
Florida - "Assisted living facility means any building or buildings, section of a building or distinct part of a building, residence, private home, boarding home, home for the aged or other place, whether operated for profit or not, which undertakes to provide through its ownership or management, for a period exceeding 24 hours, housing, food service, and one or more personal services for four or more adults, not related to the owner or administrator by blood or marriage, who
Page 3 of 15 State Definitions of Assisted Living require such services; or to provide extended congregate care, limited nursing services, or limited mental health services, when specifically licensed to do so pursuant to s. 400.407, unless the facility is licensed as an adult family care home."
Standard: A facility licensed to provide housing, meals, and one or more personal care services for a period exceeding 24 hours.
Personal care services include direct physical assistance with or supervision of a resident's activities of daily living and the self-administration of medication and similar services.
The facility may employ or contract with a person licensed under Chapter 464, F.S., to administer medication and perform other tasks as specified in s. 400.4255.
F.S., such as take vital signs, give prepackaged enemas ordered by the physician, observe residents, and document in the resident's record.
Limited nursing services: A facility licensed to provide any of the services under a standard license and those services specified in s. 58A-5.0131(1)(a)-(m).
Those services include: conducting passive range of motion exercises; applying ice caps or collars; applying heat....; cutting toenails of diabetic residents or residents with a documented circulatory problem if the written approval of the resident's health care provider has been obtained; performing ear and eye irrigations; conducting a urine dipstick test; replacing established self-maintained in-dwelling catheter or performing intermittent urinary catheterizations; performing digital stool removal therapies; applying and changing routine dressings that do not require packing but are for abrasions, skin tears, and closed surgical wounds; caring for Stage II pressure sores; caring for casts, braces, and splints; conducting nursing assessments if conducted by, or under the direct supervision of, a registered nurse; and for hospice patients, providing any nursing service permitted within the scope of the nurse's license including 24-hour supervision.
Extended congregate care: A facility licensed to provide any of the services under a standard license and LNS license including any nursing service permitted within the scope of the nurse's license consistent with ALF residency requirements and the facility's written policy and procedures.
A facility with this type of license enables residents to age in place in a residential environment despite mental or physical limitations that might otherwise disqualify them from residency under a standard or LNS license.
This definition creates a higher level of care in assisted living which requires an additional license.
Facilities with an ECC license must develop policies which allow residents to age in place and which maximize the independence, dignity, choice, and decision making; specify the personal and supportive services that will be provided; specify the nursing services to be provided; and describe the procedures to ensure that unscheduled service needs are met.
Limited mental health license: An ALF that is licensed to serve three or more mental health residents.
A mental health resident is an individual who receives social security disability income or SSI income due to a mental disorder as defined by the Social Security Administration and receives optional state supplementation.
The facility, mental health resident, and case manager must complete a community living support plan that includes the needs of the resident that must be met in order to enable the resident to live in an ALF and the community.
The mental health provider and the facility must execute a cooperative agreement with each mental health resident which provides procedures and directions for accessing emergency and after-hours care.
Georgia - "Any dwelling, whether operated for profit or not, which undertakes through its ownership or management to provide or arrange for the provision of housing, food services, and one or more personal services for two or more adults who are not related to the owner or administrator by blood or marriage."
Hawaii - Assisted living facility means a facility as defined in §321-15.1, HRS.
This facility shall consist of a building complex offering dwelling units to individuals and services to allow residents to maintain an independent assisted living lifestyle.
The environment of assisted living shall include one in which meals are provided, staff are available on a 24hour basis, and services are based on the individual needs of each resident.
Each resident, family member, and significant other shall work together with the facility staff to assess what is needed to support the resident in his or her greatest capacity for living independently.
The facility shall be designed to maximize the independence and self-esteem of limited mobility persons who feel that they are no longer able to live on their own.
Assisted living means encouraging and supporting individuals to live independently and receive services and assistance to maintain independence.
All individuals have a right to live independently with respect for their privacy and dignity and to live in a setting free from restraints.
Page 4 of 15 State Definitions of Assisted Living Adult residential care facility means any facility providing 24-hour living accommodations, for a fee, to adults unrelated to the family, who require at least minimal assistance in ADLs, but who do not need the services of an intermediate care facility.
There are two types of homes.
Type I homes serve five or fewer residents, and Type II serve six or more residents.
Adult residential care homes may obtain an extended care license to serve a limited number of residents who meet the nursing home level of care.
Idaho - Residential and assisted living facility means one or more buildings constituting a facility or residence, however named, operated on either a profit or non-profit basis, for the purpose of providing 24-hour care for three or more adults who need personal care or assistance and supervision essential for sustaining activities of daily living or for the protection of the individual.
Specialized care units/facilities for Alzheimer's and dementia residents - are specifically designed, dedicated, and operated to provide the elderly individual with chronic confusion, or dementing illness, or both, with the maximum potential to reside in an unrestrictive environment through the provision of a supervised life-style which is safe, secure, structured but flexible, stress free and encourages physical activity through a well developed activity and recreational program.
The program constantly strives to enable residents to maintain the highest practicable physical, mental or psycho-social wellbeing."
Illinois - Assisted living establishment means a home, building or residence, or any other place where sleeping accommodations are provided for at least three unrelated adults, at least 80 percent of whom are 55 years of age or older and where the following are provided consistent with the purpose of this act: · · Services consistent with a social model that is based on the premise that a resident's unit in assisted living and shared housing is his or her own home; Community based residential care for persons who need assistance with ADLs, including personal, supportive, and intermittent health-related services available 24 hours per day, if needed, to meet the scheduled and unscheduled needs of a resident; Mandatory services, whether provided directly by the establishment or by another entity arranged for by the establishment with the consent of the resident; and A physical environment that is a homelike setting that includes the following and such other elements as established by the Department in conjunction with the assisted living and shared housing advisory board: individual living units each of which shall accommodate small kitchen appliances and contain private bathing, washing, and toilet facilities, or private washing and toilet facilities with a common bathing room readily accessible to each resident.
Units shall be maintained for single occupancy unless shared by consent.
· ·
Shared housing establishment means a publicly or privately operated free-standing residence for 12 or fewer persons, at least 80 percent of whom are 55 years of age or older and who are unrelated to the owners and one manager of the residence, where the following are provided: Services consistent with a social model that is based on the premise that the resident's unit is his or her own home; Community-based residential care for persons who need assistance with ADLs, including housing and personal, supportive, and intermittent health-related services available 24 hours per day, if needed, to meet the scheduled and unscheduled needs of a resident, and Mandatory services, whether provided directly by the establishment or by another entity arranged for by the establishment with the consent of the resident.
Sheltered care facility means a facility licensed under the nursing home care act that provides maintenance and personal care but does not provide routine nursing care.
Page 5 of 15 State Definitions of Assisted Living Supportive living facility (SLF) means a residential setting that provides personal care services, 24- hour supervision and assistance (scheduled and unscheduled), activities, and health related services with a service program and physical environment designed to minimize the need for residents to move within or from the setting to accommodate changing needs and preferences; has an organized mission, service programs, and a physical environment designed to maximize residents' dignity, autonomy, privacy, and independence; and encourages family and community involvement.
Indiana - Residential care facilities.
A facility that provides room, food, laundry, and occasional assistance in daily living for residents who need less services than the degree of service provided by a comprehensive care facility (nursing home).
There is an overall general supervision of health care, medications, and diets as defined in the written policies of the facility.
Housing with service establishment is defined as an establishment providing sleeping accommodations to at least five residents and offering or providing for a fee at least one regularly scheduled health related service or at least two regularly scheduled supportive services.
Health related services mean attendant and personal care services, professional nursing services, and central storage of medications.
Supportive services mean personal laundry, handling or assisting with personal funds, arranging for medical services, health related services, or social services.
Iowa - "Assisted living means provision of housing with services which may include but are not limited to health related care, personal care and assistance with instrumental activities of daily living to six or more tenants in a physical structure which provides a home-like environment.
Assisted living also includes encouragement of family involvement, tenant selfdirection, and tenant participation in decisions that emphasize choice, dignity, privacy, individuality, shared risk, and independence.
Assisted living includes the provision of housing and assistance with instrumental activities of daily living only if personal care or health related care is also included."
96 Acts, Chapter 1192.
SF 2193 modified the definition by including housing and IADLs only if personal care and health related services are included.
A dementia-specific assisted living program means an assisted living program that either serves five or more tenants with dementia or cognitive disorder at Stage 4 or above on the Global Deterioration Scale or holds itself out as providing special care for persons with cognitive disorder or dementia, such as Alzheimer's disease, in a dedicated setting.
Kansas - Assisted living facility means any place or facility caring for six or more individuals not related within the third degree of relationship to the administrator, operator, or owner by blood or marriage and who, by choice or due to functional impairments, may need personal care and may need supervised nursing care to compensate for activities of daily living limitations and in which the place or facility includes apartments for residents and provides or coordinates a range of services including personal care or supervised nursing care available 24-hours a day, seven days a week for the support of resident independence.
The provision of skilled nursing procedures to a resident in an assisted living facility is not prohibited by this act.
Generally, the skilled services provided in an assisted living facility shall be provided on an intermittent or limited term basis, or, if limited in scope, on a regular basis.
The rules provide that the administrator or operator of facilities ensure that written policies and procedures are developed and implemented which incorporate the principles of individuality, autonomy, dignity, choice, privacy, and a home-like environment.
Kentucky - Assisted living community (ALC) means a series of living units on the same site, operated as one business entity, and certified under KRS 194A.707 to provide services for five or more adult persons not related within the third degree of consanguinity to the owner or manager.
Personal care homes (PCHs) are establishments with permanent facilities including resident beds.
Services provided include continuous supervision, basic health and related services, personal care services, residential care services, and social and recreational activities.
Louisiana - Adult residential care home means a publicly or privately operated residence that provides personal assistance, lodging, and meals (for compensation) to two or more adults who are unrelated to the residence licensee, owner, or director.
Page 6 of 15 State Definitions of Assisted Living Assisted living home/facility means an adult residential care facility that provides room, board, and personal services, for compensation, to two or more residents that reside in individual living units which contain, at a minimum, one room with a kitchenette and a private bathroom.
Personal care home means an adult residential care facility that provides room, board, and personal services, for compensation, to two but not more than eight residents in a congregate living setting and is in a home that is designed as any other private dwelling in the neighborhood.
Shelter care home means an adult residential care facility that provides room, board, and personal services, for compensation, to nine or more residents in a congregate living and dining setting.
Maine - Chapter 1664 established a category of assisted housing programs that cover two types of settings in which services are provided: residential care facilities and independent housing.
It further defined service and housing programs as follows: An assisted living program consists of assisted living services provided 1) to residents in private apartments in buildings that include a common dining area and 2) either directly by the provider or indirectly through contracts with persons, entities, or agencies.
An independent housing with services program consists of assisted housing services provided 1) to residents in private apartments in buildings that include a common dining area and 2) either directly by the provider or indirectly through contracts with persons, entities, or agencies.
Independent housing with services programs would not be allowed to provide medication administration or nursing services.
Assisted housing services are provided by an assisted housing program and consist of housing, assistance with ADLs and IADLs, personal supervision, protection from environmental hazards, meals, diet care, care management, and diversional or motivational activities.
Assisted living services add medication administration or medication administration and nursing services to the list of services covered by assisted housing services.
The remaining information summarizes existing rules.
Residential care facility is a house or other place that, for consideration, is maintained wholly or partly for the purpose of providing residents with assisted living services.
Residential care facilities provide housing and services to residents in private or semi-private bedrooms in buildings with common living areas and dining areas.
Residential care facility does not include a licensed nursing home or a supported living arrangement certified by the Department of Behavioral and Developmental Services.
Assisted living services mean the provision by a single entity of housing and assistance with ADLs and IADLs.
Assisted living services must be provided by the provider of housing either directly by that provider or indirectly through written or verbal contracts with persons, entities, or agencies.
Services may include, but are not limited to, personal supervision; protection from environmental hazards; ADLs; administration of medication; diversional, motivational, or recreational activities; dietary services; and nursing services.
A congregate housing services program (CHSP) is a comprehensive program of supportive services (including meals, housekeeping, and chore assistance), case management, and other services that are delivered on the site of congregate housing and assists occupants to manage ADLs and IADLs.
Congregate housing services may also include personal care assistance, with or without supervision, or assistance in the administration of medication and nursing services subject to the licensing requirements.
Level I residential care facility (formerly known as adult foster homes or certain six-bed boarding homes) means a residential care facility with a licensed capacity of six or fewer residents.
A Level I plus facility serves five or six residents
Page 7 of 15 State Definitions of Assisted Living or employs three or more employees.
Level II residential care facility means "a house or other place that is licensed to care for seven or more residents that is maintained wholly or partly for the purpose of providing residents with assisted living services."
Alzheimer's/dementia care unit means a designated separate area for residents wi provides specialized programs, services, resident outside the designated or separa unit, facility, or distinct part of a facility that provides care/services in a th Alzheimer's disease or other dementia.
The unit, facility, or distinct part and activities and is locked, segregated, or secured to provide or limit access by a ted area.
Maryland - An assisted living program is "a residential or facility-based program that provides housing and supportive services, supervision, personalized assistance, health related services, or a combination thereof to meet the needs of residents who are unable to perform, or who need assistance in performing, the activities of daily living or instrumental activities of daily living in a way that promotes optimum dignity and independence for the residents."
Massachusetts - Assisted living residence is any entity, however organized, whether conducted for profit or not for profit, which meets all of the following criteria: Provides room and board; provides, directly by employees of the entity or through arrangements with another organization which the entity may or may not control or own, assistance with activities of daily living for three or more adult residents who are not related by consanguinity of affinity to their care provider; and collects payments or third-party reimbursements from or on behalf of residents to pay for the provision of assistance with the activities of daily living.
Michigan - Homes for the aged means a supervised personal care facility, other than a hotel, adult foster care facility, hospital, nursing home, or county medical care facility, that provides room, board, and supervised personal care to 21 or more unrelated, non-transient individuals 60 years of age or older.
Home for the aged includes a supervised personal care facility for 20 or fewer individuals 60 years of age or older if the facility is operated in conjunction with and as a distinct part of a licensed nursing home.
Adult foster homes.
There are two levels of adult foster homes, those that serve 12 or fewer and those that 13 and 20 residents.
An adult foster care facility is a governmental or nongovernmental establishment that care to adults.
Adult foster care facilities include facilities and foster care family homes for adults who are ill, developmentally disabled, or physically handicapped who require supervision on an ongoing basis but require continuous nursing care.
serve between provides foster aged, mentally who do not
Minnesota - A housing with services establishment means "an establishment providing sleeping accommodations to one or more adult residents, at least 80% of which are 55 years of age or older, and offering or providing for a fee, one or more regularly scheduled health-related services and two or more regularly scheduled supportive services, whether offered or provided directly or by another entity arranged for by the establishment."
The state's Medicaid waiver defines assisted living services as "up to 24-hour oversight and supervision, supportive services, home care aide tasks and individualized home management tasks provided to residents of a residential center living in their own units/apartments with a full kitchen and bathroom."
A full kitchen includes a conventional stove with an oven, refrigerator, food preparation counter space, and a kitchen utensil storage compartment.
Mississippi - "Facility means any home or institution that (1) has sought or is currently seeking designation as a licensed facility under the terms of these regulations; or (2) is operating a home or institution unlawfully which, by its nature and operational intent, is required to be a licensed facility under the terms of these regulations."
Personal Care Home: Residential Living.
The terms "Personal Care Home - Residential" and "Residential Personal Care Home" are defined as any place or facility operating 24 hours a day, seven days a week, accepting individuals who require personal care services or individuals, who due to functional impairments, may require mental health services to compensate for activities of daily living.
Regulation by the licensing agency for such facilities are governed by the "Regulations Governing Licensure of Personal Care Homes - Residential."
Page 8 of 15 State Definitions of Assisted Living Personal Care Home: Assisted Living.
The terms "Personal Care Home - Assisted Living" and "Assisted Living Personal Care Home" are defined as any place or facility operating 24 hours a day, seven days a week, accepting individuals who require assisted living services as governed by the state's regulations.
Missouri - Residential Care Facility I (RCF I) means any premises--other than a Residential Care Facility II, intermediate care facility, or skilled nursing facility--which is utilized by its owner, operator, or manager to provide 24hour care to three or more residents, who are not related within the fourth degree of consanguinity or affinity to the owner, operator, or manager of the facility and who need or are provided with shelter, board, and with protective oversight, which may include storage and distribution or administration of medications and care during short-term illness or recuperation.
Residential Care Facility II (RCF II) adds to the definition of RCF I the supervision of diets, assistance in personal care, and supervision of health care under the direction of a licensed physician.
Facilities can be licensed to provide both levels of care within the same facility.
Montana - Personal Care Facilities.
A facility in which personal care is provided for residents in either a Category A bed or a Category B bed.
A facility must have a license for either Category A or Category B. Category A means the residents can self medicate, are mobile, continent, and generally in good health.
Category B means residents may be in need of nursing services; unable to self-medicate; incontinent; under chemical, physical, or medical restraint; or non-ambulatory.
A facility that does not have a Category B license may obtain one if the residents in the facility decline in health.
Facilities may have up to five residents who fall into this category.
Nebraska - An assisted living facility is a facility where shelter, food, and care are provided for remuneration for a period of more than 24 consecutive hours to four or more persons residing at such facility who require or request such services due to age, illness, or physical disability.
This definition does not include (a) those homes, apartments, or facilities providing casual care at irregular intervals and (b) those homes, apartments, or facilities in which a competent resident provides or contracts for his or her own personal or professional services and no more than 25 percent of the residents receive such services.
A competent resident is someone who has the capability and capacity to make an informed decision.
No facility may hold itself out to be assisted living unless it is licensed.
Nevada - An adult group home for the elderly or disabled means a residential facility which provides care to three or more elderly or disabled persons requiring assistance and protective supervision due to infirmity or disability.
(Added by statute effective July 2003.
The term includes without limitation an assisted living facility.)
An Alzheimer's group home means a residential facility which provides care and protective supervision for three or more persons with Alzheimer's disease or related diseases to include: senile dementia, organic brain syndrome, or other cognitive impairments.
New Hampshire - "Residential care facilities, whether or not they are private homes or other structures built or adapted for the purpose of providing residential care, offering services beyond room and board to two or more individuals who may or may not be elderly or suffering from illness, injury, deformity, infirmity, or other permanent or temporary physical or mental disability.
Such facilities include those: 1.
Offering residents home-like living arrangements and social or health services including, but not limited to, providing supervision, medical monitoring, assistance in daily living, protective care or monitoring and supervision of medications; or 2.
Offering residents social, health, or medical services including, but not limited to, medical or nursing supervision, medical care or treatment, in addition to any services included under subparagraph (1).
Such homes or facilities shall include, but not be limited to, nursing homes, sheltered care facilities, rest homes, residential care facilities, board and care homes, or any other location, however, named, whether owned publicly or privately or operated for profit or not."
Page 9 of 15 State Definitions of Assisted Living The statute indicates that residential care requires a minimum of regulation and reflects the availability of assistance in personal and social activities with a minimum of supervision or health care, which can be provided in a home or homelike setting.
Supported residential health care reflects the availability of social or health services, as needed, from appropriately trained or licensed individuals, who need not be employees of the facility, but residents shall not require nursing services complex enough to require 24-hour nursing supervision.
Such facilities may also include short-term medical care for residents of the facility who may be convalescing from an illness and these residents shall be capable of self-evacuation.
Supportive residential care serves residents who do not need 24-hour nursing care except on a short-term basis.
Residents may need help with ADLs but must be able to evacuate with assistance.
Residential care homes are a step below supported residential care facilities and provide supervision and some ADL assistance.
HB 1220 defines assisted living residences as any entity that provides housing and holds itself out, through marketing, advertising, or use of the term "assisted living" or a similar designation, as providing or arranging for personal assistance or any health-related or supportive service beyond room and board to one or more adults who are not related to the owner of the residence by blood or marriage.
New Jersey ­ "Assisted living "means a coordinated array of supportive personal and health services, available 24-hours per day to residents who have been assessed to need these services, including residents who require formal long-term care.
Assisted living promotes resident self direction and participation in decisions that emphasize independence, individuality, privacy, dignity and homelike surroundings."
Assisted living residence means a facility which is licensed by the Department of Health and Senior Services to provide apartment-style housing and congregate dining and to assure that assisted living services are available when needed, for four or more adult persons unrelated to the proprietor.
Apartment units offer, at a minimum, one unfurnished room, a private bathroom, a kitchenette, and a lockable door on the unit entrance.
Comprehensive personal care home means "a facility which is licensed by the Department of Health and Senior Services to provide room and board and to assure that assisted living services are available when needed, to four or more adults unrelated to the proprietor.
Residential units may house no more than two residents and have a lockable door on the unit entrance."
Assisted living program (ALP) "means the provision of or arrangement of meals and assisted living services, when needed, to the tenants of publicly subsidized housing which because of federal, state or local housing laws, regulations or requirements cannot become licensed as an assisted living residence.
An assisted living program may also provide staff resources and other services to a licensed assisted living residence and a licensed comprehensive personal care home."
In these instances, ALPs must comply with the licensing standards that are appropriate to the setting.
New Mexico - Adult residential care whose primary purpose is to provide programmatic services, room, board, and/or general supervision to two or facility means any congregate residence, maternity shelter, or building for adults, to residents, within the facility, either directly or through contract services, assistance with activities of daily living, in accordance with the program narrative, more adults who have difficulty living independently or managing their own affairs.
Medicaid.
Assisted living is a special combination of housing and personalized health care service designed to respond to the individual needs of waiver recipients who require assistance with activities of daily living (e.g., ability to perform tasks that are essential for self care, such as bathing, feeding oneself, dressing, toileting, and transferring) and instrumental activities of daily living (e.g., ability to care for household and social tasks to meet individual needs within the community).
Assisted living is based on the following fundamental principles of practice: individuality, independence, privacy, dignity, choice, and a home-like environment.
Assisted living services are packaged per individual recipient needs.
New York - The report would broadly define assisted living as the provision, arrangement, or coordination, either directly or indirectly, of housing, home care, and any other services requiring licensure or certification under Article 7 of Social Services Law or Article 36 of Public Health Law.
The report states: "The definition covers a wide array of housing with services options and provides maximum choice and flexibility."
Page 10 of 15 State Definitions of Assisted Living An adult care home is established and operated for the purpose of providing long-term residential care, room, board, housekeeping, personal care, and supervision to five or more adults unrelated to the operator.
Adult homes may be either proprietary, public, or non-profit.
An enriched housing program means an adult care facility established and operated for the purpose of providing longterm residential care to five or more adults, primarily persons 65 years of age or older (no more than 25 percent under 65 and all are 55 or older), in community integrated settings resembling independent housing units.
Such programs must provide or arrange for the provision of room and board, housekeeping, personal care, and supervision.
Assisted Living Program (ALP) (Medicaid program) is available in some adult home and enriched housing programs, combines residential and home care services.
It is designed as an alternative to nursing home placement for individuals who have historically been admitted to nursing homes for social rather than medical reasons.
The operator of the ALP is responsible for providing or arranging for resident services that must include room, board, housekeeping, supervision, personal care, case management, and home health services.
North Carolina - Assisted living residence means any group housing and services program for two or more adults, by whatever name it is called, which makes available, at a minimum, one meal per day and housekeeping services and provides personal care services directly or through a formal written agreement with one or more licensed home care agencies.
The Department may allow nursing service exceptions on a case by case basis.
Assisted living residences are to be distinguished from nursing homes subject to the provisions of G.S. 131E-102.
There are two types of assisted living residences: adult care homes and group homes for developmentally disabled adults.
Adult care home is an assisted living residence in which the housing management provides 24-hour scheduled and unscheduled personal care services to two or more residents, either directly or, for scheduled needs, through formal written agreement with licensed home care or hospice agencies.
There are three types of adult care homes.
1.
Adult care homes licensed for seven or more beds; 2.
Family care home: an adult care home licensed for 2 to 6 beds; and 3.
Group home for developmentally disabled adults: an adult care home which is licensed for two to nine beds for developmentally disabled adult residents.
Multi-unit assisted housing with services means "an assisted living residence in which hands- on personal care services and nursing services which are arranged by housing management are provided by a licensed home care or hospice agency, through an individualized written care plan."
Multi-unit assisted housing with service programs are required to register with the Division of Facility Services and to provide a disclosure statement.
North Dakota - Assisted Living (HB 1109 created in 2001) changed the definition of assisted living facility to any building or structure containing a series of living units operated as one business entity to provide services for five or more individuals who are aged or disabled adults and who are related by blood or marriage to the owner or manager of the entity and which is kept, used, maintained, advertised, or held out to the public as a place that makes available individualized support services to accommodate an individual's needs and abilities to maintain as much independence as possible.
It does not include a facility that is licensed as a basic care facility or a congregate housing facility.
Assisted living facilities must be registered.
Basic care facility means "a residence licensed by the department ... that provides room and board to five or more individuals who are not related by blood or marriage to the owner or manager of the residence and who, because of impaired capacity for independent living, require health, social or personal care services, but do not require regular 24hour medical or nursing services and makes response staff available at all times to meet the 24-hour scheduled and unscheduled needs of the individual; or, is kept, used, maintained, advertized, or held out publicly as an Alzheimer's, dementia, or specialty memory care facility.
to assist the residents to attain or maintain their highest level of functioning,
Page 11 of 15 State Definitions of Assisted Living consistent with the resident assessment and care plan, to five or more residents not related by blood or marriage to the owner or manager."
Ohio - Residential care facility means a home that provides either of the following: 1.
Accommodations for 17 or more unrelated individuals and supervision of personal care services for three or more of those individuals who are dependent on the services of others by reason of age or physical or mental impairment.
2.
Accommodations for three or more unrelated individuals, supervision, and personal care services for at least three of those individuals who are dependent on the services of others by reason of age or physical or mental impairment and to at least one of those individuals, any of the skilled nursing care authorized by section 3721.011 of the revised code.
Any entity that meets this definition must be licensed.
Adult care facility means an adult family home or an adult group home.
An adult family home is a residence or facility that provides accommodations to three to five unrelated adults and supervision and personal care services to at least three of those adults.
Adult group homes provide accommodations to six to sixteen unrelated adults and supervision and personal care to at least three of the unrelated adults.
If a residence, facility, institution, hotel, congregate housing project, or similar facility provides services that meet the definition of a residential care facility or an adult care facility, then it must be licensed accordingly, regardless of how the facility holds itself out to the public.
Oklahoma - An assisted living center means any home or establishment offering, coordinating, or providing services to two or more persons who: · · · · · · Are domiciled therein; Are unrelated to the operator; By choice or functional impairments, need assistance with personal care or nursing supervision; May need intermittent or unscheduled nursing care; May need medication assistance; and May need assistance with transfer and/or ambulation.
No facilities may call themselves an assisted living center or a continuum of care facility unless they are licensed.
The bill allows assisted living centers to be licensed as a component of a nursing facility.
A continuum of care facility means a home, establishment, or institution providing nursing facility services and assisted living center services or adult day care center services.
Residential care home means any establishment or institution other than a hotel, motel, fraternity or sorority house, or college or university dormitory which offers or provides residential accommodations, food services, and supportive assistance to any of its residents or houses any resident requiring supportive assistance who is not related to the owner or administrator of the home by blood or marriage.
Said residents shall be ambulatory and essentially capable of managing their own affairs but do not routinely require skilled nursing care or intermediate care.
Oregon - "Assisted living means a building, complex or distinct part thereof, consisting of fully self-contained individual living units where six or more senior and persons with disabilities may reside.
The facility offers and coordinates a range of supportive personnel available on a 24-hour basis to meet the ADL, health services, and social needs of the residents
Page 12 of 15 State Definitions of Assisted Living described in these rules.
A program approach is used to promote resident self-direction and participation in decisions that emphasize choice, dignity, privacy, individuality, independence and home-like surroundings."
No facility may use the term assisted living unless it is licensed.
"Residential care facility means a facility that provides care for six or more persons over the age of 18 on a 24-hour basis in one or more buildings on contiguous property."
Pennsylvania - Personal care homes.
"A premises in which food, shelter and personal assistance or supervision are provided for a period exceeding 24 hours for four or more adults who are not relatives of the operator, who do not require the services in or of a licensed long-term facility, but who do require assistance or supervision in matters such as dressing, bathing, diet, financial management, evacuation of a home in the event of an emergency, or medication prescribed for self-administration."
Rhode Island - Assisted living residence is a publicly or privately operated residence that provides directly or indirectly by means of contracts or arrangements personal assistance to meet the resident's changing needs and preferences, lodging, and meals to two (2) or more adults.
. . .
Assisted living residences include sheltered care homes, and board and care residences, or any other entity by any other name providing the above services which meet the definition of assisted living residence."
There are four levels of licensure for residential care and assisted living facilities.
A residence may have areas within the facility that are licensed separately.
The levels are: · · · · Level F1: licensure for residents who are not capable of self preservation; and/or Level F2: licensure for residents who are capable of self preservation; or Level M1: licensure for residents who require central storage and administration of medications; or Level M2: licensure for facilities which only assist residents with self-administration of medications.
Alzheimer's special care unit/program means any assisted living residence that locks, secures, segregates, or provides a special program or a special unit for residents with a diagnosis of probable Alzheimer or a related disorder, to prevent or limit access by a resident outside the designated or separated areas; and that advertises or markets the residence as providing specialized Alzheimer/dementia care.
The state's Medicaid waiver defines assisted living as "personal care and services, homemaker, chore, attendant care, companion services, medication oversight (to the extent permitted under state law), therapeutic social and recreational programming, provided in a home-like environment in a licensed community care facility.
This service includes 24-hour, on-site response staff to meet unscheduled or unpredictable needs in a way that promotes maximum dignity and independence, and to provide supervision, safety and security."
South Carolina - Community residential care facility (CRCF).
"A facility which offers room and board and which, unlike a boarding house, provides/coordinates a degree of personal assistance for a period of time in excess of twenty-four consecutive hours for two or more persons, eighteen years old or older, not related to the licensee within the third degree of consanguinity.
It is designed to accommodate individual residents' changing needs and preferences, maximize residents' dignity, autonomy, privacy, independence and safety, and encourage family and community involvement.
Included in this definition is any facility (other than a hospital) which offers or represents to the public that if offers a beneficial or protected environment specifically for individuals who have mental illness or disabilities."
Alzheimer's Special Care Unit or Program.
"A facility or area within a facility providing a secure, segregated special program or unit for residents with a diagnosis of probable Alzheimer's disease and/or related dementia to prevent or limit access by a resident outside the designated or separated areas, and that advertises, markets, or otherwise promotes the facility as providing specialized care/services for persons with Alzheimer's disease and/or related dementia or both."
Page 13 of 15 State Definitions of Assisted Living South Dakota - An assisted living center is defined as "any institution, rest home, boarding home, place, building, or agency which is maintained and operated to provide personal care and services which meet some need beyond basic provision of food, shelter, and laundry to five or more persons in a free standing, physically separated facility."
Tennessee - Assisted care living facility (ACLF) means a building, establishment, complex, or distinct part thereof which accepts primarily aged persons for domiciliary care and which provides on site to its residents room, board, non-medical living assistance services appropriate to the residents' respective needs, and medical services as prescribed by each resident's treating physician, limited to the extent not covered by a physician's order to a home care organization and not actually provided by a home care organization.
An ACLF may directly provide such medical services as medication procedures, topicals, suppositories and injections (excluding intravenous) pursuant to a physician's order, and emergency response.
All other skilled nursing services (parttime or intermittent nursing care, physical occupation and speech therapy, medical social services, medical supplies other than drugs and biologicals, and durable medical equipment) that a home care organization is licensed to provide may be provided in the facility only by a licensed home care organization, except for home health aide services.
Home for the aged: a home which accepts aged persons for relatively permanent, domiciliary care.
It provides room, board, and personal services to one or more non-related persons.
A home for the aged may be any building, section of a building, or distinct part of a building, a residence, a private home, a boarding home for the aged, or other place, either for profit or not, which provides, for a period exceeding 24 hours, housing, food services, and one or more personal services for one or more aged persons who are not related to the owner or administrator by blood or marriage.
Homes for the aged must have agreements with a physician who is available to render care or who will come to the home to visit residents when necessary and with a nursing home that will accept its residents who must be discharged.
Texas - Assisted living facility is an establishment that furnishes, in one or more facilities, food and shelter to four or more persons who are unrelated to the proprietor of the establishment; and provides personal care services.
Facilities for persons with Alzheimer's disease.
Facilities that advertise, market, or otherwise promote their capacity to provide personal care services for people with Alzheimer's disease must be certified as a Type B facility.
Facilities for supervision of medication and general welfare is a separate category of assisted living that provides only medication supervision.
The rules license the following types of assisted living facilities: · · Type A home residents are capable of evacuating the facility unassisted, do not require routine attendance during night-time hours, and are capable of following directions under emergency conditions.
Type B facility residents may require staff assistance to evacuate, may not be able to follow directions, require attendance during the night, and while not permanently bedfast, may require assistance in transferring to and from a wheelchair.
Type C facilities are four-bed adult foster care facilities.
·
Medicaid.
Assisted living/residential care services provide a 24-hour living arrangement for persons who, because of a physical or mental limitation, are unable to continue independent functioning in their homes.
Services are provided in assisted living facilities licensed by the Texas Department of Human Services (DHS).
In effect, the rules recognize three types of units provided in licensed assisted living facilities.
Community based alternatives waiver participants are responsible for their room and board costs and, if applicable, a co-payment for assisted living/residential care services.
Utah - Assisted Living Type I is a residential facility that provides assistance with ADLs and social care to two or more ambulatory residents who are capable of achieving mobility sufficient to exit the facility without assistance of another person.
Page 14 of 15 State Definitions of Assisted Living Assisted Living Type II is a residential facility with a home-like setting that provides an array of coordinated supportive personal and health care services, available 24 hours a day, to residents who have been assessed.
Type I and II facilities may be classified as: large facilities (17 or more residents; facilities comply with the I-2 Uniform Building Code); small facilities (six to sixteen residents; facilities comply with the R-4 code); and limited capacity facilities (up to five residents; facilities comply with the R-3 code).
Vermont - Assisted living residence means a program or facility that combines housing, health, and supportive services to support resident independence and aging-in-place.
At a minimum, assisted living residences shall offer, within a homelike setting, a private bedroom, private bath, living space, kitchen capacity, and a lockable door.
Assisted living shall promote resident self-direction and active participation in decision-making while emphasizing individuality, privacy, and dignity.
Negotiated risk is a formal, mutually agreed upon, written understanding that results after balancing a resident's choices and capabilities with the possibility that those choices will place the resident at risk of harm.
Residential care home is a place, however named, excluding a licensed foster home, which provides for profit or otherwise, room, board, and personal care to three or more residents unrelated to the licensee.
Level III means a residential care home licensed to provide room, board, personal care, general supervision, medication management, and nursing overview.
Level IV homes do not provide nursing overview.
The Medicaid waiver for this program includes standards covering negotiated risk which is defined as "allowing residents choices in accepting certain risks.
These choices are negotiated between the resident, case manager, provider, and family members with the intent of fostering independence, safety, and self-determination."
Virginia - Assisted living facility means any congregate residential setting that provides or coordinates personal and health care services, 24-hour supervision, and assistance (scheduled and unscheduled) for the maintenance or care of four or more adults who are aged, infirm, or disabled and who are cared for in a primarily residential setting, except a facility or portion of a facility licensed by the State Board of Health or the Department of Mental Health, Mental Retardation and Substance Abuse Services (and other exceptions including HUD housing building).
Assisted living care means a level of service provided by an assisted living facility for adults who may have physical or mental impairments and require at least moderate assistance with activities of daily living.
Included in this level of services are individuals who are dependent in behavior pattern as documented on the uniform assessment instrument.
Residential living care means a level of service provided by an assisted living facility for adults who may have physical or mental impairments and require only minimal assistance with activities of daily living.
Minimal assistance means dependency in only one ADL or one or more IADLs or medication administration.
Washington - Boarding home means any home or other institution, however named, that is advertised, announced, or maintained for the express or implied purpose of providing board and domiciliary care to three or more aged persons not related by blood or marriage to the operator.
Medicaid.
Medicaid covers services in three types of boarding homes: assisted living, adult residential care and enhanced adult residential care.
"Assisted living services is a package of services, including personal care and limited nursing services, that the department contracts with a licensed boarding home to provide in accordance with Parts I and II of this chapter.
Assisted living services include housing for the residents in a private apartment-like unit."
The contract previously defined assisted living as "a coordinated array of personal care, health services, and other supportive services available 24 hours per day to residents who have been assessed to need these services.
Assisted living promotes resident self-direction and participation in decisions that emphasize independence, individuality, privacy, dignity, choice, and residential surroundings."
Adult Residential Care facilities are licensed boarding homes.
They provide room and board, help with personal care tasks, and may provide help with medications.
Residents may have limited supervision.
Page 15 of 15 State Definitions of Assisted Living Enhanced Adult Residential Care provides all of the same services as Adult Residential Care.
In addition, limited nursing care may be provided and no more than two people will share a room.
West Virginia - Personal care homes.
"Any institution, residence or place or any part or unit thereof, however named, in this state which is advertised, offered, maintained or operated by the ownership or management, whether for a consideration or not, for the express or implied purpose of providing accommodations and personal assistance and supervision, for a period of more than twenty-four hours, to four or more persons who are dependent upon the services of others by reason of physical or mental impairment who may require limited and intermittent nursing care, including those individuals who qualify for and are receiving services coordinated by a licensed hospice."
Residential board and care homes.
"Any residence or any part or unit thereof, however named, in this state which is advertised, offered, maintained or operated by the ownership or management, whether for a consideration or not, for the express or implied purpose of providing accommodations and personal assistance and supervision, for a period of more than twenty-four hours, to four to 10 persons who are not related to the owner or manager by blood or marriage within the degree of consanguinity of second cousin and are dependent upon the services of others by reason of physical or mental impairment or who may require limited and intermittent nursing care but are capable of self-preservation and are not bedfast, including those individuals who qualify for and are receiving services coordinated by a licensed hospice."
Residential care communities is a new category created by Chapter 163 (1997).
A residential care community means any group of 17 or more residential apartments, however named, which are part of a larger independent living community and which are advertised, offered, maintained, or operated by an owner or manager, regardless of consideration or the absence thereof, for the express or implied purpose of providing residential accommodations, personal assistance, and supervision on a monthly basis to 17or more persons who are or may be dependent upon the services of others by reason of physical or mental impairment or who may require limited and intermittent nursing care but who are capable of self-preservation and are not bedfast.
Alzheimer's/Dementia special care units means any licensed facilities, as defined in this rule, that provide specialized services, 24 hours per day, in a specialized unit in the facility, for residents with a diagnosis of Alzheimer's disease or related dementia; and that advertises, markets, or otherwise promotes the facility as providing a specialized unit for residents requiring Alzheimer's/dementia care services.
Wisconsin - Residential care apartment complex is "a place where five or more adults reside that consists of independent apartments, each of which has an individual lockable entrance and exit, a separate kitchen, including a stove, and individual bathroom, sleeping, and living areas, and that provides, to a person who resides in the place, not more than 28 hours per week of services that are supportive, personal and nursing services.
Residential care apartment complex does not include a nursing home or a community-based residential facility, but may be physically part of a structure that is a nursing home or community based residential facility."
Facilities that are part of a nursing facility must be physically separate and distinct although they may share a common lobby and entrance.
They may also share common dining and activity areas as long as they are not scheduled for concurrent use.
A community based residential facility is a place where five or more unrelated adults reside, in which care, treatment, or services above the level of room and board are provided to residents as a primary function of the facility.
Wyoming - Assisted living means "a non-institutional dwelling operated by a person, firm or corporation engaged in providing limited nursing care, personal care and boarding home care, but not habilitative care, for persons not related to the owner of the facility."
Boarding home care means "a dwelling or rooming house operated by any person, firm or corporation engaged in the business of operating a home for the purpose of letting rooms for rent and providing meals and personal daily living care, but not habilitative or nursing care, for persons not related to the owner."
