CYBERCRIME COMMITTEE MEETING September 2, 2003 INDENTITY THEFT PRESENTATION Thank you....
It is a pleasure for me to speak to you this morning about recent changes in the law and recommendations concerning identity theft.
My name is Gene Fishel, I'm the newest prosecutor in the AG's Computer Crime Unit.
I'm here in place of the unit's Director, Lisa Hick-Thomas, who recently had a baby boy.
I would also like to introduce to you our newest investigator of computer crimes, C.W. Lawrence.
C.W. comes to the AG's office with over 25 years of experience as a US Postal Inspector.
He has held positions nationwide including Inspector in Charge, Assistant Inspector and Branch Manager.
We're glad to have a valuable resource like C.W. on board as our unit continues to expand.
As you well know, ID theft is a serious problem throughout the Commonwealth and the country.
And it is the fastest growing crime in the US.
Victims spend hours restoring his or her good name and trying to repair credit problems.
The prevalence of the Internet and computers in our everyday lives, now more than ever, leaves more people vulnerable to this type of crime.
Because of this, legislation must be passed to protect the public.
In 1998, the US Congress passed the ID Theft and Assumption Deterrence Act.
And in 2000, the VA General Assembly passed the ID Fraud Law (which makes ID theft a Class 1 misdemeanor unless over $200, then a felony; Subsequent offenses are a Class 6 felony).
1 This morning I am going to give a brief overview of recent laws that took effect which were passed to curtail ID theft, steps Attorney General Kilgore's office has taken to protect ID theft victims, and recommendations from the AG's task force which were not acted upon from last session.
RECENT CHANGES IN THE LAW On May 10, 2002, Attorney General Kilgore launched the Identity Theft Task Force composed of technology and business leaders, law enforcement officers, legislators, identity theft victims and consumer advocates.
The Task Force was charged with developing practical and effective ways to prevent identity theft and to help victims.
The groups made recommendations, some of which were enacted as laws this past session of the General Assembly.
This past year, there were a number of significant enactments based on recommendations from the task force.
Because of increasing reports of such a violation, Section 18.2186.3 was amended to prohibit the theft of any person whether living or dead.
The statute was also amended to address "dealers" in false ID's and those who seek to distribute information or material that would aid in identity theft.
According to the Prevention Work Group news reports showed an emerging trend of thieves posing as state attorney general offices.
Thus, the statute was amended to include as a violation the commission of an identity theft offense by posing as a law enforcement or state official.
2 The task force's Consumer Work Group heard troubling testimony from ID theft victims whose credit had been damaged and finances depleted.
Section 18.2-186.5 was added to allow the Attorney General's Office in conjunction with the state police to issue "ID Theft Passports."
This program took effect on July 1, 2003.
As some of you may know, it has gained national attention for its innovative approach in protecting victims of ID theft.
Basically, the program allows a victim of ID theft to present a court order expunging their record or proof that they've filed a police report to our office and we will issue a passport such as this (except a lot smaller).
The passport allows a victim to show it to law enforcement, indicating that they've been a victim of identity theft.
It will hopefully prevent a victim from being unnecessarily arrested, thus avoiding potential embarrassment in front of friends or family, or at least make the officer double check before they arrest the person.
Since July 1, our office has issued 13 passports.
Another significant change was an amendment to the Government Data Collection and Dissemination Practices Act (2.2-3800).
It now prohibits the display of Social Security numbers on state issued ID cards: It states that, On or after July 1, 2004, no agency shall display the social security number of a data subject on a student or employee identification card, and colleges and universities have until January 1, 2005 if they have a plan in place to deal with misuse of personal information.
By July 1, 2006, no agency shall display an individual's entire social security number on ANY (must replace existing ones) student or employee ID card.
3 It also prohibits state agencies from displaying social security numbers on all mailings, whether on the outside or inside of the package or envelope.
Another important change should also be noted.
In 2002 Section 11-33.2 was amended to prohibit associations or corporations that accept credit cards to print more than the last 5 digits of the CC number or the expiration date on any receipt.
All new machines must have done this after July 1 of this year and all existing machines must be corrected by July 1, 2007.
Finally, Section 42.1-82(1) was amended to ensure that public records containing personal identifying information are destroyed when they are no longer needed.
The Attorney General's Office has worked hard to educate and protect the public from ID theft.
As I mentioned earlier, our ID theft passport program has been an early success.
We've also published a booklet on how to avoid ID theft and a brochure educating the public on cyber-crime in general.
I've brought copies with me today which all of you may take as you're leaving today.
RECOMMENDATIONS There were several recommendations from the Attorney General's Task Force that I would like to bring to your attention today that were not acted upon or weren't passed as law during the previous session.
The Task Force was divided into 4 working groups which included the business work group, the law enforcement work group, the prevention work group and the consumer work group.
Each group 4 studied data, listened to citizens and eventually made recommendations to the AG.
The task force heard increasing complaints about the unwillingness of local police to take reports of ID theft.
Both the Law Enforcement Work Group and the Business Work Group in the AG's task force recommended that Virginia police departments be encouraged to take police reports from victims of ID theft and that a standard form be developed to facilitate this.
The group recognized the need for a statewide effort to simplify the reporting process for victims and for law enforcement.
The Law Enforcement Work Group heard testimony from a VA teacher whose identity was stolen and used by someone who worked at her insurance company and therefore had access to personal information by virtue of her employment.
Thus, they recommended expanding Section 18.2-186.3 to include "Identity Embezzlers" = those who obtain the information by legal means, such as through employment, and then use it in an unauthorized manner.
(Looking to single those type of people out).
At the very least, an increase in the sentencing guidelines for people such as this is in order.
The Prevention Work Group also recommended an additional amendment to 18.2-186.3 by the task force would prohibit "secondary identity theft" which deals with the criminal possession, recording, or distribution of the MEANS by which thieves may unlawfully access personal identifying information.
The group learned of a newer type of computer trespass where "wireless fidelity" hackers use wireless modems and drive around to wireless local are networks and hack into them.
They then post or distribute the network's location and other stolen access information in order to aid other hackers.
This can be a potentially dangerous problem with hackers able to tap into airport or train routing information for example.
5 The Consumer Work Group found that a great deal of identifying information appears on publicly available documents.
Vital records are defined in VA as "certificates of reports of births, deaths, fetal deaths, adoptions, marriages, divorces or annulments and amendment data related thereto."
The Group ultimately recommended that Section 18.2-204.1, which prohibits the unlawful acquisition, possession, sale or distribution of another's birth certificate, be expanded to include all vital records.
CONCLUSION As you can see, the General Assembly and the Attorney General Office has made a lot of headway in the area of ID theft but we can still do a lot more.
Hopefully that was a helpful overview of current ID theft law and recommendations.
Thank you for letting me speak to the committee today and if our computer crime unit can be of help to you at any time in the future please feel free to contact me.
Thank you.
6
