State of New York Office of the State Comptroller Division of Management Audit and State Financial Services THE QUEENS BOROUGH PUBLIC LIBRARY DELIVERY OF SERVICES AND SELECTED FINANCIAL MANAGEMENT PRACTICES REPORT 97-N-11 H. Carl McCall Comptroller
State of New York Office of the State Comptroller Division of Management Audit and State Financial Services Report 97-N-11 Msgr.
Thomas J. Gradilone, President Board of Trustees Queens Borough Public Library 89-11 Merrick Blvd.
Jamaica, NY 11432 Mr. Carl T. Hayden Chancellor The University of the State of New York State Education Department Albany, NY 12234 Dear Msgr.
Gradilone and Mr. Hayden: The following is our report addressing the delivery of services and selected management practices by the Queens Borough Public Library.
We did this audit according to the State Comptroller's authority as set forth in Article X, Section 5 of the State Constitution, and Article II, Section 8 of the State Finance Law.
We list major contributors to this report in Appendix A.
April 28, 1999
OSC Management Audit reports can be accessed via the OSC Web Page : http://www.osc.state.ny.us.
If you wish your name to be deleted from our mailing list or if your address has changed, contact the Management Audit Group at (518) 474-3271 or at the Office of the State Comptroller, Alfred E. Smith State Office Building, 13th Floor, Albany, NY 12236.
Executive Summary The Queens Borough Public Library Delivery of Services and Selected Financial Management Practices Scope of Audit Founded in 1907, the Queens Borough Public Library (QBPL or Library) system includes a Central Library, and 62 branch libraries.
The Library is a not-for-profit corporation that is supported by Federal, New York State (State) and New York City (City) appropriations, as well as funds from private sources.
The Library serves the 1.9 million residents of the Borough of Queens.
Its mission statement, adopted by the QBPL Board of Trustees on January 1991, states that: "QBPL is to provide quality services, resources and lifelong learning opportunities through books and a variety of other formats to meet the informational, educational, cultural and recreational needs and interests of its diverse and changing population."
For the year ended December 31, 1997, the Library received nearly $52 million in funding from New York City; almost $6 million in State aid; slightly more than $4.5 million in other receipts, including interest and fines and fees; and about $400,000 in Federal aid.
Our audit reviewed QBPL's delivery of library services and selected financial management practices from July 1, 1995 through February 28, 1998, and addressed the following questions: ! Is the Library delivering services to Queens residents according to its mission, and according to guidelines established by the State Education Department? Has the Library established and implemented internal controls that provide adequate protection of its assets?
!
Audit Observations and Conclusions
We reviewed the Library's educational and recreational programs to determine whether program goals were being met, and analyzed the service hours of the various branches to evaluate their compatibility with the needs of the populations they were intended to serve.
In addition, we tested the Library's compliance with State laws and regulations governing the use of State aid to library systems, and sought to determine whether the Library had established and implemented certain financial management practices in areas such as contract awards and procurement activities.
We identified no reportable weaknesses in QBPL's educational and recreational programs, service hours, use of State aid, contracting and procurement
processes, and QBPL's initiatives to keep pace with today's everexpanding technology.
We visited several branches and the Central Library to determine whether QBPL security systems were effective in protecting the Library from the loss of its materials.
We found that although the security systems at the Central Library and branches were operational, library materials were not routinely sensitized to enable the system to detect removal from the library premises without proper authorization.
We found that staff do not routinely magnetically-sensitize popular materials, which are usually multimedia items such as videotapes and audiotapes.
(See p. 5) We also determined that there was a high risk that the QBPL was losing a significant portion of its loan and reference materials due, at least in part, to the control weaknesses we identified.
We judgmentally selected five purchase orders for 156 books that were supposed to have been shipped to five different branches, to determine if the books were on the shelves or could otherwise be accounted for.
We found that 69 (44 percent) of the selected materials, could not be accounted for.
Thus, QBPL could be losing its new books and other lending materials systemwide.
(See pp. 5-7) The State Education it provides to the intended purposes.
expenditures of the Department (SED) is authorized to oversee the funds Library and to ensure that they are used for their However, SED has never reviewed QBPL's actual funds provided.
(See pp. 9-12)
Comments of the Queens Borough Public Library and State Education Department Officials
Queens Borough Public Library officials responded to a draft copy of this report that they have taken actions to strengthen controls over library materials.
Specially, officials have directed branch managers to strictly enforce procedures for sensitizing materials that are returned by customers.
O fficials have also directed staff to check sensitizing/desensitizing equipment regularly to ensure it is functioning properly.
Officials disagreed with our recommendation to perform periodic inventories of loan and reference materials.
State Education Department officials advised us that they will take actions to improve monitoring of library operations by developing a reporting process to track the results of field visits to institutions under the Division of Library Development's scope of responsibility.
Contents Introduction Background . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology . . . .
Internal Control and Compliance Summary . . . .
Comments of the Queens Borough Public Library State Education Department Officials . . . . . . .
..
..
.. and ..
..........1 ..........1 ..........3 ..........3
Controls Over Library Materials State Education Department Oversight Appendix A Appendix B Appendix C
Library Security System . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5 Books Inventory . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
5 Recommendations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7 ..........................................9 Recommendations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12
Major Contributors to This Report Comments of Queens Borough Public Library Officials Comments of State Education Department Officials
Introduction Background Founded in 1907, the Queens Borough Public Library (QBPL or Library) system includes a Central Library, and 62 branch libraries.
The Library is a not-for-profit corporation that is supported by Federal, New York State (State) and New York City (City) appropriations, as well as funds from private sources.
The Library serves the 1.9 million residents of the Borough of Queens.
Its mission statement, adopted by the QBPL Board of Trustees on January 1991, states that: "QBPL is to provide quality services, resources and lifelong learning opportunities through books and a variety of other formats to meet the informational, educational, cultural and recreational needs and interests of its diverse and changing population."
For the year ended million in funding slightly more than fines and fees; and December 31, 1997, the Library received nearly $52 from New York City; almost $6 million in State aid; $4.5 million in other receipts, including interest and about $400,000 in Federal aid.
The QBPL is chartered by the State Board of Regents as a Public Library and is incorporated by an Act of the State Legislature.
Therefore, it is required by State statute to file an annual report of its activities with the State Education Department (SED).
Because QBPL is registered with SED, it is not scrutinized by the State Attorney General's Office.
Hence, unlike other nonprofit organizations that are chartered in New York State, QBPL is exempt from filing tax returns and annual reports with the State Attorney General's Office.
In addition, the City Comptroller's Office and the Library agreed in 1997 that the City Comptroller will audit only the use of City funds and funds received in the form of fines and fees collected from the public.
However, the City is not allowed to audit the Queens Borough Public Library's foundation or the use of QBPL's corporate funds.
This audit was done concurrently with similar audits of the Brooklyn Public Library and New York Public Library, which operate separately and independently from the Queens Borough Public Library.
Audit Scope, Objectives, and Methodology
Our audit included a review of the Queens Borough Public Library's delivery of library services and selected financial practices from July 1, 1995 through February 28, 1998.
The objectives of the audit were to determine whether the Library was delivering services to borough residents according to its mission statement, and guidelines established by SED.
We also evaluated whether the Library has implemented controls
and procedures that will provide adequate protection of its assets and whether it has kept pace with today's ever-expanding technology.
To accomplish our objectives, we interviewed appropriate Library staff; reviewed QBPL's policies and procedures for the circulation of books and other library materials to determine whether those policies were in compliance with SED guidelines; and tested the Library's compliance with its own policies and procedures.
We also conducted tests to evaluate the adequacy of the Library's internal controls that are intended to safeguard its assets.
We reviewed the Library's educational and recreational programs to determine whether program goals were being met, and analyzed the service hours of the various branches to evaluate their compatibility with the needs of the populations they were intended to serve.
In addition, we tested the Library's compliance with State laws and regulations governing the use of State aid to library systems, and sought to determine whether the Library had established and implemented certain financial management practices in areas such as contract awards and procurement activities.
We identified no reportable weaknesses in QBPL's educational and recreational programs, service hours, use of State aid, contracting and procurement processes, and QBPL's initiatives to keep pace with today's ever-expanding technology.
We requested SED's legal interpretation as to its oversight authority to audit QBPL and QBPL's foundation expenditures of funds from nongovernmental sources, such as fines and fees and donations from the public.
SED informed us that it has no authority to examine the corporate records of the separate QBPL's foundation, but as of the date of this report, we have not received SED's legal interpretation as to whether its oversight authority allows it to audit QBPL expenditures of funds received from nongovernmental sources, such as fees and donations from the public.
For the year ended June 30, 1997, QBPL had a balance of over $4.6 million of such funds.
We did not review the QBPL or the QBPL's foundation's expenditures of these funds obtained from such sources, and they are not subject to audit by other government agencies with oversight responsibilities such as the City Comptroller's office or the State Attorney General's office.
Moreover, these funds are not considered by the City when funding the QBPL's operating budget.
Since a portion of the funds obtained by the Library had been spent, in effect, without restriction or oversight, we could come to no conclusions about whether that portion had been spent appropriately.
We did our audit according to generally accepted government auditing standards.
Such standards require that we plan and do our audit to adequately assess the QBPL operations included in our audit scope.
Further, these standards require that we understand QBPL's internal control structure and its compliance with those laws, rules and regulations
2
that govern the operations included in our audit scope.
An audit includes examining, on a test basis, evidence supporting transactions recorded in the accounting and operating records and applying other auditing procedures as we consider necessary in the circumstances.
An audit also includes assessing management's estimates, judgments, and decisions.
We believe, except for the expenditure of nongovernmental funds, our audit provides a reasonable basis for our findings, conclusions and recommendations.
We use a risk-based approach when selecting activities to audit.
This approach focuses our audit efforts on those operations identified through a preliminary survey as having the greatest chance for needing improvement.
So, by design, we use our finite audit resources to identify where and how to make improvements.
Thus, we devote little audit effort to reviewing operations that may be efficient or effective.
As a result, our audit reports are prepared on an "exception basis."
This report, therefore, highlights those areas needing improvement and does not focus on activities that may be functioning properly.
Internal Control and Compliance Summary
Our consideration of QBPL's internal control structure identified significant weaknesses in procedures used to safeguard books and other library-related materials.
These are discussed in the section of this report entitled "Controls Over Library Materials."
We also identified a need for stronger oversight of QBPL's operations by the State Education Department.
This matter is discussed in the section of this report entitled "State Education Department Oversight."
We provided draft copies of this report to Queens Borough Public Library and State Education Department officials for their review and formal comment.
We have considered their comments in preparing this report and have included them as Appendices B and C. Also, pursuant to comments provided by Library and SED officials, we deleted Recommendation No. 4 from this report.
Within 90 days after final release of this report, we request that the Chairman of the Board of Trustees of the Queens Borough Public Library and the New York State Commissioner of Education report to the Governor, the State Comptroller, and leaders of the Legislature and fiscal committees of the State of New York, advising what steps were taken to implement the recommendations contained herein, and where recommendations were not implemented, the reasons therefor.
Comments of the Queens Borough Public Library and State Education Department Officials
3
4
Controls Over Library Materials As a good business practice, management should establish internal controls to adequately safeguard the organization's assets from unauthorized use and possible loss.
Thus, it is important for the QBPL to have a good internal control system governing the purchasing, recording, monitoring and safeguarding of its books and other library-related materials.
We concluded, however, that QBPL officials need to strengthen several procedures that are used to protect the Library's assets.
Library Security System
The QBPL's security system (system) is intended to deter patrons from leaving the library with materials they have not borrowed through the proper procedures.
The system, which is installed in all public exits at each site, detects library materials that are magnetically sensitized (tattletaped).
However, we identified some significant flaws in the system.
We visited five branches and the Central Library to determine whether the system w orked and whether the Library was safeguarding its materials from loss.
We found the system to be operational.
However, we discovered that some library materials had not been tattle-taped, to allow detection by the system.
In addition, when we tested the sensitizing/desensitizing machines, we found that they did not always work properly.
Finally, in one library branch, we found that staff had not tattle-taped some audio cassettes, and left them in the open, in an unsecured area where they could easily be stolen.
Because of the weaknesses we found in the tattle-taping and the re-sensitizing process, we believe some Library materials are left unprotected, making it possible for patrons to walk out with them undeterred.
When we discussed our findings with QBPL officials, they agreed that the process for tattle-taping and sensitizing materials was not being followed, and told us that they would reinforce the policy.
Books Inventory
Central Library staff can use a single purchase order to buy books and other materials for several of QBPL's branch libraries.
The items can then be delivered to the Central Library or to the individual branches.
We judgmentally selected five recent purchase orders placed by the Central Library for 156 books with a list price of $679.95, which included books that were supposed to have been shipped to five different branch libraries.
We visited each destination, and used each of the five branches' circulation systems to determine whether the books had been recorded by Central Library staff as received but not loaned to patrons.
We then went to the shelves, accompanied by a librarian working at that
5
branch, to search for the books.
If the books were not on the shelves, we asked the librarian to search the book carts and bins containing books that had been returned recently.
We could not account for 69 (44 percent) books, after receiving help from the branch librarian.
The results of our test are summarized by the following table: Books Not Found (NF) 3 39 3 7 17 69
Branch Laurelton Flushing South Jamaica Court Square Corona Total
Ordered 10 76 12 25 33 156
NF List Price $ 15 196 7 20 85 $323
The 69 missing books had cost $323 and represented 44 percent of the 156 new books we attempted to locate.
When we advised QBPL officials of our findings, they cited several reasons for our inability to find them.
For example, they said, the books could have been misfiled, or could have been in the process of being returned, but had not yet reappeared in the circulation system.
Regardless of the reasons, Library officials did concede that they could not find some of the books purchased under that particular purchase order.
(QBPL officials responded that librarians have since found all but nine of the missing books.)
Furthermore, QBPL staff did not perform periodic physical inventory of its holdings and had not established an acceptable loss percentage, even though it used the circulation systems to keep track of its inventory.
Moreover, based on our discussions with branch managers, we concluded that there was a significant risk that considerable amounts of books could not be accounted for at branches we did not test, because the controls (and associated control weaknesses) that existed at the branches we tested were similar to the controls that existed systemwide.
Library management was unaware of the amount of books that were being lost and had not decided the amount of loss that was acceptable for the Library's operations.
Consequently, QBPL management has been unable to take corrective action on a timely basis.
Thus, QBPL could be losing its new books and other lending materials systemwide.
Library officials should institute inventory counts.
They should also decide on an
6
acceptable rate of loss, just as retail establishments and distributorships do, and consider their loan materials as assets.
Recommendations 1.
Reiterate to QBPL staff the importance of following correct procedures for tattle-taped and sensitizing materials.
(Library officials responded that they have directed branch managers to strictly enforce the long-standing procedure of sensitizing materials when they are returned by customers.)
2.
Maintain sensitizing/desensitizing equipment regularly to ensure its proper operation.
(Library officials responded that staff have been instructed to check sensitizing/desensitizing equipment on a regular basis to ensure that it is fully operational.
Officials added that the equipment will be replaced immediately when staff determine that it is malfunctioning.)
3.
Take periodic inventory verifications at the central and branch locations to account for loan and reference materials purchased by QBPL.
Report the results of the inventory verifications to senior management.
Senior management should ensure that effective corrective actions are taken promptly to eliminate excessive inventory losses.
(Library officials responded that this recommendation was not practical in their public library setting.
Officials added that a public library must be closed each time an inventory is conducted.
7
Recommendations (Cont'd) Auditors' Comment: We believe that Library officials have not fully considered the range of options available in implementing an inventory control program.
For example, all of the inventory does not have to be verified at the same time.
Tests can be conducted periodically rotating among the various library sections.
Further, sampling methodologies can be applied which obviate the need to test every item in the inventory.
We agree that any chosen effort needs to be cost-effective, practical and beneficial.
Moreover, we note that officials of the Brooklyn Public Library recently advised us that they began incremental inventory verifications (by library division) at their branch and central libraries in December 1997.
Brooklyn officials noted that this project will take several years to conduct across all library divisions.)
4.
(Recommendation deleted.)
8
State Education Department Oversight Article 5, Section 216, of the State Education Law (Law) authorizes the State Education Department (Department or SED) to incorporate (or grant a charter to) any library whose purposes are of educational or cultural value deemed worthy of recognition and encouragement by the Board of Regents.
Section 261 of the Law requires a public library's board of trustees to apply to the Board of Regents for a charter in accordance with the actions to establish such library.
Moreover, Section 215 of the Law authorizes representatives of the State Education Department to visit, examine or inspect any institution under the educational supervision of the State.
Thus, through a visit, examination or inspection, SED officials could determine if a public library's program activities were properly performed and its objectives met.
The Department's Division of Library Development (Division) is responsible for administering State programs for the public libraries in New York State.
The Division has a staff of 21 employees.
One of the 21 employees is responsible for monitoring the activities of the Brooklyn Public Library, Queens Borough Public Library, and New York Public Library in New York City, as well as public libraries in Westchester County and Long Island.
The QBPL is registered with the State Education Department as a not-forprofit organization and must abide by SED's rules, laws, regulations, and fiscal guidelines.
Because QBPL is registered with SED, it is exempt from registering with and reporting annually to the Attorney General, the New York State monitor of not-for-profit entities.
For calender year 1997, QBPL received approximately $6 million from the State in various program aids.
The QBPL has a Central Library and 62 branches to serve a population of more than 1.9 million people.
SED officials are responsible for ensuring that program funds given to the Library are used for their intended purposes.
However, we found that SED has never verified the actual expenditures of funds provided to QBPL by auditing the documentation supporting them.
Although SED followed the procedures outlined in the New York State Education Law (Law), it relied on unverified information and documentation QBPL had submitted to determine whether program objectives had been met; whether the activities had been carried out; and whether the funds provided had been used for their intended purposes.
Without any review of program-related documents, SED could not be assured that the funds were spent only for program purposes.
9
We also requested SED's legal interpretation as to its oversight authority to audit QBPL expenditure of funds from nongovernmental sources, such as fines and fees; and QBPL expenditure of funds received from its foundation.
SED informed us that it has no authority to examine the corporate records of the separate QBPL foundation, but as of the date of this report, we have not received SED's legal interpretation as to whether its oversight authority allows it to audit QBPL expenditures of funds received from nongovernmental sources.
A pamphlet entitled "Helpful Information for Meeting Minimum Public Library Standards," published in June 1996 by SED, indicates that libraries must have a written budget, both to ensure fiscal accountability and to obtain the funds that will enable them to address the needs of the community.
It points out that the budget presentation can also be useful for library advocacy and that such a presentation, if well-documented and well-prepared, can help show local funding authorities the importance of the library in the community.
According to the pamphlet, a library budget should: ! indicate the resources that will be needed to meet the library's goals and objectives within a certain period of time; base income and expenditure figures on past experience and anticipated change, taking into consideration the library's longrange plan for development.
(The budget should be realistic, something between a wish list and a recipe for survival); and present expenditure allocations to meet both the community's information and service needs and legal requirements, including SED's minimum standards for public libraries.
!
!
To ensure that the Library's money has been used as intended, we believe it would be prudent to verify that a sample of actual expenditures is reviewed against planned budgeted expenditures and tested to ensure the actual expenditures were made for legitimate library purposes.
We found that SED has not performed such reviews.
The Education Law prescribes the procedures to be followed by the recipients of State grants or aid.
In most instances, the grantee must submit an application detailing the objectives and activities of the program, including a proposed budget, and how the program will be evaluated both qualitatively and quantitatively.
The application is reviewed by a panel of professionals at the Division for content and completeness.
Once the application is approved, funds are released to the grantee.
At the
10
completion of the program, the grantee is required to submit to SED a report describing the results of the program.
We reviewed documentation available at SED for the Coordinated Outreach Services Program to determine the effectiveness of SED oversight over the QBPL expenditures for this program.
We found that, even thought SED had the documentation required to be submitted by the QBPL and had access to the supporting documentation for the reports submitted for this program, no verification of the information or documents submitted was made.
In 1996, QBPL was given $274,455 for the Coordinated Outreach Services Program, to service the blind, physically handicapped, aged, institutionalized and unemployed/underemployed population in Queens a breakdown follows: Categories Personal Services Employee Benefits Equipment Supplies and Materials Contractual Agreements Other Expenses Total Budget Approved $155,097 37,710 17,264 59,874 3,865 645 $274,455
We did not find any documentation that SED reviewed the actual expenditures of this program.
When we asked SED officials about this, we were advised that such reviews do not take place.
SED should have reviewed, on a sample basis, the supporting documents for actual expenditures made against budgeted figures for this program.
Also, the Division has not performed any formal assessments of the general operations of the QBPL.
Our review of QBPL disclosed some significant weaknesses in each library's operations.
Therefore, we believe that the Division should exercise its statutory authority to formally inspect the library programs periodically.
Such inspections could be used to help ensure that QBPL management is effectively addressing the matters we identified and any others, as identified by Division staff, which impact the Library's ability to maximize the services it provides to its patrons.
11
Recommendations 5.
Develop a plan to verify key program accomplishments included on QBPL's summary reports.
(Department officials agreed, in part, with this recommendation.
They indicated that the Library Board's review and authentication of program accomplishment reports was an acceptable validation of program accomplishments.
Officials added, however, that the Department may, on an exception basis, test the validity of reported program data should it find cause to do so.)
6.
Periodically do a risk assessment of significant operations of QBPL to focus, from a risk perspective, on the verifications of the supporting documentation maintained by the libraries for their operations.
(Department officials responded that they will strengthen their monitoring practices by developing a staff reporting process that tracks the results of staff visits to institutions that are under their scope of responsibility.)
7.
Determine SED's legal authority to audit QBPL expenditures of funds from nongovernmental sources.
If it is determined that they have such authority, they should develop a plan for reviewing such funds.
(SED did not respond to the specifics of this recommendation.
Instead, SED officials indicated that SED has "no authority to examine the corporate records of the separate foundation for the Queens Borough Public Library."
However, our recommendation concerns auditing expenditures of QBPL's nongovernmental funds, not its separate foundation.)
12
Major Contributors to This Report William Challice Carmen Maldonado Walter Mendelson Brian Mason Santo Rendon Eli Yarmish Tenneh Blamah Marc Geller Alina Mattie Orin Ninvalle Ronald Gerstein Alex Ruiz Sheila Williams Marticia Madory
Appendix A
Appendix B
B-2
B-3
B-4
B-5
B-6
B-7
Appendix C
C-2
