Adjutant General Mission and philosophy To defend and serve America and Wyoming.
General information Maj. Gen. Ed Wright, the Adjutant General, Wyoming National Guard
Results of outcomes Homecomings and separations were the underlying themes book ending FY03 for the Wyoming National Guard.
In July the state welcomed home 373 Wyoming Air National Guard personnel stationed overseas from the unit's largest activation since the Korean War.
During the nine months of the activation for Operation Enduring Freedom, aircrews, maintenance and support personnel completed more than 2,292 sorties in 5,927 hours at a com pletion rate of more than 80 percent ­ more than 30 percent higher than active duty Air Force crews stationed with them in Oman.
As the Wyoming Air National Guard was gearing down, the Wyoming Army National Guard was called to action.
Two units were federally activated to assist the country's efforts in the continuing war against terrorism, this time for Operation Iraqi Freedom.
Both units left the state amid a flurry of support from local communities, elected officials and Wyoming National Guard commanders.
The 1041st Engineer Company based in Rock Springs, with detachments in Evanston and Afton, was called to service in January 2003.
The unit mobilized and deployed to Fort Polk, La. to complete training and await marching orders to head to Kuwait.
Its equipment left Louisiana in April, but the swift pace of the conflict in Iraq resulted in the unit's personnel demobilization and return home without going overseas.
However, the five months in Fort Polk were not wasted months.
The unit integrated a platoon of 34 soldiers from the Kentucky Army National Guard, conducted extensive field and garrison training exercises, validated equipment and 191 personnel for overseas deployment, and exceeded all mobilization standards while at Fort Polk.
The equipment is slowly making its way back to Fort Polk for shipment to Wyoming.
A week later, the 4th Infantry Division Rear Operation Center, based in Casper, was called to duty.
The unit, the first National Guard unit to be fully integrated into an active duty Army division in 1996, deployed to Fort Hood, Texas Jan. 27.
Three months later the 21 members deployed to Iraq with the rest of the 4th Infantry Division.
The unit arrived in Iraq on Easter, April 20.
No firm date is known for their homecoming.
Wyoming Air National Guard units continued their cycle of deployments throughout the year.
The 153rd Security Forces Squadron deployed to Saudi Arabia in December 2002 anticipating a standard 90-day rotation at
Agency Contact Mr. Doug Shope, deputy director 5500 Bishop Blvd.
Cheyenne, WY 82009-3320 dshope1@state.wy.us or http://wyoguard.state.wy.us 307/772-5235
Other locations Armories are located in Afton, Casper, Cheyenne, Cody, Douglas, Evanston, Gillette, Guernsey, Lander, Laramie, Lovell, Powell, Rock Springs, Sheridan, Torrington, Wheatland and Worland.
The Wyoming Air National Guard base is in Cheyenne.
The Oregon Trail Veterans Cemetery is in Evansville.
The Veterans Commission is in Casper.
Year established and reorganized The Wyoming Army National Guard, 1870; The Wyoming Air National Guard, 1946.
The Wyoming Military Department was reorgan ized in 1986, 1998 and 2003.
Statutory references Wyoming Statutes Title 19
Number of authorized personnel Total: 2,679.
This includes 2,545 Wyoming Army and Air National Guard personnel and 134 state employees.
Of the 134 state employees, two work for the Oregon Trail Veterans Cemetery and three work for the Veterans Affairs Commission.
Organizational structure Adjutant General's Office, Wyoming Army National Guard, Wyoming Air National Guard, Oregon Trail State Veterans Cemetery, Veterans Commission
Clients served The residents of Wyoming, the citizens of the United States, National Guard Bureau, Department of Defense.
3.159
Wyoming State Government Annual Report 2003
Adjutant General
Prince Sultan Air Base.
When allied forces invaded Iraq, the unit's homecoming was delayed 90 days, creating a six-month deployment for the unit.
The 15 airmen returned to Cheyenne May 21.
Although heavily tasked with federal missions, the Wyoming Military Department's commitment to Wyoming's residents never faltered during FY03.
When floodwaters raced through Kaycee the Wyoming Army National Guard was at the ready.
More than 32 soldiers from the 2-300th Field Artillery Brigade assisted Kaycee residents with cleanup activities at the fairgrounds and other public venues.
However, the Wyoming Military Department didn't limit its interaction with state residents to times of hardship.
Soldiers and airmen continued to volunteer time to local civic organizations and community events.
The 187th Aeromedical Evacuation Squadron had seven volunteers for Cheyenne Frontier Days Cowboy Medic program.
Members of the 153rd Logistics Readiness Squadron volunteer to deliver food for the Cheyenne Community Christmas Basket Program.
Units participate in parades around the state.
The 67th Army Band offered free community concerts to Platte and Goshen County residents during the summer.
During the Sept. 11, 2001 anniversary ceremonies around the state, Guard members assisted communities and organizations providing color guards and speakers.
Maj. Gen. Ed Boenisch, Wyoming's adjutant general, was a speaker at the Wyoming State memorial ceremony, held on the steps of the State Capitol.
The commitment to Wyoming's veterans also remained strong in FY03.
The department was instrumental in assisting veterans to receive a newly issued medal, the Korean War Service Medal, which originally was offered, but never issued, to veterans who served in the conflict for more than 30 days.
Kim Jong-Hoon, consulate general for the Korean Consulate in San Francisco, presented it to more than 30 veterans from Wyoming's 300th Field Artillery Association, and other units, in September.
The Oregon Trail State Veterans' Cemetery began work on plans to move forward in updating the chapel area and irrigation systems to continue to provide quality interments for Wyoming veterans.
As of June 30, 1,766 veterans or their dependents had been buried at the cemetery.
Internally the Wyoming Military Department experienced a number of changes.
With the election of a new governor came the appointment of a new adjutant general.
Maj. Gen. Ed Wright became Wyoming's adjutant general May 15.
The Wyoming Emergency Management Agency, which had been a part of the Wyoming Military Department, was moved to the newly created Department of Homeland Security.
The Wyoming Veterans' Affairs Commission received a name change and a new chairman.
Legislation passed in FY03 changed the name to the Wyoming Veterans' 3.160 Wyoming State Government Annual Report 2003
Budget information Wyoming Army National Guard Wyoming Air National Guard Administration Oregon Trail State Veterans Cemetery Starbase Education Assistance Program Veterans Education Veterans Commission Operation Eduring Freedom Operation Noble Eagle Total Federal Funds State Funds Other Funds $38,453,514 $34,974,582 $1,925,674 $137,500 $287,400 $519,173 $ 31,510 $139,070 $19,083,016 $2,450,200 $98,001,639 $94,758,950 $3,151,189 $91,500
Adjutant General
Commission and Stan Lowe, long-time commission chairman, handed the reigns of the group to Bob Palmer.
The Wyoming Air National Guard welcomed a new unit.
In July it received command of the 153rd Command and Control Squadron from F.E. Warren Air Force Base.
The unit provides mobile communications for the commander of the United States Northern Command.
Moving the unit from the active duty force to the National Guard was in line with Department of Defense's total force concept and allows greater flexibility in meeting the needs of the nation.
During FY03 the Wyoming Military Department also continued to meet the needs of its personnel.
Medical commands in both branches of the National Guard worked diligently to increase their skill levels to meet the changing needs of the force.
The 153rd Medical Squadron of the Wyoming Air National Guard created two new units, one specifically designed to deal with potential patient contamination threats.
The Wyoming Army National Guard Medical Command implemented the new Medical Protection System to ensure essential medical data was collected for all deployed personnel.
Personnel also took advantage of a number of training exercises.
The 153rd Civil Engineer Squadron firefighters worked hard to refresh their crash and rescue skills, as well as their response to terrorist attacks, chemical and biological incidents and other emergencies.
Much of the Wyoming Air National Guard spent time at Camp Guernsey in April training for its wartime mission.
The 133rd Engineer Company of the Wyoming Army National Guard trained for its wartime mission, in part, by assisting Camp Guernsey with range improvements.
Camp Guernsey also was reclassified as a Maneuver Training Center Heavy.
The reclassification increases the opportunity for federal resource options at the 33,000-acre state-of-the-art facility.
The agency also continued to expand the Family Readiness Program to assist families of deployed National Guard personnel before, during and after deployments of any duration.
The program successfully hosted a statewide family conference in August focused on deployment-related family issues.
The Wyoming Committee for Employer Support of the Guard and Reserve also continued to be active, working to assist civilian employers and deploying personnel with answers to questions and concerns.
The committee was pleased to see its nomination accepted for Wyoming government to receive the Secretary of Defense Freedom Award.
The award annually recognizes civilian employers who go above and beyond federal requirements to support their National Guard and Reserve employees.
FY03 ended with much as it began.
The Wyoming Army National Guard welcomed home the 84 members of the 1022nd Medical Company from a
successful three-month deployment to Fort Carson, Colo.
While deployed as part of Northern Command's Joint Task Force Civil Support mission, the unit trained to perform its medical evacuation mission should Northern Command require it.
All but 20 personnel who remained federally activated at Fort Benning, Ga. returned to Cheyenne on July 1, 2003.
Strategic plan updates Please refer to the Wyoming Military Department's strategic plan dated Sept. 1, 2003 for changes to the previous plan, dated Sept. 1, 2002.
Wyoming State Government Annual Report 2003
3.161
Adjutant General
Adjutant General organization chart Adjutant General Maj. Gen. Ed Wright
Assistant Adjutant General Army Brig. Gen. Howard Dillon
Assistant Adjutant General Air Brig. Gen. Jenenne Nelson
Assistant Adjutant General State Affairs Doug Shope
Veterans' Services
Army National Guard Units
Air National Guard Units
Oregon Trail State Veterans Cemetery Burt Widmer, manager
Veterans' Affairs Commission Executive Director Don Ewing
Veterans' Education Phil O'Connor, education program consultant
3.162
Wyoming State Government Annual Report 2003
