Permanent Commission on the Status of Women 2000 Annual Repor t Women of the New Millennium Women of the New Millennium Cover photos (l-r starting at the top) Katelyn Ierardi (granddaughter of PCSW NEW Program Manager Jackie Slamon); Shania Mona' Shealey (niece of PCSW Legislative Analyst Natasha M. Pierre); Erin Milillo (granddaughter of PCSW NEW Program Manager Jackie Slamon); Daysheanna Mills (daughter of PCSW NEW Program Assistant Jazzlyn Mills) middle row--Anai I'Liera Holmes (granddaughter of PCSW Administrative Assistant Lillie Wright); Christina M. Lopez (daughter of PCSW Legislative Secretary Rosemary Lopez); Amelia Maryrose Green (granddaughter of PCSW Public Information Officer Barbara Potopowitz) bottom row--Sophia Porter (daughter of former PCSW Legislative Secretary Colleen Auletta); Alexa Victoria Brescia (granddaughter of PCSW Executive Secretary Magdaliz Baez); Sophie and Dawn Schultze-Allen (granddaughters of PCSW Executive Director Leslie J. Brett)
an act to create a permanent commission on the status of women
T Staff
The Commission shall conduct an ongoing study of all matters concerning women and in furtherance of that responsibility shall: (a) inform leaders of business, education, and state and local governments and the communications media of the nature and scope of the problem of sex discrimination, with a view to enlisting their support in working toward improvement; (b) serve as a liaison between government and private interest groups concerned with services for women; (c) promote consideration of qualified women for all levels of government positions; (d) oversee coordination and assess programs and practices in all state agencies as they affect women.
The Commission shall annually, by February fifteenth, report to the Governor and the General Assembly the results of its findings of the preceding year with its recommendations for the removal of such injustices as it may find exist.
Excerpt from Section 46a.
Chapter 812 of the Connecticut General Statutes.
Report of the Chair Commissioners Message from the Executive Director
report contents 3 4 back cover 5 5 5 6 7 12 12 14 20 21 22 22 23 23 23 24 special insert
2
Report of the Year Connecticut Women's Agenda Connecticut Women's Health Campaign Women's Economic Development Initiative (WEDI) Legislative Report Talent Bank Collaborations Special Projects Nontraditional Employment for Women Program Public Information Publications Speaker 's Bureau Requests for Information and Referral Materials Distributed Requests for Formal Complaint Assistance Budget Commissioner 's Biographies
This Annual Report was published by PCSW Public Information Officer, Barbara Potopowitz, with information and data provided by the entire PCSW staff.
one
Y
report of the chair Yes, I am an authentic baby-boomer, a woman who came of age before Roe v. Wade and Title IX.
Like my post-war contemporaries, I grew up with the women's movement.
So when Governor Rowland asked me to serve on the Permanent Commission on the Status of Women in 1996, I accepted, gladly.
I looked forward to the opportunity to contribute to the Commission's work on issues that matter to women.
Many of those issues had been playing out in my life since childhood.
I was born in the 1950s, when Dwight Eisenhower was President and "Leave It to Beaver" and "Father Knows Best" defined American gender roles.
Everyone knew where June Cleaver was when she called out to her husband as he returned home from work, "I'm in here, Ward."
Mine was not a "Leave It to Beaver" existence, though.
I grew up with my mother, my grandmother, and one sister in a single parent home.
For us, dividing chores along gender lines was not an option: if a woman didn't do a job, it didn't get done.
I learned to drive a nail, rewire a lamp, and change the washer in a bathroom faucet.
I enjoyed the feelings of competence and confidence that came with the mastery of nontraditional skills.
In school, however, I encountered very real gender-related barriers.
Advanced math and science courses, the critical filters for students seeking careers as engineers, scientists, or physicians, were the de facto province of boys.
Boys could choose from eight varsity sports; there were no varsity teams for girls.
Like the rest of my female classmates, I was required to take Home Economics.
I was the only girl, though, in my Drafting class.
When I joined the Permanent Commission, I knew that PCSW was created by statute in 1973, with a broad mandate to address issues that affect women.
Even so, I was astounded at the range of its activities.
In its "study of all matters concerning women," for example, it collects and analyzes data that are crucial to informed public policy decisions, and disseminates these "Facts about Connecticut Women" to leaders in government, business, and education, and to the media.
Its Congressional District Advisory Councils bring local leaders together to discuss their concerns.
Its Connecticut
Women's Voices 2000 survey identified the issues most important to Connecticut women in this past election year.
PCSW is obligated to "inform leaders of business, education, state and local governments, and the communications media of the nature and scope of the problem of sex discrimination, with a view toward enlisting their support in working toward improvement."
To this end, PCSW provides sexual harassment awareness and prevention training to state employees, and transmits complaints of gender-related workplace discrimination to the Connecticut Commission on Human Rights and Opportunities.
It also consults with the General Assembly on statutory drafting and provides legislative testimony within the sphere of its expertise.
(I'm happy to report that the Agency's 2000-2001 budget appropriately recognizes the value of these services to our lawmakers by restoring funding for a legislative analyst's position frozen out of the budget in 1990).
Likewise per its charter, PCSW works to build coalitions of public and private agencies working on women's issues, such as the Connecticut Women's Agenda and the Connecticut Women's Health Campaign.
Through the CWHC, the Commission works not only to ensure women's access to family planning and safe, legal abortion, but also on a multitude of other health care issues affecting women of all ages.
For example, it spearheaded efforts to enact legislation requiring insurers to pay for minimum hospital stays for childbirth and mastectomy, helped secure a $1.8 million budgetary appropriation for breast and cervical cancer screening for uninsured women, helped secure passage of a bill requiring insurers to pay for prescription contraceptives, and co-sponsored a program to alert women to risks associated with osteoporosis.
PCSW has developed a number of programs to serve women across the economic spectrum.
Its Women's Economic Development Initiative, for example, won the Small Business Administration 2000 award for its programs for women business owners.
Its Nontraditional Employment for Women Program helps women train for high-wage jobs in the skilled trades.
Its staff members contribute to several committees and task forces that bring public and private partners to the table to assess and address the causes of poverty and develop strategies for education and job training.
two
PCSW also works for broader representation of women in elected and appointed office through its Talent Bank, and mentors future Connecticut leaders by organizing "Girls in Government" and "Take Our Daughters to Work" programs at the Capitol.
It supports legislation to reduce sexual assault and domestic violence.
It participates in a working group on prison issues to ensure that the needs of incarcerated women and the concerns of family members of both female and male inmates are not overlooked in discussions of prison reform.
PCSW is non-partisan; it offers information and counsel on women's issues to legislators on both sides of the aisle.
It is also issuedriven, and because its issue positions often challenge long-held assumptions about gender roles, it sometimes, as Sojourner Truth would say, "stirs the waters."
If the Commission weren't making at least a few waves in the process, it wouldn't be doing its job.
PCSW is fortunate, though, to have many colleagues who understand that policies that expand women's educational and career options expand men's options, too, much as policies that give women the skills necessary for self-sufficiency, safeguard them from violence in their homes, ensure that they receive court-ordered child support, and guarantee them access to appropriate health care, strengthen families and communities in the process.
Ours is a classic win-win agenda.
Our work, though, is far from done.
Reports that Connecticut women still earn only 72 cents for every dollar their male counterparts earn dismay us.
Thank goodness PCSW is a permanent commission; we still have much to accomplish.
commissioners 2000 Officers Cindy R. Slane, Esq., Chair Jann-Marie Halvorsen, Vice Chair Tanya Meck, Secretary Ann M. Clark, Esq., Treasurer Members Appointed by the Governor Marcia A. Cavanaugh Anne Dailey, Esq. Karen L. Giblin Sarah E. McGirr Cindy R. Slane, Esq. Susan O. Storey, Esq.
Members Appointed by the President Pro Tempore of the Senate Barbara DeBaptiste Jann-Marie Halvorsen Tanya Meck Rosaida Morales-Rosario Members Appointed by the Speaker of the House Ann M. Clark, Esq. Anne R. Fornabi Patricia T. Hendel Carmen I. Sierra Holly Abery-Wetstone, Esq.
Legislative Members, 2000 Senator Donald E. Williams, Jr.
Senator Thomas F. Upson Representative Michael P. Lawlor Representative Robert Farr
three
executive director message phone survey of women and men conducted by a bi-partisan and multicultural team of pollsters.
The purpose was to determine the priorities and concerns that Connecticut women have ­ particularly with respect to the economy and their families.
One disturbing finding was that more than half of all the women surveyed felt that the economic "boom" of the late `90's had not reached them or their families.
Women were clear, however, about one of the solutions to their economic worries: Most women list equal pay and benefits as their top priority.
W
We began this "millennial" year at the PCSW by looking backward at women's progress over the last quarter century, and we ended the year by looking forward to the challenges in the year ahead.
In the winter, as part of our 6th Annual Making Women Visible Day event on February 23, 2000, we published an edition of our annual facts book, Connecticut Women in the New Millennium: Not Equal Yet.
We provided current data about the status of women in the economy and the workplace, in the family, in government, in the criminal justice system and with respect to health and health care.
But we also took a look backward to the period in the mid 1970's when the PCSW was established to see how much progress we had made in the past twenty-five years.
To enrich our thinking, we invited seven Connecticut scholars to contribute brief essays and to join us for a panel discussion about where we have been and where we are heading.
We are very grateful to Ivor Echols of the UConn School of Social Work, Shyamala Raman of St. Joseph's College, Susan Porter Benson of the University of Connecticut/Storrs, Maria-Luz Samper of the University of Connecticut/Storrs, Carolyn Mazure of Yale University School of Medicine, Diana Evans of Trinity College and Andi Rierden of Fairfield University for their thoughtful contributions.
(Later in the year, Professor Echols passed away.
We mourn the loss of this wonderful colleague and advocate.)
At the PCSW, we ar e listening to women's voices as we always do.
We continue our work for equal pay and benefits, better access to health care, the growth of women owned businesses, reduction of poverty among women and their children, and equal treatment under the law.
We also continue to advocate for more assistance for low wage workers, programs to help women enter higher wage nontraditional occupations, better services for women in the criminal justice and mental health systems, and family friendly policies in the workplace.
To help us achieve our goals, we work with a broad range of partners including the members of our Congressional District Advisory Councils, the Connecticut Women's Agenda, the Connecticut Women's Health Campaign, the Women's Economic Development Initiative, the Working Group on Prison Issues, the Nontraditional Occupations Advisory Committee, and many others.
Working for equality is a long, collaborative process and we extend our thanks to all our colleagues.
At the PCSW we know exactly why we are doing this work because in the year 2000 we were blessed with the births of three new baby girls in our staff "extended family!" We all learned again, in very personal ways, about the importance of high quality, affordable health care and workplace policies that support parents and families.
For Sophia, Amelia and Anai, ­ our three newest women of the future ­ and for all our daughters and sons, granddaughters and grandsons, we are proud to work for a more equitable future and to report our activities in this Annual Report.
In the fall, we released the results of our statewide poll, Connecticut Women's Voices 2000 that provided information to help us look forward.
This project, conducted in collaboration with the Center for Policy Alternatives in Washington D.C., included focus groups and a tele-
four
meet the year 2000 pcsw commissioners Holly Abery-Wetstone serves on the Public Information/Talent Bank Committee of the Permanent Commission on the Status of Women.
Moira Lyons, Speaker of the House appointed her in 2000 to the PCSW.
A partner in the law firm of Wetstone 
She was a partner with Clayman, Markowitz, Litman 
Presently, Ms. Abery-Wetstone serves in the Family Division Masters Program in the Courts of Hartford, Tolland and Middlesex counties and is also a Fact Finder/ Arbitrator/Attorney State Trial Referee for the Judicial District of Hartford/New Britain.
Ms. Abery-Wetstone has a wide range of political experience serving as Minority Leader for the West Hartford Town Council (Democrat) since 1999; and as a 1st District Member of the West Hartford Democratic Town Committee from 1991 ­ 1997 and the 1st District West Hartford Democratic Town Committee Chairwoman 1996 ­ 1997.
Marcia A. Cavanaugh was appointed to the Commission in 1998 by Governor John G. Rowland, and she presently serves as Chair of the Special Projects Committee and Chair of the Congressional District Advisory Council in the 3rd Congressional District.
Ms. Cavanaugh is First Vice President with New Haven Savings Bank.
She is an alumna of Bay Path College and the Williams College School of Banking.
Currently she serves on the President's Advisory Council of Bay Path College as well as on the Development Committee of Gaylord Hospital.
She is a past President and member of the New Haven Kiwanis Club and is on the Board of Governors for the Quinnipiac Club.
Ms. Cavanaugh is Director in Perpetuity of the New Haven Colony Historical Society, past President and Executive Director of Connecticut Estate and Tax Planning Council, as well as a member of the Advisory Board of the Women's Seamen's Friend Society of Connecticut., Inc.
Ann M. Clark, Treasurer, was appointed to the Commission in 1997 by Speaker of the House, Thomas D. Ritter and is Chair of the Commission's Public Information/Talent Bank Committee.
She holds a Bachelor of Arts degree, with distinction, in the field of Government from Connecticut College and a Juris Doctor degree from New York University School of Law.
After graduating law school, Ms. Clark joined the Hartford firm of Day, Berry 
Ms. Clark has served the Connecticut General Assembly since 1993 having first worked in the Office of Thomas D. Ritter, Speaker of the House of Representatives.
Ms. Clark was promoted to the position of Permanent Assistant Clerk of the Connecticut House of Representatives in December of 1993.
Ms. Clark is a member of the American Society of Legislative Clerks and Secretaries.
Ms. Clark has been an appointed member of the Connecticut State Library Board since 1993.
In 1998, her peers on the Connecticut State Library Board elevated her to the position of Chairperson, where she has presided over a national search for a State Librarian.
Barbara DeBaptiste was first appointed to the Permanent Commission on the Status of Women in 1995 by the President Pro Tempore of the Senate M. Adela Eads and reappointed to the PCSW July 2000 by the Speaker of the House Moira Lyons.
She is the immediate past Chair.
This past year, Ms. DeBaptiste served on the Public Information /Talent Bank Committee for the PCSW.
She also serves as Chair of the Advisory Council in the 5th Congressional District and is a newly elected At-Large Board member of the National Association of Commissions for Women (NACW).
Ms. DeBaptiste is a Trustee for the Long Wharf Theater, and the Klingberg Family Centers, and is a founding member and Honorary Chairperson of Covenant to Care, Inc.
She founded the Connecticut Council for Black Student Professionals and the Political Awareness Program.
She is a past National President of the National Coalition of 100 Black Women and is a founder, as well as the State President, of the coalition's Connecticut Chapter.
She is a Director of the National Black United Fund and Chair of its Annual Appeal.
She has served as a board member for the Homeland Ministries, and was the first African American to serve as moderator for the Connecticut Conference of the United Church of Christ.
She is an appointed member of the Department of Labor 's Advisory Council on Displaced Homemakers and a Member-at-
Large for the CT Federation of Business and Professional Women.
For the past three years, she has served as the Assistant District Governor for District 7980 Rotary International and was selected as a facilitator for the Northeast Multi-District Presidents-Elect Training Seminar in Nashua, New Hampshire.
Ms. DeBaptiste was recently elected to the Board of Directors of the Women's Campaign school at Yale University and the Afro-American Cultural Center at Yale University.
She is a member of the Girl Scout Alumnae Search Committee, CT Trails Council and a member of the Entrepreneurial Center Advisory Board, The Hartford College for Women.
Anne Dailey was appointed to the Commission in 1999 by Governor John G. Rowland.
She serves on the Special Projects Committee.
After graduating from Yale University in 1983 and Harvard Law School in 1987, Professor Dailey clerked for Judge Jose A. Cabranes, then judge of the United States District Court for the District of Connecticut.
She has taught at the University of Connecticut School of Law since 1990.
In addition to teaching courses on family law, constitutional law and women and the law, Professor Dailey's current research focuses on the relevance of psychology to legal doctrine and theory.
Professor Dailey's published work has appeared in the Virginia Law Review, the Duke Law Journal and the University of Pennsylvania Law Review.
Anne R. Fornabi was appointed to the Commission in 1997 by Speaker of the House Thomas D. Ritter.
Ms. Fornabi received her IIMC certification from Salve Regina College.
She has recently retired as the Town Clerk for East Hartford, and serves on the Special Projects Committee of the PCSW.
She is a Justice of the Peace, Special Assistant Registrar and a Certified Connecticut Election Official.
Ms. Fornabi has served on the Connecticut Federation of Democratic Women's Clubs and has been a delegate to the Democratic State Convention.
She also serves in various capacities in the National Federation of Democratic Women.
Karen L. Giblin was appointed to the Permanent Commission on the Status of Women in 1996 by Governor John G. Rowland.
She is the President of Prime Plus, Inc., which provides menopause management education programs and services throughout the country.
Ms. Giblin has received the National Organization for Women's Elizabeth Blackwell Award for her commitment to the health of women.
Prior to founding Prime Plus, Inc., Ms. Giblin served three terms as a Selectperson in the town of Ridgefield.
Jann-Marie Halvorsen was appointed to the Permanent Commission on the Status of Women in 1996 by Senate President Pro Tempore M. Adela Eads, and she currently serves as the Vice Chair of the Commission and Chair of the Legislative Committee.
She also Chairs the 4th Congressional District Advisory Council.
Ms. Halvorsen received her BA degree from Wellesley College, graduating with honors, and her MBA in Finance and Public Management from Stanford University's Graduate School of Business.
She is the founder and President of The Middlebury Group, a strategic management and consulting firm.
Previously, she was Vice President and Service Director for the Gartner Group.
Ms. Halvorsen held management positions at GE Capital Corporation, and management/marketing positions in the San Francisco Bay Area with international financial institutions.
She also worked in the Netherlands for Royal Dutch Shell.
Currently, she is completing her doctorate in strategic management at the University of Massachusetts at Amherst.
Ms. Halvorsen is on the Board of Directors of the Waterbury Symphony Orchestra.
Patricia T. Hendel was appointed to the Commission by Governor William A. O'Neill in 1986, reappointed in 1991 by Governor Lowell P. Weicker, Jr. and reappointed again in 1996 by Speaker of the House Thomas D. Ritter.
A resident of New London, she is a former State Representative from the 40th District (New London and Groton).
She has served as Chair, Vice Chair, and Treasurer of the Commission and currently serves on the PCSW Public Information/Talent Bank Committee.
Ms. Hendel is President of the National Association of Commissions for Women, a nonpartisan organization composed of state, regional, county and local commissions throughout the United States, Puerto Rico and the Virgin Islands.
Ms. Hendel serves on the Steering Committee of the National Council of Women's Organizations, an umbrella organization of over 130 national women's organizations.
Previously, she was Executive Director of H.O.P.E. Inc., an organization devoted to providing affordable housing to low and moderate-income persons.
Ms. Hendel holds a Bachelor 's degree from Barnard College and a Masters degree from Connecticut College where she majored in economics, with an emphasis on public finance.
Ms. Hendel's activities have included the League of Women Voters, the New London Public Library and the United Way.
Sarah E. McGirr, former Chair of the PCSW, was appointed to serve on the Commission in 1985 by Speaker of the House R.E. Van Norstrand.
She was reappointed by Speaker of the House Richard Balducci in 1990, reappointed in 1992 by Governor Lowell P. Weicker, Jr., and reappointed once again in 1997 by Governor John G. Rowland.
Ms. McGirr serves on the PCSW Special Projects Committee.
She is a past State President of the Connecticut Federation of Business and Professional Women.
She was a delegate to the White House Conference on Small Business in 1986, and reactivated and chaired the Connecticut Small Business Advisory Council for five years.
She chaired the Disadvantaged and Women-Owned Business Enterprise Certification Panel for the Connecticut Department of Transportation and served for four years on the panel.
Ms. McGirr is the Managing Member of Renaissance Limited Liability Company.
She is a public member of Connecticut Medical Examiners Board.
Ms. McGirr is listed in the World's Who's Who of Women and Who's Who of American Women.
Tanya Meck was appointed to the Commission in 1998 by Senate President Pro Tempore Kevin Sullivan.
She is Secretary of the Commission and a member of the Legislative Committee.
She is currently Assistant Secretary of the State and Chief of Staff.
Prior to her work in the Secretary of the State's office, Ms. Meck was the Director of Development for the Connecticut Women's Education and Legal Fund (CWEALF).
Ms. Meck is a Phi Beta Kappa and Summa Cum Laude graduate of Drew University.
She received her Master 's degree in Public Policy Studies from Trinity College.
Ms. Meck is a member of the Farmington Avenue East Study Commission, an Adult Advisory Team member for the Connecticut Valley Girl Scout Council, President of the Drew University Connecticut Alumni Chapter, and has served on the steering committee for Ten Thousand Villages in West Hartford Center.
She has received numerous awards and was named Woman of the Year by the New Jersey Association for Intercollegiate Women's Athletics in 1993.
An accomplished athlete, Ms. Meck plays in the West Hartford Women's Soccer Club and officiates girls' field hockey at high schools in Greater Hartford.
Rosaida Morales-Rosario was appointed to the Permanent Commission on the Status of Women in 1993 by Senate President Pro Tempore John B. Larson and reappointed in 1998 by Senate President Pro Tempore Kevin Sullivan.
Ms. Rosario currently is on the Legislative Committee of the PCSW, and serves as the Chair of the Advisory Council in the 6th Congressional District.
She received her Bachelor 's degree from Wesleyan University, a Graduate Fellowship from the Institute on
Educational Policy, Washington, D.C., and a National Hispana Leadership Institute Fellowship to the JFK School of Harvard University, and the Center for Creative Leadership.
She is currently the President of Rosario and Associates and was previously National Executive Vice President of the National Puerto Rican Forum.
She serves as Vice Chair of the Hartford Foundation for Public Giving.
Her board memberships have included the Greater Hartford United Way, the Greater Hartford AIDS Fund, and the Governor 's Commission on Employment and Training.
Carmen I. Sierra was appointed to the PCSW in 1993 and then again in 1998 by Speaker of the House Thomas D. Ritter.
She is a member of the Special Projects Committee and is the Chair of the Advisory Council for the 1st Congressional District.
Ms. Sierra received a Bachelor 's degree in Management/Human Resources from Central Connecticut State University and a Master 's degree in Public Administration from the University of Hartford.
Ms. Sierra is a member of the Democratic State Central Committee, Chair of the Puerto Rican Forum, Board Member on the Workforce Development Board, Board member of the Southend Democratic Ladies Club and the Hartford Infant Mortality Board.
She worked in the Hartford office of Congresswoman Barbara Kennelly for more than five years.
Cindy R. Slane, Esq., Chair of the Commission and previously Vice Chair and Chair of the Legislative Committee, was appointed to the Commission in 1996 by Governor John G. Rowland.
A former high school humanities teacher, she is a graduate of Douglass College and Yale Law School.
She was a member of the trial department at Day, Berry 
Professor Slane is admitted to practice in the State of Connecticut, the State of New York, and before the United States Supreme Court.
She is a member of the Connecticut Bar Association, the American Bar Association, the Clinical Legal Education Association, and the Federal Bar Council, and serves on the Connecticut Bar Association's Committee on Professional Ethics and the State of Connecticut's Legal Internship Committee.
Susan O. Storey serves on the Legislative Committee of the PCSW and was appointed in 2000 by Governor Rowland to the Permanent Commission on the Status of Women.
She graduated Magna Cum Laude, Phi Beta Kappa from Mount Holyoke College in 1979.
She received her J.D. from the University of Connecticut School of Law in 1982 and spent the next two years as a staff attorney with the Legal Aid Society of Hartford County.
In 1984, she was appointed as the supervising attorney in the Juvenile Public Defender 's office in Hartford.
She has also practiced as a trial attorney representing indigent persons charged with serious felony offenses in the Hartford and Middletown Judicial Districts.
From 1990 to 1994, she represented clients charged with capital crimes as an Assistant Public Defender in the Capital Defense and Trial Services Unit.
She was appointed to her current position of Deputy Chief Public Defender in 1994.
She is a member of the Connecticut Bar Association, the Connecticut Criminal Defense Lawyers Association, and the American Council of Chief Defenders.
Legislative Members Senator Donald E. Williams, Jr., Democrat from the 29th Senate District, was elected to the General Assembly in a January 1993 special election.
Senator Thomas F. Upson, Republican from the 15th Senate District, was elected to the General Assembly in 1984.
Representative Michael P. Lawlor, Democrat from the 99th House District, is House Chair of the Judiciary Committee, a member of the Government Administration and Elections Committee, and the Executive and Legislative Nominations Committee.
Representative Robert Farr, Republican, 19th District of West Hartford, was elected to the House of Representatives in 1981 and is the Ranking Member of the Judiciary Committee, and member of the Appropriations Committee.
report of the year 2000 connecticut women's agenda
included seven brief essays from scholars mentioned above with expertise in women's issues.
On Tuesday, May 9th, we hosted our third annual Making Women Visible Dinner at the Legislative Office Building during which we reviewed the successes and disappointments of the 2000 legislative session, and distributed a written summary of legislation affecting the status of women.
Several participants in the Connecticut Women's Agenda agreed to meet with us in the summer and fall to strategize about ways to increase the value of the CWA to those who participate, and to generate interest among additional organizations.
As a result of these discussions, we initiated two new activities: We held two longer meetings in October at which we featured presentations from organizations that offer direct services to women, one in the Governor 's Southwestern Connecticut Office in Bridgeport and the other at the Capitol in Hartford.
We also offered a "skills building" workshop in November about how to conduct successful press events and communicate an effective message.
T
The Connecticut Women's Agenda is an open forum for representatives of organizations to share information about issues affecting the status of women and their families in Connecticut.
Hosted by the Permanent Commission on the Status of Women on a monthly basis, these meetings have included discussions of health care and welfare policies, violence against women, employment discrimination, economic development, criminal justice and family law.
On February 23, 2000, the Connecticut Women's Agenda, the Connecticut Junior Leagues, and the PCSW held the sixth annual Making Women Visible Day at the Capitol.
In honor of the "millennial year," the day included a morning press conference, followed by a special luncheon and a panel of scholars discussing the progress that women have made and the challenges that we still face.
Speakers at the morning press conference who introduced their legislative priorities included: Jane McNichol of the Legal Assistance Resource Center of Connecticut; Laura Micklus, Connecticut Women and Disabilities Network; Nancy Pilver, Connecticut Breast Cancer Coalition; Fernando Betancourt, Latino and Puerto Rican Affairs Commission; Anne Stanback, Connecticut Women's Education and Legal Fund; and Carolyn Gabel, DemocracyWorks.
Also speaking on behalf of the PCSW were Chairperson Barbara DeBaptiste, Executive Director Leslie Brett, and Public Information Officer Barbara Potopowitz.
The afternoon panel included Professor Ivor Echols of the UConn School of Social Work, Professor Shyamala Raman of St. Joseph's College, Professor Maria-Luz Samper of the University of Connecticut/Storrs, Professor Carolyn Mazure of Yale University School of Medicine, and Professor Diana Evans of Trinity.
As part of our presentation on Making Women Visible Day, we released two publications: The Connecticut Women's Agenda 2000 Legislative Priorities, which included information from thirty organizations, and our annual book of facts entitled, Connecticut Women in the New Millennium - Not Equal Yet.
The fact book also
connecticut women's health campaign
T
The Connecticut Women's Health Campaign (CWHC) is a statewide coalition of organizations representing consumers, providers and policy experts with particular interests in women's health and access to health care.
The Campaign is convened and Co-Chaired by the PCSW ; the other Co-Chair in 2000 was CONNSACS (Connecticut Sexual Assault Crisis Services).
This is one way that the PCSW "serves as a liaison between government and private interest groups concerned with services for women."
In 2000, we continued to focus on legislative proposals to improve the health of women and their families.
Our priorities during the year included the expansion of Medicaid coverage for adults, women and cardiovascular disease, multicultural health, and funding for treatment of uninsured women with breast and cervical
five
cancer.
Members of the Connecticut Women's Health Campaign delivered testimony and provided information to the General Assembly on these and other women's health issues.
Among the legislative successes for women's health in 2000 was the expansion of HUSKY A coverage to adults with incomes up to 150% of poverty, effective January 1, 2001.
Also, legislation was passed that allowed working people with disabilities to continue to receive health care coverage through Medicaid.
Another statute was enacted to authorize the Department of Social Services to seek federal funds if they become available for the treatment of uninsured women diagnosed with breast or cervical cancer, and also directs the Department of Public Health to establish an account into which the proceeds of any settlement of a private lawsuit may be deposited and used for such treatment.
The Connecticut General Assembly also established an Advisory Commission on Multicultural Health within the Department of Public Health to work toward the elimination of disparities in health status among the state's cultural and ethnic communities.
The Chairperson of the Permanent Commission on the Status of Women has a seat on this commission.
On March 15, 2000, we held our fourth annual Women's Health Day at the Capitol with a public forum highlighting racial disparities in health care.
Panelists included Margarita Burgos of the Office of Multicultural Health, Ellen Andrews of the CT Health Policy Project, Suzette Benn of the Urban League of Greater Hartford, and Alma Cain of the Connecticut Dieticians Association.
Display tables in the concourse of the Legislative Office Building offered valuable information about women's health and members of the Connecticut Women's Health Campaign were available to answer questions.
In addition, we published a "Women's Health Quiz" with fact sheets to educate the public about various women's health issues.
women's economic development initiative
I
In March, the Women's Economic Development Initiative (WEDI) sponsored the second annual Connecticut Women Entrepreneurs' Day at the State Capitol.
PCSW Commissioner Barbara DeBaptiste directed the opening ceremonies.
The day's event was taped on Connecticut Public Access Television (CTN) and was then broadcast on statewide public access.
Over 200 women attended the event to network and gather information on financing, training programs and state procurement opportunities.
The technical fair provided an opportunity to interact with representatives of state purchasing offices.
In addition to Entrepreneurs' Day activities, PCSW Public Information Officer and the WEDI Project Coordinator Barbara Potopowitz continued to sit on committees at the CT Department of Public Works and the CT Department of Transportation that helped to establish the internal procedures regarding their set-aside and disadvantaged business enterprise procurement programs.
In the year 2000, the Starting and Growing A Business subcommittee of WEDI worked with the State Library Association to produce a video entitled, Starting and Growing A Small Business ­ Choices for Success.
This video highlights the many resources in the state, both public and private, that assist in the start-up of small businesses.
Many women who own small businesses were also featured to talk about the opportunities and obstacles they faced as they began their businesses.
Jim Kading of Stonington donated production of this video and worked with the PCSW as part of an intern project through Southern Illinois University.
Nancy Aborn-Patton of Patton Enterprises and a local television personality donated her talent and narrated the video.
Copies of this video will be housed in every library in the state of Connecticut for circulation.
six
A new subcommittee of WEDI was formed in 2000 to look at the issue of state certification for small businesses.
Through the work of this committee, the state Department of Transportation (CONNDOT) and the Department of Administrative Services (DAS) now have a reciprocal agreement: when a small business receives certification from CONNDOT, it is automatically offered certification in the DAS program without completing any additional paperwork.
DAS is the state agency that purchases all the goods and services for the state of Connecticut.
The National Foundation of Women Business Owners reports that there were 115,000 women owned businesses, representing 35% of all businesses, in the state of Connecticut in 2000.
The fastest growing segment was in the construction business and the majority are microenterprises.
The PCSW will continue to work to support the growing number of women owned businesses in our state.
tivity; or 4) purchase of a car in order to get or keep a job.
Through this program, the state will provide grants to community based organizations to offer IDA programs which will also include case management and rigorous financial education and planning for participants.
PA 00-144, AN ACT INCREASING THE MINIMUM WAGE (H.B. 5160) Result: Passed Effective January 1, 2001, the minimum wage in Connecticut will be raised to $6.40 per hour and on January 1, 2002, it will increase to $6.70.
In addition, the new law allows 15 year olds to work in retail food stores on Saturdays and maintains the minimum wage at $4.74 for wait staff at restaurants because of the so-called "tip deduction."
The minimum wage for bartenders remains at $6.15.
legislative report
T
The Commission continued its work to provide information, research and analysis to elected officials and the public regarding issues affecting women.
Following is a summary of key 2000 legislation affecting the status of women.
S.H.B. 5619, AN ACT STUDYING PAID FAMILY AND MEDICAL LEAVE Result: Amended to require a one year study, then transferred and passed as par t of another bill, Public Act 00-192, AN ACT CONCERNING THE EXPENDITURES OF THE OFFICE OF POLICY AND MANAGEMENT (s.H.B. 5619) (section 80) Effective July 1, 2000.
This bill authorizes the Office of Policy and Management, in consultation with the Department of Administrative Services, the Department of Labor, and the Co-Chairs and Ranking Members of the Labor Committee of the legislature, to hire a consultant to study the costs and benefits of providing wage replacement to employees who take family and medical leave in Connecticut.
A report must be provided to the General Assembly by July 1, 2001.
ECONOMIC EQUITY/ECONOMIC SECURIT Y S.B. 122, AN ACT CONCERNING INDIVIDUAL DEVELOPMENT ACCOUNTS Result: Passed, but transferred to another bill, Public Act 00-192, AN ACT CONCERNING THE EXPENDITURES OF THE OFFICE OF POLICY AND MANAGEMENT (H.B. 5922) (sections 1-12).
Effective upon passage are Sections 4, 9, 10, and 12.
All other sections will be effective Januar y 1, 2001.
The State created a new "Connecticut IDA Initiative" and provided $400,000 of seed money.
Individual Development Accounts are matched savings accounts for low to moderate income households.
Savings are matched two to one, up to a maximum of $1,000 per year and $3,000 total if the household income is below 80% of the local median income, and if the savings are used only for 1) education or job training; 2) purchase of a home or a rental deposit for a primary residence; 3) entrepreneurial ac-
H.B. 5158, AN ACT CONCERNING ELIGIBILIT Y FOR UNEMPLOYMENT COMPENSATION Result: Failed This proposed bill would have allowed the state to use an "alternative base period" for calculating when workers would be eligible to receive unemployment benefits.
The purpose was to eliminate or reduce the waiting period for collecting benefits for people who had only recently entered the workforce, such as those in transition from welfare to work or who were seasonal employees.
Although the Labor Committee and the Appropriations Committee voted upon the bill favorably, it failed in the Planning and Development Committee.
seven
PA 00-199, AN ACT TRANSFERRING ENFORCEMENT OF THE SET-ASIDE PROGRAM FROM THE DEPARTMENT OF ECONOMIC AND COMMUNIT Y DEVELOPMENT TO THE DEPARTMENT OF ADMINISTRATIVE SERVICES AND THE COMMISSION ON HUMAN RIGHTS AND OPPORTUNITIES (S.B. 392) Result: Passed - This bill took effect upon passage.
This bill completes the transfer of the state set-aside program for women and minority owned businesses from the Department of Community and Economic Development (DECD) to the Department of Administrative Services (DAS) and the Commission on Human Rights and Opportunities (CHRO).
In the 1999 legislative session, the certification process was transferred from DECD to DAS.
This bill now gives the process of setting goals and exceptions for state agencies to DAS and the monitoring and enforcement to CHRO.
S.H.B. 5855, AN ACT CONCERNING UNEXPECTED TANF FUNDS Result: Original bill failed, but some elements were passed in Public Act 00-2, An Act Concerning Programs And Modifications Necessar y To Implement The Budget Relative To The Depar tment Of Social Services (H.B. 6002) Effective July 1, 2000 The intent of the original bill was to increase reporting about the state's expenditures of federal funds claimed under the Temporary Assistance to Needy Families block grant, and to use unspent or available funds for a Reserve Fund.
The original bill was voted favorably upon by the Human Services Committee and the Appropriations Committee, but then failed in the Committee on Legislative Management.
Language regarding reporting by the Department of Social Services to the General Assembly was added to section 34 of the DSS budget implementation bill (H.B. 6002).
Per this section, DSS must transmit the TANF expenditure report to the General Assembly within 45 days of its submission to the federal Department of Health and Human Services.
WELFARE, EDUCATION AND JOB TRAINING H.B. 5322, AN ACT CONCERNING ACCESS TO PO ST-SECONDARY EDUCATION AND JOB TRAINING Result: Original bill failed, but some elements were added as an amendment to section 7 of Public Act 00-204, An Act Concerning Changes To Miscellaneous Education And Higher Education Statues (S.B. 160) - Effective upon passage The final version of this bill requires the Labor Department, in cooperation with the Department of Social Services, to design a program of state funded work study slots combined with education and job training at institutions of higher education, such as community colleges and other job training programs.
Participants in work study slots would also be able to obtain child care and transportation assistance while at work and in school, provided they were eligible.
Some slots must be reserved for education and training in nontraditional occupations.
Eligible participants will include people currently receiving Temporary Family Assistance and other "needy persons" as defined by the state TANF plan, with priority given to people at or below the poverty level.
The Department of Labor must report to the legislature on the design of this program by January 1, 2001.
WOMEN'S HEALTH CARE EXPANSION OF HUSKY A COVERAGE TO PARENTS.
H.B. 5928, AN ACT CONCERNING THE EXPENDITURES OF THE DEPARTMENT OF SOCIAL SERVICES (SECTION 18) Result: Eligible population reduced, but some adult coverage retained.
EXPANSION OF HUSKY A COVERAGE TO PARENTS, H.B. 5928/H.B.
6002, AN ACT CONCERNING THE EXPENDITURES OF THE DEPARTMENT OF SOCIAL SERVICES Result: Passed as Public Act 00-2, An Act Concerning Programs And Modifications Necessar y To Implement The Budget Relative To The De par t ment Of Social Ser vices (H.B. 6002) - Effective July 1, 2000 The budget enacted last year included a scheduled expansion of HUSKY A (Medicaid) health care coverage for adults with incomes up to 185% of poverty.
The Governor 's budget proposed a repeal of this expansion.
The final budget passed for FY 2000/2001 lowers the eligibility threshold to 150% of poverty, and postpones the implementation of the expanded coverage until January 1, 2001.
The budget includes $7.4 million for this program.
(These changes do not affect eligibility for children.)
eight
PA 00-213, AN ACT PROVIDING WORK INCENTIVES FOR PERSONS WITH DISABILITIES (H.B. 5778) Result: Passed - Effective October 1, 2000 The new law requires the state to take advantage of recent changes in Medicaid rules so that working people with disabilities can continue to receive health care coverage through Medicaid.
Instead of losing health care coverage as earnings increase, working people with disabilities will be able to continue to receive coverage through Medicaid.
Those with earnings exceeding 200% of poverty must contribute a premium co-pay based on a sliding scale formula which takes into account significant medical expenses.
was included and passed in the bill implementing the budget of the Department of Public Health which allows the Commissioner of DSS to seek any waivers or amend the state Medicaid plan in the future to seek federal funds if they become available.
(Section 5) It also directs the Department of Public Health to establish a special account for treatment funds into which the proceeds of any settlement of a private lawsuit may be deposited and used for this purpose.
(Section 4)
S.B. 532, AN ACT EXTENDING BENEFITS UNDER THE HUSKY PLAN TO CERTAIN UNEMPLOYED INDIVIDUALS Result: Failed This bill would have allowed people with incomes up to 300% of poverty level who had lost their health insurance because of loss of employment and had also exhausted their COBRA coverage to receive coverage under the state sponsored HUSKY B program.
Although the bill was voted upon favorably in the Human Services, Appropriations and Public Health Committees, it was never taken up for a vote in the Senate.
H.B. 5652, AN ACT CONCERNING A CERTIFICATE OF NEED EXEMPTION FOR CERTAIN PHYSICIAN OFFICES AND THE ACCREDITATION OF OFFICES WHERE CERTAIN LEVELS OF ANESTHESIA ARE ADMINISTERED Result: Failed This proposed bill included a section opposed by the PCSW and the Connecticut Women's Health Campaign because it would have allowed "physician owned or physician controlled" health care providers to be exempt from the Certificate of Need (CON) review process.
The CON process has provided the regulatory review that prevents health care providers from reducing access to essential services, including reproductive health care services.
Although the bill was voted favorably upon in the Public Health Committee, it failed in the Appropriations Committee.
S.B. 423, AN ACT ESTABLISHING AN ADVISORY COMMISSION ON MULTICULTURAL HEALTH Result: Amended modified version passed in another bill, PA 00-01, AN ACT IMPLEMENTING AND MAKING TECHNICAL REVISIONS TO THE STATE BUDGET FOR THE BIENNIUM ENDING June 30, 2001 (H.B. 6001) Section 14 creates a new Advisory Commission on Multicultural Health to assist and oversee the efforts of the Office of Multicultural Health, within the Department of Public Health, to eliminate disparities in health status among the state's cultural and ethnic communities.
The Advisory Committee will consist of 18 members, including the Chairperson of the PCSW or her designee.
H.B. 5533, AN ACT CONCERNING MEDICAID REIMBUR SEMENT FOR BREAST CANCER TREATMENT Result: Amended; modified version passed in another bill, Public Act 00-216, AN ACT CONCERNING EXPENDITURES FOR THE PROGRAMS AND SERVICES OF THE DEPARTMENT OF PUBLIC HEALTH, H.B. 5911 - Effective July 1, 2000 The goal of this bill was to provide funds for treatment of women diagnosed with breast or cervical cancer through the state's Breast and Cervical Cancer Screening and Early Detection Program.
Women who use these services are uninsured or underinsured and cannot afford treatment.
The bill was drafted in expectation of Congressional action to make such people eligible for Medicaid.
Since this had not yet occurred by June, 2000 modified language
Public Act 00-216, AN ACT CONCERNING EXPENDITURES FOR THE PROGRAMS AND SERVICES OF THE DEPAR TMENT OF PUBLIC HEALTH Section on drug formularies (previously H.B. 5911) PRESCRIPTION DRUG COVERAGE (INCLUDING CONTRACEPTION) Result: Passed - Effective July 1, 2000
nine
In spite of passage the previous year of the law requiring equitable coverage of prescription contraception, some women are still denied coverage of the specific medication prescribed by their physicians.
In partial response to that problem and denials of other prescriptions, section 7 of H.B. 5911 requires that managed care organizations must develop their "formularies" or lists of covered drugs in the same way they develop "medical protocols," which require input from physicians who are specialists in various fields.
crime, requires training of police officers concerning hate crime laws, and increases enforcement and public awareness of hate crime laws.
PA 00-161, AN ACT CONCERNING SEXUAL ASSAULT (R.B. 5882) Result: Passed - Effective October 1, 2000 This bill addresses the use of "daterape"drugs by increasing the penalty for a person who engages in sexual intercourse with another person who has been temporarily incapable of controlling her/his conduct due to a drug or intoxicating substance given to another person without her/his consent.
The person can now be charged with sexual assault in the first degree, which carries a penalty of 1-20 years in prison and up to a $15,000 fine.
Public Act 00-002 (H.B. 6002) AN ACT CONCERNING THE EXPENDITURES OF THE DEPARTMENT OF SOCIAL SERVICES - CONNPACE (H.B. 5928) Result: Passed - EFFECTIVE JULY 1, 2000.
Section 29 requires DSS to develop a plan to expand the ConnPACE program to meet the needs of people whose incomes currently exceed the eligibility threshold but who still need assistance to purchase prescription medications.
The plan proposed by DSS must be revenue neutral and submitted to the legislature by January 1, 2001.
PA 00-80, AN ACT CONCERNING THE STATUTE OF LIMITATIONS FOR PROSECUTION OF SEXUAL ASSAULT AND FOR REQUESTING A NEW TRIAL (S.H.B. 5903) Result: Passed - Effective upon passage This act increases, in many cases, the time period in which a person identified by DNA analysis may be charged with sexual assault, providing the victim has notified the police or a prosecutor of the offense within five years of the assault.
This act applies to first-degree sexual assault, aggravated first-degree sexual assault, sexual assault in a spousal or cohabitating relationship, second-degree sexual assault, and third-degree sexual assault, with and/or without a firearm.
It also removes the 3-year limit in which a victim has to request a new trial in a civil or criminal matter when the request is based on DNA evidence.
Public Act 00-002 (H.B. 6002) AN ACT CONCERNING THE EXPENDITURES OF THE DEPARTMENT OF SOCIAL SERVICES.
(previously MEDICAID MANAGED CARE, H.B. 5928) Result: AN ACT CONCERNING PROGRAMS AND MODIFICATIONS NECESSARY TO IMPLEMENT THE BUDGET RELATIVE TO THE DEPARTMENT OF SOCIAL SERVICES.
(H.B. 6002) Passed as PA 00-002 - Effective July 1, 2000 Section 31 requires DSS to study alternative methods of delivering care to the Medicaid population, including the Primary Care Case Management system.
They must report their findings to the legislature by March 1, 2001.
CIVIL RIGHTS AND POLITICAL PARTICIPATION S.H.B. 5102, AN ACT PROPOSING COMPREHENSIVE CAMPAIGN FINANCE REFORM FOR STATE-WIDE CONSTITUTIONAL OFFICES AND GENERAL ASSEMBLY OFFICES Result: Passed both the House and Senate, vetoed by the Governor This legislation provided for a comprehensive public financing system with spending limits for state-wide campaigns beginning in the year 2006; established a public financing system with voluntary spending limits for State House and Senate races in 2004 and created a Citizens' Election Fund with a "check-off" funding mechanism on state income tax returns.
VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN PA 00-72, AN ACT CONCERNING INTIMIDATION BASED ON BIGOTRY OR BIAS (S.H.B. 5710) Result: Passed - Takes effect October 1, 2000 (increased penalties), however sections 4 through 7 shall take effect July 1, 2001 This law increases the penalty for intimidation based on bigotry or bias to a class C felony, establishes a diversion program for persons charged with the commission of a hate
ten
S.H.B. 5701, AN ACT CONCERNING THE FORFEITURE OF ELECTORAL RIGHTS AND PRIVILEGES Result: Failed This proposed bill would have restored voting rights to persons convicted of a felony as soon as such persons were released from prison and/or completed their parole.
Connecticut currently denies voting rights to people convicted of felonies until they have completed their entire sentence including probation.
The purpose of this proposal was to encourage greater re-integration and political participation.
This bill passed in the House, but was never taken up for a vote in the Senate.
R.B. 124, AN ACT CONCERNING STATE INMATES IN OUT-OF-STATE FACILITIES / R.B. 458, AN ACT CONCERNING INCARCERATION OF INMATES / H.B. 5454, AN ACT CONCERNING FUNDING FOR THE JAIL DIVERSION PROGRAM / H.B. 5833, AN ACT CONCERNING PRISON OVERCROWDING / S.B. 604, AN ACT CONCERNING ALTERNATIVE INCARCERATION FOR WOMEN AND CHILDREN Result: Failed Although the above bills designed to address reform in the criminal justice system failed, the following passed: $25 million in bonding money to build / refurbish new prison space.
Money for 100 new beds for drug treatment programs in the judicial budget.
$4.5 million Contingency Fund in the Department of Correction budget to address prison overcrowding.
FAMILY LAW PA 00-228, AN ACT CONCERNING THE BEST INTERESTS OF CHILDREN IN ADOPTION MATTERS (H.B. 5830) Result: Passed - Effective October 1, 2000 This bill allows a second adult who shares parental responsibility for a child with a legal parent, but is not married to him or her, to adopt when the Probate Court determines that such adoption is in the best interests of the child.
For example, for same sex couples who are raising a child together but are not legally allowed to marry, the second parent will be permitted to adopt under this revision to the adoption statutes.
MISCELLANEOUS PA 00-207, AN ACT CONCERNING SAFE HAVENS (H.B. 5023) Result: Passed - Effective October 1, 2000 This bill allows a parent of a newborn to leave the baby at a hospital emergency room without the risk of prosecution for abandonment or risk of injury to a minor.
The Department of Children and Families (DCF) assumes custody of a baby left under these circumstances.
The purpose of this new law is to prevent circumstances in which new parents may leave a baby in unsafe or even fatal circumstances because they are afraid of the consequences of abandoning the baby.
CRIMINAL JUSTICE PA 00-200, AN ACT CONCERNING VICTIM'S RIGHTS (S.H.B. 5785) Result: Passed - Effective October 1, 2000 This bill covers several issues relevant to the rights of victims.
It helps families who lost wage earners to homicide or manslaughter the opportunity to acquire low interest loans up to $100,000 through the Office of Victim Services.
It allows family members of victims of homicide to give an impact statement on the case.
It allows family members to display an 8" x 10" picture in the courtroom that is a "fair and accurate" likeness of the deceased person, and it allows a town or municipality to waive all or a portion of the interest due on a delinquent property tax to a taxpayer who has received compensation as a crime victim.
eleven
talent bank
P
PCSW maintains a Talent Bank in compliance with our statutory mandate to "promote consideration of qualified women for all levels of government positions."
The purpose of the Talent Bank is to address the under-representation of women on state boards, councils and commissions.
In the year 2000, the Talent Bank had a total listing of 247 qualified women with diverse backgrounds and areas of expertise.
This list is made available to the Governor, President Pro Tempore of the Senate, Speaker of the House, and any other governmental appointing authority for its consideration in making appointments.
This list is also made available to the heads of state boards and commissions.
Additionally, Talent Bank members receive a list of the current vacancies each month by email or fax.
In November 2000, PCSW conducted another seminar in its series entitled "How to Be Appointed to State Boards and Commissions."
It was held at Connecticut College in New London and moderated by PCSW Commissioner and Chair of the Public Information / Talent Bank Committee, Ann Clark.
The purpose of these seminars is to educate women about the steps needed to determine where there are vacancies and how to apply for a vacancy.
Michele Stebbins, the Governor 's appointment representative, discussed the process involved in getting appointed and brought with her the vacancy list and application forms to complete for gubernatorial appointments.
Patricia Hendel, PCSW Commissioner and President of the National Association of Commission for Women (NACW), shared her own experiences about serving on state boards.
In addition, she talked about the process of seeking appointment to federal positions.
Brenda Williams discussed her experience as a member of the PCSW Congressional District Advisory Council.
Over 50 women attended this seminar to learn mor e about participating in Connecticut's state boards and commissions.
Another goal of the PCSW Talent Bank is to create a pool of candidates to increase the representation of women on the bench.
In 2000, PCSW Commissioners formalized the procedure to be used when women come before the Commission asking for endorsement in their quest for a judgeship.
PCSW also participates in the Reflecting Connecticut project with DemocracyWorks, a
community based organization.
Reflecting Connecticut is a coalition of approximately 15 organizations that support the appointment of women and people of color to state boards and commissions.
collaborations
I
In 2000, the PCSW continued its collaborations with state agencies, officials and communitybased groups addressing the status of women in Connecticut.
The PCSW is collaborating with over 60 organizations in the newly formed CT Campaign to Fight Poverty and Build Economic Security.
Executive Director Leslie J. Brett serves on the Board of Directors of the CT Consortium for Women and their Children with Behavioral Health Needs.
Executive Director Leslie J. Brett serves as CoChair of the Citizenship Fund, which is established by the Secretary of the State to oversee community education and civic participation regarding voting and elections.
Volunteer Deborah Flis continued her representation of PCSW on the Child Day Care Council.
Chair Cindy R. Slane represents the PCSW on the Multicultural Health Advisory Commission.
Executive Director Leslie J. Brett serves as Trustee of Hartford College for Women and on the Advisory Committee to the CT Women's Hall of Fame.
Special Projects Director Susan H. Hoover represents PCSW on the Steering Committee of the Hartford Construction Jobs Initiative, which is concerned with ensuring that Hartford residents are employed in newly created construction jobs in the Hartford revitalization effort.
Commissioner Patricia T. Hendel serves as President of the National Association of Commissions for Women (NACW), a nonpartisan membership organization founded in 1970, that is composed of regional, state, county and local commissions created by government to improve the status of women.
Executive Director Leslie J. Brett was appointed by Representative Christopher Donovan to serve on a legislative TANF Advisory Council.
twelve
Public Information Officer Barbara Potopowitz represents the PCSW on the CT Department of Transportation's Task Force that monitors procedures implementing new federal regulations regarding their Disadvantaged Business Enterprise Program.
Special Projects Director Susan H. Hoover is working with the five Girl Scout Councils in the state on a comprehensive project, initiated by Commissioner Barbara DeBaptiste, Girls Involved in Government, so the Girl Scouts will meet women involved in government and learn about issues that impact women and girls.
Public Information Officer Barbara Potopowitz is a member of the Fatherhood Initiative Task Force convened by the CT Department of Social Services.
Executive Director Leslie J. Brett continued to serve on the Diversity Task Force of the Millennium Project in Hartford.
Public Information Officer Barbara Potopowitz is a member of the Child Support Guidelines Commission.
Commissioner Patricia T. Hendel, Executive Director Leslie J. Brett and Special Projects Director Susan H. Hoover continued to meet with New England women's commissions and the Region I Office of the Women's Bureau of the United States Department of Labor.
The New England Coalition of Commissions for Women collaborates on issues of relevance to women in New England.
Special Projects Director Susan H. Hoover represents PCSW on the Hartford Area Child Care Collaborative, a forum for business and nonpr ofit pr ofessionals to work together on childcare issues.
Public Information Officer Barbara Potopowitz provides leadership to the Working Group on Prison Issues, a coalition of providers and advocates who represent a variety of constituents and who have an interest in constructive ways of addressing prison issues in Connecticut.
Special Projects Director Susan H. Hoover serves on the Executive Committee of the School to Career Partnership for the North Central Region.
Special Projects Director Susan H. Hoover and NEW Program Manager Jacquelyn Slamon rep-
resent the PCSW on the Connecticut Displaced Homemakers Advisory Council.
NEW Program Manager Jacquelyn Slamon serves on the Joint Apprenticeship Training Directors Committee of Connecticut to advance the role of women in the trades.
Commissioner Barbara DeBaptiste and Executive Director Leslie J. Brett worked with the Sankofa Cultural Arts Festival to co-host An Evening with Women Poets on April 11, 2000 at the Afro-American Cultural Center at Yale University.
Commissioner Jann-Marie Halvorsen also attended.
Special Projects Director Susan H. Hoover represents PCSW on the Osteoporosis Advisory Council , a legislatively mandated council charged with coordinating public awareness activities that could prevent osteoporosis.
NEW Program Manager Jacquelyn Slamon represents PCSW on the Connecticut Alliance for Women and Girls in Education and Training, a coalition of program operators, workforce development boards, social service agencies, advocates, educators, and state leaders dedicated to full funding of training programs for women that lead to economic independence.
Commissioner Patricia T. Hendel serves on the Advisory Committee for the Public Health and Community Services Block Grant.
Special Projects Director Susan H. Hoover is a member of the Girls and Technology Network, a broad-based coalition working to increase access to collaborative learning experiences using technology.
NEW Program Manager Jacquelyn Slamon represents PCSW on the State Apprenticeship Council.
Special Projects Director Susan Hoover represents PCSW on the Advisory Council for the Obesity Prevention Project, a federally funded grant being conducted by the Department of Public Health.
Special Projects Director Susan Hoover represents PCSW on the Youth Council of the Capitol Region Workforce Investment Board that has responsibility for implementing the youth component of the Workforce Investment Act.
thirteen
special projects
T
The special projects that were implemented during 2000 support the priorities and initiatives of the Permanent Commission on the Status of Women in a variety of important ways.
Very often these are the programs we take into the communities in an effort to reach out to people all across Connecticut.
Because of projects such as the Advisory Councils, the girls and government programs, and the public issues forums, more people than ever before are informed about their rights and aware of the opportunities to become involved.
Connecticut Women's Voices 2000 PCSW was pleased to partner with the Center for Policy Alternatives on Women's Voices 2000, a polling project which surveyed women and men in Connecticut and across the nation about the issues they felt were important during the election year.
In Connecticut, the bi-partisan national pollsters conducted two focus groups, one with entrepreneurial women and another with low-income women, many of whom are transitioning from welfare to work.
Additionally, they conducted telephone polling with 400 women and 200 men in Connecticut.
Lifetime TV, a partner in this project, devoted a significant amount of air time to the issues of concern to women.
The Center for Policy Alternatives conducted press conferences at both the Republican and Democratic Conventions with good results, including media coverage.
At a press conference on October 24 in Hartford, Linda Tarr-Whelan, president of the Center for Policy Alternatives, released the data from the national W o men's Voices 2000 polling project.
The Permanent Commission on the Status of Women highlighted the Connecticut-specific data gleaned from the polling data.
The Center for Policy Alternatives has been tracking women's views in every presidential election since 1992 through its Women's Voices surveys.
Key findings from the Connecticut survey include:
s Women expressed their belief that their families have not shared in the current economic prosperity.
Many are asking, "What if this is this as good as it gets?" s Women most want economic security throughout their life cycles, and safer communities.
An overwhelming majority of women in Connecticut strongly support the following policies: Equal pay and benefits, job-independent, affordable health care, retirement benefits that are portable from job to job, and stronger gun safety laws.
s Women are concerned both about economic security and about the well being of our children and communities.
s Elected officials are not getting a complete picture of economic conditions in our state partly because those who have been left out of the economic prosperity are the least likely to vote.
s Connecticut women and men overwhelmingly agree that state government should do more to help uninsured individuals get affordable health coverage.
s A majority of Connecticut women and men also agree that more should be done to expand the availability of good, affordable child care, although more women feel this way than do men.
s Women and men support several approaches to helping small businesses get started and grow, with some looking to financial institutions to increase loans and credit to small business, and others looking to government to provide low interest loans and increase access to contracts to women and minorities.
s Women in Connecticut feel the "time crunch" more than women in other parts of the country.
A majority of Connecticut women report that juggling work and family demands has gotten harder, not easier, over the last four years.
s Women and men agree that women get paid less, on average, than men get paid for the same work.
s Women want shorter and more flexible hours and a job that pays more.
The charts that follow illustrate the findings from the survey of Connecticut women and men.
(A complete copy of the report is available from PCSW upon request, and is posted on our website.)
fourteen
Women most want economic security throughout their life cycles, and safer communities.
The policy agenda is diffuse, and women and men have different priorities for improving peoples' lives.
Women place equal pay and benefits, followed by job independent, affordable health care are retirement benefits that move from job to job at the top of their lists.
Men look first to retirement benefits, followed by equal pay and benefits and lower taxes to increase income.
N ow fo r so me t hing s light ly d iffere nt.
I a m go ing to re ad yo u a list o f ite ms.
For eac h ite m, p lease te ll me ho w good o f a n idea yo u think it is a nd ra te eac h o n a sca le fro m 0 to 10, w her e 0 mea ns it is o ne o f t he wors t id eas, a nd 10 mea ns it is o ne o f t he bes t ide as.
Equa l pay and benefits Job-Inde pe nde nt, Afforda ble He a lth Ca re Re tirement benefits that go from job to job Stronger gun safety la ws Sta te a ge ncy to re duce pre scription price s for uninsure d Lowe r taxes Inve sting public dolla rs in public schools 0%
66% 64% 63% 60% 57% 54% 53% 20% 40% 60%
83% Retirement bene fits that move from job to job
61% 53% 48% 47% 41% 38% 36% 0% 20% 40% 60%
82% 75% 72% 70% 69% 64% 69% 80% 100%
80% 87% 81% 79% 75% 78% 80% 100%
Equa l pay and benefits Lowe r taxes Job-inde pe nde nt, a fforda ble he a lth ca re Inve sting public dolla rs in public schools Sta te a ge ncy to re duce pre scription proce s to uninsure d Increased training and e duca tion in te chnology
The issue agenda is diffuse and both Connecticut men and women have a diverse range of concerns.
Women top their lists with education, followed by retirement and Social Security and health care.
Men have more economic concerns listing education, followed by taxes and the economy and jobs as their top concerns.
Men are more than twice as likely as women to list taxes as a concern.
Now I am going to read you a list of concerns that some people have.
Please tell me which one of these you personally worry about the most.
Education Retirment and Social Security Health Care Moral Decline Economy 
Women , Co nne cticut Men, Con necticut
1% Welfare 0%
fifteen
Connecticut women and men overwhelmingly agree that state government should do more to help uninsured individuals get affordable health coverage.
Nonetheless, Connecticut men and women overwhelmingly believe the state government should do more to help uninsured individuals get affordable coverage--with more than eight out of ten women and seven out of ten men advocating state intervention.
Moreover, women of color are even more likely than their white counterparts to believe the state should help.
In your view, s hould more be done by the Connec tic ut s tate government to he lp uninsured people get affordable hea lth insura nc e or is this s omething better left to bus iness es in the marke tplac e? 80 % 90 %
15 % 8%
White Women 5% 2% Minority Wome n
0%
20%
40%
60%
80%
100%
*Youn ger women are s i gnif icant ly more lik ely t han senior w omen t o s ay t he st at e government should help t he unins ured ­ 94 p ercent more should be done a mon g w omen under 30, 85 p ercent amon g women 30-44, 79 p ercent amon g w omen 45-59, and 74 p ercent amon g women over 60.
Women and men agree that women get paid less, on average, than men get paid for the same work.
Equal pay for equal work is a driving concern, and both men and women agree women are not paid the same as men.
However, women are significantly more likely than their male counterparts to say women get paid less than men for the same work.
Connecticut women are more likely than women nationwide to think women are paid less than men, whereas men are equal in their response.
O n a vera ge, do yo u t hink t ha t wo me n get p a id less, t he sa me, or more t ha n me n w ho do t he sa me work t he y do? Much Less Somewhat Less Slightly Less Same Much More Somewhat More Slightly More
100% 90% 80% 70% 60% 50% 40% 30% 20% 10% 0%
81% 64%
37%
27% 14% 31% 32%
2% 11%
3%
Less
Same
More
Less
Same
More
*More t ha n s even out o f ten wo me n a nd a major it y o f me n across ever y demographic group say wo me n get pa id less than me n for the sa me work.
Eight o ut o f te n yo unger a nd o lder wo me n sa y wo me n ge t pa id less t ha n me n (80 pe rce nt a nd 82 perce nt less, respect ive ly), whereas o nly 59 per ce nt o f yo unger me n sa y wo me n ge t pa id les s co mpa red to 69 p erce nt o f o lder me n.
sixteen
Congressional District Advisory Councils
Congressional District Advisory Council 4 Chair ­ PCSW Commissioner Jann-Marie Halvorsen Co-Chair ­ Brenda Culpepper Members ­ Catha Abrahams, Beverly Aveni, Nancy Baker, Liv Brakewood, Carolyn Brangman, Terri Brisendine, Lillie Crosby, Lee Reynolds Crouch, George Dean, Lori Duke, Alice Ferreira, Mary Franco, Carolyn Frzop, Carla Gisolfi, Ann Karrick Glaser, Patricia Hendrickson, Kikki Karpen, Pam Koprowski, Lynne Laukhuf, Johanna Malinowski, Kay Maxwell, Wanda McKenzie, Donna Nickitas, Francine Pastore, Mary Raddock, Irene Senter, Ann Sheffer, Sarah Summons, Susan Toliver, Cordelia Ursone, Gwen Vendley
T
The Advisory Councils meet in the spring and fall in each of the six Congressional Districts.
During 2000, a total of 240 persons attended the meetings that focused on a variety of women's issues such as health care and pay equity.
The CDACs were established in 1996 as a way for PCSW to become more aware of issues that are of particular concern to women across Connecticut.
Members come from all backgrounds and occupations and are committed to using their leadership skills to achieve equity for women.
Congressional District Advisory Council 1 Chair ­ PCSW Commissioner Carmen I. Sierra Co-Chair ­ Ivette Rivera-Dreyer Members - Ana Sanchez-Adorno, Femi Bogle-Asegai, Leslie M. Averna, Teresa E. Boyd, Gail C. Champlin, Kathy Coddington, Susan Coleman, Betty W. Cornish, Carmen Diaz, Maggie Ford, Christine Fortunato, Theresa Freeman, Marion Griffin, Sandra A. Hackett, Kathleen Holgerson, William A. Howe, Jill Hurst, Margo S. Kilbon, Kathleen King, Lenell Kittlitz, Betty Kuehnel, Terry Lewis, Cheryl Linear, Sam Luciano, Claire A. Markham, Dorothy R. McCullum, Maura Melley, Celeste Bergman-Moore, Patricia G. Nickols, Richard Picone, Gerri Roberts, Andy Romegialli, Jane P. Seidl, Anne Stanback, Winston Thompson, Sonja Larkin-Thorne, Adriana Venegas, Judy Warfield, Jill T. Watson, Phillip Wheeler, Gwendolyn Williams, Carmen Wooster, Anne Young-Jaffe, Linda A .
Jorgensen
Congressional District Advisory Council 5 Chair ­ PCSW Commissioner Barbara DeBaptiste Co-Chair ­ Sharon Hamilton Members ­ Kay Bergin, Pearl Dent, Jane Didona, Lydia Straus-Edwards, Carol Flynn, Alejandra Garcia, Amoret Bender-Good, Sheila Grossman, Patti CohenHecht, C. Elaine Hendrickson, Alice H y m an, Ellyn Mae Ingalls, Lori Belle-Isle, Joyce Kathan, Arlene Kreinik, Kathleen Kr evetski, Betty Kuck, Julie Kushner, Jane Mahler, Rudy Mazurosky, Arlene Mittenthal, Amelia Mustone, Shirley Nwachukwu, Ilene Oppenheim, Hugh Penney, Christine Polio, Rona Rothhouse, Judith Slisz, Susan Sponheimer, Leah Stambler, Patricia Surprenant, Jacqueline Sussman, Joyce Ann Turcotte, Constance Wilds, Gail Hill Williams
Congressional District Advisory Council 6 Chair ­ PCSW Commissioner Rosaida MoralesRosario -- Co-Chair ­ Beverly Ann Ceuch Members ­ Argelia Aguayo, Mitzi Bakunis, Ruthe W. Boyea, Sharon Braverman, Sue Cary, Michele StewartCopes, Judith DiLaurenzio, Audrey Eckert, Marlene Fein, Annette T. FitzGerald, Molly Rees Gavin, Patricia Goulet, Peter J. Jacoby, Charlene LaVoie, Debra Lewis, Charlotte Libov, Sandra Lydecker, Julio Morales, Donna H. Ozga, Rita Pacheco, Huguet Pameijer, Helen Z. Pearl, Tina Prioli, Maureen Reilly, Amy McLean Salls, Brenda Samuels, Karen Sands, Carol Santoski, Barbara Spiegel, Gerri Br ownSpringer, Lisl Standen, Pamela Fancher Wright, Ann Young, Paula J. Yukna
Congressional District Advisory Council 2 Chair ­ Former PCSW Commissioner Maureen E. Satti -- Co-Chair ­ Brenda Williams Members - Sheila Amdur, Susan Porter Benson, Kathie DeVeau, Janine Dunn, Jane Fawcett, Joan Evans Hunter, Alice Johnson, Barbara Johnston, Rose Jones, Mary Ellen Jukoski, Patrice Kunesh, Shirley Langford, Helen Lupien, Tamar MacFadyen, Renee Main, Sandra Maniscalco, Sarah McGirr, Nancy Moriarty, Elizabeth Murphy, Ann O'Reilly, Bettye Jo Pakulis, Sharon Palmer, Donna Palumbo, Patricia Phillips, Eleanor Piel, Barbara Pimentel, Phyllis Porter, Gina Privott, Ann Regan, Marie Richardson, Gail Rooke-Norman, Gabriella Schlesinger, Sandra Silberman, Elaine Stattler, Margaret Stroup, Christine Tomichek, Steven Wisensale, Catherine Young
Health Care Research As part of a project sponsored by the PCSW, Yale graduate students, in the Schools of Epidemiology and Public Health, conducted focus groups with women who were uninsured to learn how they manage their personal health care needs in the absence of health insurance coverage.
The women they studied worked on average 31 hours per week and earned between $20,000 - $29,000 per year.
The women reported that they would postpone seeking medical care until they judged that their conditions absolutely warranted professional attention.
For those with conditions needing prescription medications, they often did without or reduced the dosage to
Congressional District Advisory Council 3 Chair ­ PCSW Commissioner Marcia Cavanaugh -Co-Chair ­ Glenda Boyd Members ­ Susan Addiss, Rosalyn Amenta, Jennifer Aniskovich, Marilyn Alford, Michael Boyle, Bearnice Bowman, Norman R. Brody, Rosemarie A. Burton, Marijane Carey, Bonnie Bentley-Cewe, Karen Charest, Kim Goff-Crews Deborah Ferrigno, Linda Hershman, Joan Lakin, Beverly Newell, Beatrice Okwu, Heather Reynolds, Sheilah Rostow, Deborah Smart, Emily Sosnow, Barbara Kahn-Stark, Merle Waxman, Janet Weiss, Susan E. Weisselberg
seventeen
make it last longer.
This information is particularly applicable to the work of PCSW to improve public policy and provide public information on women's issues.
day by talking with the girls to increase their awareness of women's rights and public policy.
This program empowers girls to become leaders, become involved in their communities, and to continually improve the status of women.
Take Our Daughters To Work Day Chair Barbara DeBaptiste welcomed about 100 persons ­ girls, boys, and adults ­ to the program that highlighted nontraditional occupations in state government.
A state police detective, a conservation enforcement officer, a computer educator, and two carpenters shared information about their careers.
We were pleased that Secr etary of the State Susan Bysiewicz, Treasur er Denise Nappier, and Comptroller Nancy Wyman took time to address the group.
Girls and Technology In collaboration with the Girls and Technology Network, the "Girls and Tech Expo," a daylong event for 7th grade girls, was held at the UCONN School of Engineering on September 14.
This "hands-on activity" was designed to make the girls think about careers in technology.
Lt. Governor M. Jodi Rell addressed the girls and encouraged them to pursue their educations.
Women Fostering Girls' Leadership Through Literature PCSW co-sponsors this day each year with the American Association of University Women in the New London and Old Saybrook area.
This daylong event brings together 120 5th grade girls, representing the diversity of their schools, from urban, suburban, and rural communities, to learn and practice leadership skills.
The women leading the day foster leadership in these girls with the expectation that they will foster leadership in younger girls when they return to their schools.
4-H Citizenship Day 4-H Citizenship Day at the Capitol, held this year on April 24, encouraged and supported young people to become involved with their government.
The day included a presentation on legislative action, role-playing a mock hearing, and a tour of the Capitol.
This year they used voting machines to vote in the presidential election and on a referendum question.
The day concluded with a new understanding of governmental procedures and systems.
Youth Democracy The Permanent Commission on the Status of Women cooperated with Secretary of the State Susan Bysiewicz in hosting a Youth State of Democracy Conference on October 3 at the University of Hartford in an effort to increase
80th Anniversary of Women's Suffrage The Permanent Commission on the Status of Women, along with the Secretary of the State and several other women's organizations, organized a celebration at the State Capitol of the 80th anniversary of women's suffrage on September 14.
We were inspired by special appearances by women who actually voted 80 years ago.
We chose to celebrate this anniversary on September 14th because it was on that date in 1920 that the Connecticut General Assembly went into Special Session to vote on the ratification of the 19th Amendment.
Equality Day is generally celebrated on August 26th, which is the day in 1920 that President Wilson signed the Amendment guaranteeing women the legal right to vote.
National Association of Commissions for Women (NACW) Convention The National Association of Commissions for Women is a nonpartisan membership organization composed of regional, state, county and local commissions created by government to improve the status of women.
Connecticut commissioner Patricia T. Hendel presided over a convention with a record attendance of nearly 350 and was re-elected without opposition to a third one-year term as president.
Barbara DeBaptiste was elected to a two-year term on the NACW Board of Directors, and Sarah McGirr was named Co-chair of the Website Committee.
Programs With and For Girls The programs outlined here link young people with government and adults in leadership roles.
With youth involved in government, our democracy becomes stronger.
These participants are the future of Connecticut, and their exposure to public policy issues ensures a productive and enthusiastic contribution to the state.
Girls Involved in Government Two hundred Girl Scouts and their leaders met at the Capitol on March 22 and learned many important lessons about becoming involved in government.
Many of our state's leaders provided inspiration and information to the Girl Scouts from the five Girl Scout Councils in Connecticut.
The Permanent Commission on the Status of Women actively participated in this
eighteen
nontraditional employment for women The Nontraditional Employment for Women (NEW) Program, funded by the CT Department of Labor, has developed a training program that incorporates "best practices" in preparing women to enter state registered apprenticeships and other nontraditional occupations.
In addition, the program provides technical assistance to implement initiatives that make it easier for women to work in nontraditional occupations.
This program is designed to meet the common goals of the PCSW and the CT DOL: To place women in nontraditional employment that will allow women to earn higher wages and support themselves and their families, to ensure equal access for women to the employment opportunities in the building trades, and to increase the percentage of female participation in the state's registered apprenticeship program.
T
nity colleges, job training programs, and at job fairs.
Employers often call us for referrals when seeking to hire women in the trades and nontraditional occupations.
We work closely with the US Department of Labor, Office of Federal Contract Compliance Program to assist employers who report having difficulty recruiting women for their construction projects.
The NEW Program Manager participates in the meetings of the Joint Apprenticeship Training Directors Committee of Connecticut and the Connecticut Apprenticeship Council.
In addition, the PCSW Special Projects Director sits on the Steering Committee of the Hartford Construction Jobs Initiative to assure that women are recruited for careers in the major construction projects underway in Hartford.
The second Pr o spective Appr enticeship Training Program accepted 25 women into the 10week training program that began in February 2000 at E. C. Goodwin Vocational-Technical School in New Britain.
We are happy to report that of the 20 women who graduated from the training program, 13 entered apprenticeships and three were employed in other nontraditional jobs.
Attentive and on-going case management is the reason for an 80% placement rate and a one year retention rate of 75%.
The curriculum includes math, shop classes in electrical and plumbing, physical fitness, safety, and blueprint reading.
There is an additional focus on employability skills such as sexual harassment awareness and prevention, employer expectations and work ethic, as well as problem solving and conflict resolution.
A second major component of the NEW Program is the technical assistance the PCSW provides to employers, unions, program operators, and the Regional Workforce Investment Boards to strengthen partnerships that promote and increase employment and training opportunities for women throughout Connecticut.
In addition, we talk to hundreds of students in high schools, vocational-technical schools, commu-
Annual Women in the Trades and Nontraditional Occupations Conference The third major component of the NEW Program is the annual Women in the Trades and Nontraditional Occupations Conference held in the spring each year.
Approximately 300 persons attended the 11th annual conference held on April 8, 2000, at the Ramada Plaza Hotel in Meriden.
In her keynote address Acting Hartford Police Chief Deborah Barrows emphasized the importance of being true to your values and principles.
She expressed her belief that this was especially important for women who work in occupations that are the traditional domain of men.
The Career Fair at the conference provided many opportunities ­ apprenticeship, operators, employers in the fields of technology and protective services, and government agencies all participated with information tables.
Women find this conference an excellent opportunity for networking and education.
The annual conference is funded by donations from government agencies, businesses, unions and interested persons.
nine-
public information
S
Section 46-4a of the Connecticut General Statutes requires the Commission to "inform leaders of business, education, state and local government and the communications media of the nature and scope of sex discrimination with a view toward enlisting their support in working toward improvement."
At the 6th Annual Making Women Visible press conference, held jointly with the Connecticut Women's Agenda on February 23, 2000, we released the special 2000 edition of Facts About the Status of Women in Connecticut entitled, Connecticut Women in the New Millennium: NOT EQUAL YET! This edition highlighted brief essays contributed by scholars from colleges and universities across the state that reflect the changes and challenges that women have faced in this century, and continue to face today.
The contributors were: Susan Porter Benson, University of Connecticut (The Wage Gap); Ivor J. Echols, d. 2001, Professor Emerita, University of Connecticut School of Social Work (Poverty); Diana Evans, Ph.D., Trinity College (Women in Government); Carolyn M. Mazure, Ph.D., Yale University School of Medicine (Research on the Health of Women); Shyamala Raman, MBA, Ph.D., St. Joseph's College (Reflections on the Changing Trends for Women in the Emerging Global Economy); Andi Rierden, Fairfield University (For Women Offenders: More Sanctions and Fewer Prison Sentences) and Maria-Luz D. Sampler, Ph.D., University of Connecticut (Are the New Jobs Bringing Equality? ).
This edition took a broad look at the status of women, and compared data about the status of women now with the statistics about women in the past.
Where possible, we looked back to the early 1970's when the PCSW was created.
Some of our findings included: s Connecticut falls 29th in population among all the states in the United States.
The median age for women in Connecticut is 38.1 years, slightly older than males at 35.8 years.
The population for women in Connecticut has increased 1.5% since 1975.
The largest increase is for women over the age of 65, an increase of 5.6%.
The average life expectancy for women is 79.7 years.
s As women's responsibility for the economic well-being of their families grows, the continuing wage gap and the prevalence of women in low-paid female-dominated occupations impedes women's ability to ensure their families' financial security, particularly for single mothers.
In Connecticut, the median annual income for married couples with children is $67,000; for single parents with children it is $16,800.
The median income for single females is $17,600 and for single males it is $27,800.
Women also tend to earn less, live longer and have fewer years in the workforce than men.
In retirement, many only have Social Security on which to rely. s Women represent 51.4% of the total population in Connecticut and 48% of the Connecticut labor force.
71.6% of women with children under the age of 18 and 64.9% of women with children under the age of six participate in the labor force.
s The percentage of female officers at Connecticut's top 100 companies was 9%.
In 1975, there was only one woman Commissioner of a state agency.
In 1999, that number increased to six.
s Rates for women with AIDS in Connecticut are nearly double the national average.
Women in Connecticut comprise 27.9% of persons with AIDS. s Since Ella Grasso was the first woman elected governor, every statewide office in Connecticut has been held by at least one female.
In 2000, women held four of the six constitutional offices: Lt. Governor, Secretary of the State, Comptroller and Treasurer.
Twenty-one percent of the Mayors/First Selectpersons in Connecticut are women, Hartford County having the highest representation of women.
In 1975, Hartford County had no women in these elected positions.
s Women represent 34% of the membership on state boards and commissions, and 27% of the judges in Connecticut are women.
s The number of women in prison has increased dramatically.
In 1990, there were 595 incarcerated women.
At the beginning of the new millennium, there were 1,236 women serving time behind bars.
Over 66.2% of the women have dependents and as many as 78% have not finished high school.
twenty
We continue to enhance the information provided on our website and received over 4,000 "hits" in 2000.
In 2000, PCSW provided Sexual Harassment Prevention Training to over 1,000 state employees.
Training was provided at no cost to the employees of Legislative Management, the State Comptroller, the Attorney General's office, the CT Department of Labor, CT State Library and the PCSW's Pre-Apprenticeship Training Program.
PCSW published the twelfth edition of A Directory of Women's Organizations in Connecticut, a statewide, comprehensive list of women's organizations with over 500 entries.
The PCSW was further able to reach the public through broadcasts on the Connecticut Television Network (CTN) a public access television network based at the CT State Legislature.
CTN covered CT Women Entrepreneurs' Day and the activities of Take Our Daughters to Work Day.
We answered 1,152 press calls, conducted 84 radio interviews and appeared on 12 cable TV shows.
We organized and partnered to present 32 press conferences on current issues affecting the status of women.
As always, the PCSW is proud to share our expertise on issues such as the workplace, the economic status of women, welfare, domestic violence, voting, women's health, incarcerated women and legislative issues that affect women.
speakers bureau
T
Through our Speakers Bureau, commissioners and staff spoke at 55 events for the following organizations: Westport, Wise Women of Westport ­ Hartford, Region 9A UAW/Civil Rights Council ­ New Britain, Charter Oak State College ­ Hartford, Connecticut State Library ­ Hartford, Alliance of Employment 
publications Annual Legislative Summary Annual Report PCSW Brochures: Who We Are and What We Do (in English and Spanish) PCSW Talent Bank PCSW Internship Program Women's Economic Development Initiative Directory of Women's Organizations in Connecticut Facts About the Status of Women in Connecticut (1996) FACTS UPDATE 1997, 1998, 1999 and 2000 editions Sexual Harassment Prevention Training Consultants Fact Sheets on the Status of Women Nontraditional Jobs for Women: A Resource Guide for Counselors and Women in Connecticut Nontraditional Occupations Information Packet
twenty-one
requests for information and referral
materials distributed
P
PCSW received nearly 4000 requests by phone for information and referrals in the year 2000.
While most of these phone requests were from individuals, we also received requests for information from legislators, employers, attorneys, state agencies, organizations and the media.
Of the callers, 640 (16%) requested the FACTS Book and 550 (13%) wanted PCSW's Women's Directory.
Pregnancy, Family 
We processed 170 (4%) requests for Nontraditional Occupations for Women (NTO), while 125 callers (3%) requested the Annual Report.
The largest percentage (55%) of processed requests falls under the category of "Other."
These 1,400 requests include questions about such diverse problems as employment and credit, gender discrimination and sexual harassment, cessation/interruption of insurance coverage due to job lay off and/or termination situations, and general questions about options.
T
The PCSW educational booklets, fact sheets and other materials are mailed to callers requesting information and are distributed at conferences, workshops and other events.
In 2000, we distributed approximately 4,000 copies of educational literature in response to telephone inquiries.
Additionally, we distributed over 20,000 pieces of educational literature at workshops and speaking engagements throughout the state.
Annual Report 1,500
PCSW Brochures 
Facts Update Books (About the Status of Women) 1,750 Directory of Women's Organizations in CT 1,500 Pregnancy, Family 
Continuing Progress of CT Women 200 Women Owned Business Information 1,000 Miscellaneous Materials 1,400
twenty-two
*These two publications are published by the CT Women's Education and Legal Fund.
requests for formal complaint assistance
T
The PCSW is mandated to receive complaints of sex discrimination and to assist complainants in filing formal charges with the Connecticut Commission on Human Rights and Opportunities (CHRO).
In 2000 we received 119 requests for formal complaint assistance.
Of those requests, 34 resulted in the filing of formal complaints with the CHRO.
Most of the inquiries about formal complaints concerned sex discrimination in employment and pregnancy discrimination.
The breakdown is illustrated in the chart below:
Pregnancy Discrimination 36%
Sex Discrimination in Employment 39%
Sexual Harassment 21% Other 1% Race 3%
twenty-three
budget July 1, 1999 to June 30, 2000 Agency Budget Personal Services Other Expenses Equipment Agency Total Other Income CT Department of Labor "NEW" Grant Conference 
107,640 23,500 3,000 134,140
supporters
W
We are grateful to these state agencies, corporations and individuals whose donations made it possible to conduct PCSW projects and programs.
Asnuntuck Community College, A-Z Copy 
twenty-four
staff 2000 Leslie J. Brett, Ph.D., Executive Director Susan H. Hoover, Special Projects Director Barbara Potopowitz, Public Information Officer Natasha M. Pierre, JD, MSW, Legislative Analyst Magdaliz Baez, Secretary to the Executive Director Lillie Wright, Administrative Assistant Rosemary Lopez, Legislative Secretary Colleen Auletta, Legislative Secretary Donna Andrasi, Temporary Legislative Secretary Grant Funded Staff ­ Nontraditional Employment for Women Program Jacquelyn Slamon, Program Manager Jazzlyn Mills, Program Assistant Mary Ann Turner, Conference Planner Interns/Volunteers Melissa A. Fugiero - UConn Kerry LaCharity - UConn Amy H. McLoughlin - UConn Janice Shaperow - UConn
The Permanent Commission on the Status of Women 18-20 Trinity Street s Hartford, CT 06106 Voice 860.240.8300 s Fax 860.240.8314 E-mail pcsw@po.state.ct.us www.cga.state.ct.us/pcsw
