Chapter IV Global and Domestic Market Trends Industry Trends The supply chain over which a container or commodity is routed from point A to Point B, in most cases, is directly correlated to the rate charged per unit or ton for the container or commodity."
The rate charged for moving the container or commodity is directly correlated to the type and weight of the commodity, the number of interchanges between modes of transport, the distance moved, the return of the container and transport equipment to the point of origin (whether loaded or empty) and the profit margins associated with the supply chain dictated by global market conditions"(A Five ­ Year Plan to Accomplish the Mission of Florida's SeaportsExecutive Summary, 2001/2002-2005/2006).
Likewise, the same trend has taken place with truck lines, railroads, and with coastwise/inland barge owner operators.
There are several locations around the world where container on barge and break-bulk barge operations are providing competitive regularly scheduled services under these "new world" global market conditions.
Northern Europe, particularly the Netherlands and Germany along the Rhine River, have extensive barge and short-sea shipping networks.
In Rotterdam, trucks now carry less than half of the containers to and from the port because of the growing market share and economies of scale that barge operations offer.
In Antwerp
approximately 1.52 million containers were moved by barge from originating or terminating locations in 2000.
Between Rotterdam and Antwerp alone, over 850,000 twenty-foot equivalent units (TEUs) were moved in 2000.
In Germany, the Rhine River has become a regular water "highway" for scheduled barge operations.
Because of these factors and others, the structure of the international liner trade and freight transportation in general, has changed significantly since the early 1980s.
Large mergers and consolidations have taken place in both conference and non-conference liner shipping, e.g., Maersk/Sealand and Nedlloyd/P
These mega-companies move containers in numbers large enough to warrant dedicated berths or even dedicated ports in order to minimize cost, provide for competitive rates and maximize profit margins.
A case in point is Maersk/Sealand's operation of dedicated facilities (Universal) at the Port of Miami.
In the United States, the Columbia and Snake Rivers in Washington State and Idaho, the middle Atlantic Coast, and Texas serve as primary arteries for container on barge operations.
The Mississippi River has historically served as the bulk-barge operating corridor due to the extensive export and processing of grains from the heartland to the mouth of the Mississippi at New Orleans.
The Tennessee-
Tombigbee Waterway System located in Tennessee, Mississippi, and Alabama has become a formidable shallow draft system for shipment of all products to
4-1
and from the southeastern United States via he Gulf of Mexico.
Along the Columbia and Snake River Systems, barges carried over 50,000 containers in 2000 between the Port of Portland and the Ports of Lewiston, Pasco, Umatilla, and Morrow-Boardman.
Commodities carried are primarily agricultural and forest products (bulk commodity).
Texas presently has one scheduled coastwise barge operation shipping mainly containers of foreign aid for a major foreign-owned shipping line and repositions empty containers back to point of origin.
Service is provided from the Galveston ship channel along the Gulf Intracoastal Waterway to New Orleans and return.
The firm moved 50,000 containers in 2001.
Finally, the Port of New York and New Jersey has launched a unique barge and rail cargo distribution network known as the "Port Inland Distribution Network" that will move containerized cargo by barge and/or railroad between marine terminals in the New YorkNew Jersey area and regional terminals in New York, New Jersey and three other Northeast states.
Local trucking will then be used to bring cargoes from the regional port facilities to ultimate customer locations.
It will provide scheduled barge services for cargo such as furniture, clothing, beverages and will reduce truck congestion on main interstate and thoroughfare systems serving the New York/New Jersey areas.
Subsidies are offered by the Port Authority of New York/New Jersey to make the service appealing to potential shippers and customers.
Currently, 84 percent of the containers that come in to or go out of the Port are transported by truck.
It is projected that
when all port transfer facilities are on line by the year 2020, the percentage of maritime containers moved by truck could potentially be reduced by as much as 57 percent from current levels.
By then, over 1,000 truck trips/day on New York State roadways would be eliminated by implementation of the Port Inland Distribution Network.
Reduced truck miles traveled will improve air quality by eliminating truck emissions.
By 2020, hundreds of tons of nitrogen oxides and other pollutants will be eliminated as a result of the waterside barge cargo distribution network.
In September 2002, the Port Authority Board approved up to $6,000,000 to assist with start up costs for the Port Inland Distribution Network.
The Port Authority is continuing negotiations with inland port operators at Albany, Davisville (R.I.), Bridgeport and New Haven (Conn.), Camden and Salem (N.J.), and Wilmington (Del.) to make the Port Inland Distribution Network a success.
The generally accepted distance for cost-effective use of barge over truck or rail is approximately 1,300 miles as determined by a recent study conducted by the University of Arkansas.
Container on barge
operations in most cases can not be used for time sensitive cargoes due to generally longer transit times associated with water transport compared to either truck or railroad; and this being the case, inventory costs increase for commodities shipped by shallow draft or ocean going barge attributable to the increased time it takes to move them.
This factor may not be a disadvantage depending on the
4-2
commodity being shipped, the level of congestion experienced on the land side transportation system, and the delivery window required by the customer for final production processes.
For some bulk and breakbulk commodities, the barge acts as an inventory control mechanism which actually saves the customer money by foregoing the higher costs of storing commodity on site or near production facilities until it is ready for use.
In highly congested landside transportation regions, barge transport may very well be competitive or exceed transport times available through either railroad or truck transport.
For such operations to be economically feasible, a "critical mass" of containers and/or bulk/break-bulk product must be present to offset the time and inventory cost factors.
Given the same transport distance, the marginal cost of transport by barge is generally lower per ton of commodity than by any other mode provided sufficient volumes exist to offset material handling and transloading costs.
Regularly scheduled volume
geography allows for barges to take a shorter amount of time to travel between ports, and high population and employment densities mean a large demand for commodities between these relatively short distances.
Because of the higher cost of landside transportation for both rail and truck in Europe, governments have made deliberate efforts to create and finance shore side infrastructure at key locations to accommodate rapid and efficient trans-loading of containers, bulk, and break-bulk commodities from water to points of demand.
Congestion that exists at key port locations such as Rotterdam or Antwerp provide these
jurisdictions strong incentives to promote, and in some cases subsidize, alternative waterside transportation in lieu of truck and railroad.
Special synergies must be developed and nurtured in order for barge operations to be a viable alternative to existing land side transportation.
commitments are required to justify the initiation and long-term viability of barge services.
Additionally, in order to compete with rail and truck, door to door delivery service and not just port to port service must be implemented to be cost competitive.
In Europe, conditions that contribute to the successful use of shallow draft barge operations include large population and employment densities, smaller travel distances, high levels of land side congestion, high costs of competing modes (fuel and crew costs), and maturity of the intermodal container industry.
Europe's
4-3
Florida is beginning to experience these "European symptoms" that may very well be a prologue to increased coastwise barge use.
The Gulf Intracoastal and Atlantic Intracoastal system is in place and has been for almost 100 years.
Underutilized trade corridors of over 1,300 miles, they need to be marketed, revived, adequately maintained, enhanced with the proper infrastructure and government policy incentives, to fully recognize their resource potential and economic benefit to the State of Florida.
waters of Florida's Intracoastal and other waterway systems.
For purposes of this discussion, only
"scheduled commercial barge services" presently operating or historically operating in Florida that move or have moved containers, fuel oils, phosphate, or coal can be documented.
These are the major, but not all inclusive operators, using the present day intracoastal system.
Coastal Tug and Barge, Inc.
(Ship Handling and Coastal Barge)
Existing Barge Services and Lightering Operations Scheduled coastal shipping in Florida is presently quite limited.
As recently as 1999, only one major coastal shipping line was in scheduled commercial operation.
Columbia Coastal Transport provides weekly service between Charleston, S.C. and Miami, Florida.
Short sea shippers (open water operations), however, have been in operation for quite some time particularly regarding the domestic trade between Florida and Puerto Rico.
This system, separate and unique from coastwise operations, includes the operations of Trailer Bridge, Horizon Lines LLC., Crowley Marine Services, and Sea Star Line, LLC.
Coastal Tug and Barge, Inc. operates 9 tugs and 15 tank barges in and around the State of Florida.
Most operations are conducted in the major ports and harbors of Miami, Tampa, and Canaveral.
The firm does have one operation in the Atlantic Intracoastal Waterway south of Miami.
On a daily basis, the firm transships a tank barge from its terminal in Miami on Fisher Island to the Florida Power and Light Plant at Turkey Point.
The firm delivers 12,000 barrels of fuel oil per trip (1,846 metric tons); because of the less than optimal water depth and environmental concerns of the Atlantic Intracoastal Waterway south of Miami, Coastal must use an 18,000 barrel barge lightered to 12,000 barrels to avoid grounding at the 5.6-7.0 foot depth of the waterway in that region.
The following analysis cannot be all inclusive since many products move by barge under contract on an "as needed basis" by many carriers, large and small.
(Appendix B) of this report identifies respondents, currently and historically, that have navigated the
Dredging of the Atlantic Intracoastal Waterway south of Miami may never happen, but this is a current example of commercial operations hampered by inadequate water depths at certain points in the channel.
4-4
Coastal also provides barge fuel services for ship bunkering in the southern most part of Port Everglades where no fueling pipelines exist.
A barge is sent periodically from Miami to Everglades for this purpose.
Depth problems between Miami and Everglades (Baker Haulover) in the Atlantic Intracoastal Waterway require the operator to use open Atlantic waters for this transit, sometimes negating delivery due to inclement weather.
When this happens, congestion in Port Everglades results due to required ship repositioning for fueling within the Port.
Again, lack of maintenance dredging to the authorized 9 ­ 12 foot level impedes commercial navigation in this region of the state.
between ports located from New England to the Gulf of Mexico.
The company offers weekly and twice weekly container services linking the ports of New York/New Jersey with Boston in the Northeast, Baltimore and New York in the Mid-Atlantic, Wilmington, Charleston and Miami in the Southeast, and Freeport, Bahamas in the West Indies.
Coastal also offers four weekly sailings in its Chesapeake service linking Baltimore and Norfolk.
The Company began an initial service with its "Columbia New York" container barge capable of transporting reefer cargoes into Port Canaveral in March of 2000.
Volumes necessary to sustain the service have not materialized although the company
Columbia Coastal Transport (Scheduled Coastal Barge Service)
stands ready to serve the Port when container volumes approach acceptable service levels (approximately 60 -100 boxes per call).
The original
Columbia Coastal Transport deploys a fleet of 11 U.S. flag container barges with capacity varying between 400 to 912 twenty foot equivalent units (TEUs) in regularly scheduled feeder service operations on the U.S. Atlantic coast (Atlantic Intracoastal Waterway), plus Freeport, Bahamas.
All barges are deck barges and are pulled/pushed by tugs.
Typical northbound speeds with the Gulf Stream is 10.5 knots; southbound approximately 8 knots.
plan called for a weekly stop as part of its scheduled Southern Service (Charleston, S.C. on Monday, Savannah, Ga. on Tuesday, Canaveral, FL. on Thursday, Miami, Fl. on Friday and Savannah, Ga. again on Sunday).
The service is targeted at giving shippers in central Florida (Orlando) the option of routing through a local port rather than draying freight long distances by road.
Until economic volumes of containers are generated, however, the service will bypass Canaveral at the present time.
The company began offering feeder services along the East Coast of the United States in 1990.
By 1999, they were moving 225,000 containers per year Columbia Coastal Transport plans to expand the Freeport feeder service to Miami and Port Everglades
4-5
and eventually to Norfolk in the north and Mexico to the west.
fleet includes vessels ranging up to 16,200 dead weight tons.
Capabilities include: (1) assisting ships into and out of their berths, (2) escort of petroleum/
Crowley Marine Services (Lightering and Short-sea Shipping Service)
chemical barges and tankers through shipping channels and environmentally sensitive areas, (3) tow ships, barges, and other specialized equipment/
In 1974, Crowley Marine Services added as a mainland port of call, the Port of Jacksonville, for cargo and boxes bound for San Juan, Puerto Rico.
The Company employs approximately 3,800 people worldwide and
vessels, (4) fighting vessel fires and, (4) responding to fuel spills and clean up, etc.
Through its subsidiary, Marine Transport Corporation (MTC), Crowley offers bulk petroleum transportation utilizing fully articulated tug barges (ATB).
The vessels are designed and built exclusively for petroleum and fuel distribution and have proven to be extremely
provides its services using a fleet of more than 300 vessels.
Equipment includes roll-on roll off (RO/RO) vessels, lift-on lift off (LO/LO) vessels, tankers, tugs, and deck barges.
Crowley also has extensive and land-based facilities
equipment
environmentally friendly in commercial use.
These
including terminals, warehouses, tank farms, office buildings, trucks, trailers, containers, chassis, cranes, and other specialized assets.
Crowley has a large corporate presence in Jacksonville and provides services to the Caribbean and Puerto Rico.
It is the largest independent swell conditions.
uniquely designed vessels can safely navigate in up to 24 foot
CSX Corporation purchased Sea-Land Service, Inc. (both international and domestic services) in 1986.
The international segment of the business was sold to A.P. Moeller-Maersk Lines in 1999, with domestic service retained by CSX.
operator of petroleum barges and tankers in the United States and provides chemical parcel transportation and bulk petroleum transportation throughout the North American coasts, including Florida and Puerto Rico.
The West Coast tank barge
4-6
Horizon Lines - The Carlyle Group (Lightering and Short-sea Shipping Service)
124 12'-13' open hopper barges used primarily to transport fuel coal from points in Louisiana to Florida's steam fired electric generating plants owned
The Carlyle Group successfully completed the purchase of CSX Lines, LLC from CSX Corporation for $240 million dollars in cash and $60 million dollars in securities on February 27, 2003 renaming it Horizon Lines, LLC.
and operated by Gulf Power and Light (Pensacola and Panama City).
In 2002, the company transported under contract over 2,564,000 bulk tons of product (97% fuel coal and 3% bulk steel) within Florida reaches of the Gulf Intracoastal Waterway.
The Company by survey, indicates that dredging, at Mile
The Company is based in Charlotte, N.C., with 680 employees in 20 offices throughout the United States.
It provides domestic ocean liner service and operates 16 U.S. flagged vessels, owns 27,000 containers which move cargoes along six service routes between the continental United States and Alaska, Guam, Hawaii and Puerto Rico.
Horizon currently operates port terminals in Anchorage, Kodiak and Dutch Harbor, Alaska; Honolulu, Hawaii; San Juan, Puerto Rico; and Apra, Guam.
Marker 179 and between Mile Markers 258-272 in the Escambia River (Crist Power Plant, Pensacola) is critically needed to efficiently and effectively serve Florida's Gulf Power Plant near Pensacola.
Sea Star Line, LLC (Short-sea Shipping Service)
Sea Star Line, LLC is a privately held Company headquartered in Jacksonville.
San Juan, Puerto Rico is the site of the Company's regional headquarters.
It provides integrated transportation services
Ingram Barge Company (Coastal Barge-Bulk Operations)
between the United States, Puerto Rico, and the U.S. Virgin Islands.
Ingram Barge Company of Nashville, Tennessee is a subsidiary of Ingram Industries, Inc. one of America's largest privately held companies with business interests including: distribution, insurance, marine transportation, aggregate supply, and digital fulfillment services.
Ingram Barge operates over 1,800 barges and 62 tugs nation wide.
In Florida waters, the Company operates 5 dedicated tugs and
The carrier has two ships that were built in the United States, registered in the United States, fly the American Flag and employ American crews including Puerto Rican citizens.
Sea Star's major investors are Matson Navigation Co., the largest carrier between the United States and Hawaii, and Totem Ocean Trailer Express, the largest carrier between the United States and Alaska.
Sea Star Line is also the only
4-7
ocean carrier in the trade between the United States and Puerto Rico that has significant local Puerto Rican investors.
demand, Trailer Bridge ceased its domestic Jacksonville to New Jersey service after several months of operation.
Statistics provided by the carrier at that time indicated that during the third
Trailer Bridge (Lightering and Short-Sea Shipping Service)
quarter of 1999, the last quarter of the domestic operation, the carrier handled about 800 loaded boxes (both southbound and northbound) equating
Trailer Bridge began its operations in 1991 with two roll-on roll-off barges providing weekly service between the Port of Jacksonville and San Juan, Puerto Rico.
In 1998 the Company received a federal Title XI loan guarantee of $16.9 million dollars to construct 3 deck (load-on, load-off) barges for a domestic coastal service between the Port of Jacksonville and New Jersey.
It also ordered 1,100 53 ft. domestic containers.
Trailer Bridge's coastal service was a combination of coastwise container transport and short-sea shipping (via Jacksonville to San Juan).
The sailing time between Jacksonville and New Jersey is about 4.5 days and between Jacksonville and San Juan, about 5 days.
Trailer Bridge designed a multi-port scheduled rotation between New Jersey/Jacksonville, Jacksonville/San Juan, San Juan/Jacksonville, and Jacksonville/New Jersey.
Weekly service was instituted with a full three weeks required for the entire port rotation schedule.
Competitors, notably Columbia-Coastal already had twice a week services on the run between Florida and San Juan, Florida to New Jersey.
to a space utilization of only 15% given the 213 box capacity barges being used.
Presently, three load-on, load-off barges (LO/LO) are in service: (1) two barges are used on a four week rotation of New Jersey/San Juan/Jacksonville/New Jersey; and (2), one barge is used on a two week rotation of Jacksonville/San Juan/Jacksonville.
Hence, Trailer Barge offers a biweekly New Jersey/ San Juan and a twice-a-week Jacksonville San Juan service, but no New Jersey/Jacksonville service (The Puerto Rican market is served by four lines: Trailer Bridge, Crowley, Horizon Lines, and Sea Star.
The first two operate oceangoing barges, while the last two operate self-propelled LO/LO vessels.)
Potential Florida Barge Market Segments The Louisiana State University's National Ports and Waterways Institute prepared a comprehensive report for the Department of Defense, Center for the Commercial Deployment of Transportation
Technologies (CCDoTT) entitled "High Speed Ferries Due to insufficient market response and lack of and Coastwise Vessels: Evaluation of Parameters
4-8
and Markets for Application, June 2000".
In that report, the authors concluded that a scheduled coastwise barge service system based on high speed Roll-on Roll-off (RO/RO) technology in the Gulf Coast and Atlantic Coast Regions has potential to accommodate both domestic trailers and
Having 1,300 miles of coastline, Florida has available to it an untapped alternative transportation resource that could be utilized to mitigate ever growing land side congestion and transportation inefficiencies.
To further investigate this potential, the Study Team interviewed numerous organizations and seaports to assess the opportunity for better utilizing Florida's extensive Atlantic Intracoastal, Gulf Intracoastal, and navigable waterway systems.
Among the key
international and domestic containers to complement and relieve land side truck congestion in key corridors.
This study also concluded that a scheduled intracoastal system might have significant national impact by:
contacts made included: · · Florida Inland Navigation District Jupiter, Florida West Coast Inland Navigation District Venice, Florida Port of Pensacola Port of Panama City Port St. Joe Port Canaveral Port Manatee Miami River Commission U.S. Army Corps of Engineers U.S. Coast Guard Gulf Intracoastal Canal Association American Waterways Operators Surveys to over 390 barge owner/operators Tri - Rivers Waterway Development Association
·
Providing for a new maritime alternative along with associated development of shore accommodating infrastructure, U.S. ship building, U.S. flag fleet and personnel of U.S. seafarers (e.g.- jobs); · · · · · · · · · · · ·
·
Relieving congestion and decreasing the number of heavy trucks on Gulf and East coast highway systems, improving air quality in congested non-attainment areas and mitigating other environmental consequences of land-based transportation modes; and,
·
Creating a modern U.S. short shipping fleet reserve for military and other natural or manmade emergencies, needed in light of the rapidly declining U.S. flag fleet.
4-9
A comprehensive mailing list was compiled from a myriad of sources and a mail-out survey was distributed to past and present owner/operators of barge companies conducting business in Florida between the dates of March 7, 2003 and April 15, 2003 (Appendix B).
Likewise, between notice to proceed in mid February until the middle of March, the Study Team interviewed staff from four key seaports having extensive coastwise barge
due to low conventional barge transit speeds, usually less than 10 knots, the distances involved in pick up and delivery, and the flexibility offered by truck service to and from Florida consumption centers.
Compounding this drawback is the fact that dependable scheduled services, with the exception of one company previously mentioned, do not currently exist.
Most domestic boxes in the United States (and Florida is no exception) are drayed by truck due to speed and flexibility; railroad transports some domestic boxes on longer intermodal routes.
operations, the Executive Directors of Florida's Navigation Districts, Director of the Miami River Commission, and consulted with other stakeholders to determine the level of activity and future potential level of activity for use of the State's extensive navigable waterway system.
Successful coastal shipping operations in Europe and Japan handle domestic trailers and containers in
Responses during interviews always left the Team with the same response.
"Florida is missing an opportunity to mitigate land side freight congestion by not efficiently utilizing its Atlantic Intracoastal, Gulf Intracoastal and navigable waterway systems."
Example of European Passenger and Cargo "Fast Ferry"
Florida's existing coastwise shipping system is primarily a push/pull flat deck barge operation calling at select deep water port terminals.
The barges handle bulk, neo-bulk (phosphate, fertilizer, or petroleum products) and in some cases, small numbers of containers in lightering and repositioning of loads or empty boxes (primarily for the domestic trade to Puerto Rico).
The system is not designed for domestic trailers, chassis, or domestic containers
combination with passengers and autos.
"Fast Ferry" vessels are utilized usually having RO/RO capacity and speeds capable of 24 ­ 40 knots.
These specially designed passenger/cargo vessels generally have capacity for 200 vehicles and/or containers, and because of their speed capabilities, can compete effectively both in cost and transit time with trucking
4-10
operations on the mainland.
with a daily frequency could divert from parallel highway corridors is estimated at about 234,000 truck
For a Florida coastwise domestic system to become competitive with either truck or railroad, it must be designed with dedicated domestic terminals that are on site and complement land side truck terminal operations.
These specially constructed terminals must be designed to handling smaller coastwise barge equipment, basic box handling and transfer equipment, and have Roll-on, Roll-off capabilities.
Service frequency, speed and reliability are the keys to making such a service successful; not necessarily cost; provided it is somewhat competitive with truck and/or railroad/intermodal.
Only a system with feeder service that can complement trucking operations in transit time, pickup and delivery frequency would generate the box volumes needed to sustain a viable domestic container coastwise operation.
trips per year.
Higher calling frequencies would enhance the system's competitiveness and also facilitate the creation of more sophisticated service patterns resulting in shorter trip times and less supply chain inefficiencies.
The study suggests that on Florida's east coast, a system having a concurrent northbound and southbound service loop between New York markets and Miami could handle a minimum of 467,000 truck-trips/year amounting to 75 million truck-miles/year; or about 14% of the total freight truck traffic utilizing the I-95 highway corridor between New York and Miami.
Through survey and stakeholder discussions, it is apparent that ports in Florida's panhandle having proximity to the Gulf Intracoastal Waterway such as Pensacola, Panama City, and St. Joe have the
A model Florida coastwise box/trailer barge system would have to necessarily mirror truck/railroad intermodal operations with truck drayage and delivery on both the origination and destination segments of the move.
The key to success would be the barge services ability to efficiently and effectively bypass critical land side congestion points on relatively long hauls, perhaps of 300 miles or more and to provide water side to land side intermodal service at key transfer points.
potential to become coastal barge and bulk hubs in the future.
Port Manatee has the potential for
becoming an "end-hub" for a regularly scheduled service in the Gulf region.
Port Canaveral has the potential for becoming a "mid-peninsula hub" for servicing the Orlando market.
These ports could be targeted for developing the necessary facilities and infrastructure to encourage such operations thus mitigating excessive truck traffic in the I-10 Trade Corridor and the I-75/I-4 Trade Corridor now approaching 20% to 30% of total traffic in these
According to the Louisiana State University study, the annual traffic that a basic coastal shipping system
corridors.
4-11
Through stakeholder interviews, the following discussion identifies the coastwise facilities that could, with minimal infrastructure investment, play key roles in future development of a unique Florida short-sea and coastwise container/bulk shipping system.
area of Orlando and 60 miles further west via I-4 with Tampa.
State Route 528 intersects with the major north/south highways of Interstate 95 and U.S. 1, eight miles west of the Port's entrance providing excellent north/south and east/west access with Florida's major urban centers.
The Florida East Coast Railway serves the Port from an intermodal facility at
Port Canaveral (AIWW) Port Canaveral has been a landlord port for bulk and break bulk cargo operations since the mid-1950s and a cruise port for the past 20 years.
It is unique in that it is the only port anywhere having quadramodal service that connects four major modes of transportation: sea, land, air, and space.
The port operates as a landlord port authority and has developed into the world's third largest multi-day cruise port in the world.
It has also become a "niche" port for specific cargoes.
Cargoes presently handled through the port include petroleum, newsprint, fresh citrus, juices and concentrates, salt and cement.
The port has less than a mile direct access channel to the Atlantic Intracoastal Waterway and just twice that to the major Atlantic Ocean shipping lanes.
Being centrally located mid-state on the Atlantic Coast, it can take advantage of well-developed highway, rail, air, and space transportation systems making it a major economic and distribution center for the State of Florida.
the Beeline Industrial Park (S.R. 528 and Clearlake Road), 10 miles west of the Port via State Route 528.
Additionally, Norfolk Southern Corporation handles trailer loads of freight direct from all port piers and warehouses through agreements with the Florida East Coast Railway.
The Port has many advantages to becoming a future coastwise barge and short-sea shipping hub: First, Port Canaveral is undeniably the closest major seaport gateway to rapidly growing Central Florida and its major tourist attractions, only 44 miles away; second, Central Florida has become a major consumer market with unlimited growth potential; third, the majority of consumables are of foreign origin and must be imported to the region; fourth, most goods arriving in the region today are traveling via inland transportation ­ truck and railroad ­ to reach Central and South Florida; due to geographic location, major distribution centers are continuing to relocate and open in the Orlando area; and finally and most importantly, the global Hutchison-Whampoa, Ltd. container transshipment terminal hub has begun operating 180 miles to the east/southeast in Freeport, Bahamas.
State Route 528, the Beeline Expressway connects it directly 40 miles to the west with the major urban
4-12
adjacent land for future expansion.
However, without committed service from a carrier or carriers, the port is rightfully reluctant to develop the additional capacity at the present time.
Centrally located midstate at the nexus of the Atlantic Intracoastal Waterway and between the major consumption markets of Orlando/Tampa and the major shipping lanes; Port Canaveral is well positioned to become a key transfer point for coastwise services mentioned Port Canaveral 20 Year Master Plan Map RO/RO Breakout
throughout this report.
The off-shore transshipment hub at Freeport has impacted shipping patterns and will result in new logistics and shipment patterns for containers and opens opportunities for ports like Canaveral to serve as "feeder facilities" for short-sea shipping of containers to locations in Florida and elsewhere where mega-ships and deep draft are not possible.
Port Manatee (GIWW)
As mentioned earlier, Port Canaveral has already constructed, with assistance from the State, a six (6) acre Roll-on, Roll-off facility with a high mast lighted container yard having approximately 60 acres of
Arial Photo of Port Manatee showing Southport expansion area
Port Manatee is the fifth largest of Florida's fourteen deep water ports based on volume handled.
During calendar year 2001-2002, the port experienced throughput volumes approaching 5,200,000 metric tons of freight.
It ranks first among Florida's west coast ports in container movements at the present time.
In 2001, the port handled 6,952 boxes; in 2002, that number increased to 7,186 an increase of 3%.
Port Manatee is Del Monte's second largest U.S. port facility and one of the port's highest revenue-
Port Canaveral RO/RO ramp cargo load January 2002
producing tenants.
Approximately 2,000 used cars
4-13
It is important to note that the Port is developing a strategic 10 year plan that includes infrastructure construction for state-of-the art container throughput capacity embracing, off-site container transshipment and storage with berth and crane enhancement that will accommodate both container ship and container barge operation.
Port Manatee's container berth will have 1,592 linear feet of capacity, 40 feet of water, and an available out-parcel for container off-loading Port Manatee, FL. Del Monte Ship unloading fresh
and drayage operations approaching 100 acres.
and trucks are exported each month to Central America from port docks.
It ranks number one nationally for importing frozen concentrated orange juice and is the nation's leading export location for citrus juices and beverages.
The port currently has 5,230 feet of linear dock space and owns 1,064 acres of land.
It also has available approximately 500 additional acres for future development opportunities.
The planned completion for Berth 12/13 (Southport) is projected in the 2005/2008 timeframe and is estimated to have capacity to handle 336,000 twentyfoot equivalent units (TEUs) or 224,000 forty-foot equivalent units (FEUs) annually.
Port Manatee would be well positioned to become an end-hub for Gulf Intracoastal Waterway container transport, thus alleviating congestion on both the I-75 and I-4 land side interstate systems while at the same time, be in Port Manatee's location on Tampa Bay provides for relatively short vessel steaming times from the Gulf of Mexico and the Caribbean.
The port is moving rapidly to substantially improve water access by performing major dredging as partners with the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers.
Land access is excellent with U.S. 41 just outside the front gate and I-75 less than 5 miles from the port entrance.
The port is initiating port facility and infrastructure development in the amount of $40,000,000 to expand upon its $66,000,000 in port infrastructure improvements over the past 5 years.
Port Manatee, FL. Berth 12
close proximity to both the Tampa and Orlando (Central Florida) markets to adequately serve those urbanized areas.
4-14
Port of Pensacola (GIWW) The Port of Pensacola is a "niche" port having facilities and infrastructure that can accept diverse cargoes on a relatively short notice, but currently has a limited 50 acres of port property to warehouse and transload maritime cargoes.
The port does not have the infrastructure and land side access to accommodate large deep-draft vessels in excess of 33 ft., but is in very close proximity to the Gulf Intracoastal Waterway, and in fact, currently has barge calls from Martin Marietta (bulk aggregates), Coastal Fuels (bunker oil/fuels) and Reynolds Redi-Mix Corporation.
Current cargo mix includes: lumber, pipe, frozen produce, aggregates, rice, flour, asphalt, sulfur (neobulk and liquid bulk), pulp, scrap iron, granite, and some petroleum based fuels.
The Bay and Inner Harbor channels have not been dredged since 1970.
In October 1983, a U.S. Army survey showed Corps
to range from 30.5 to 33 feet mean low water and that they are in need of some maintenance dredging.
Permits were approved in 1998 and funding for the dredging is being sought at this time.
According
to Port of Pensacola, Fl. Tug Barge operation
the Port's 1999 Master Plan, it
has approximately 2,867 feet of berthing space with average size per berth of 400 to 540 feet per berth.
Covered storage area is approximately 460,000 square feet, with open storage capacity of just 4 acres.
The port is within 100 miles of Mobile, Alabama, Gulfport, Mississippi, and Panama City, Florida.
The entrance channel is maintained to a mean low water depth of 35 feet and 500 feet wide at the mouth of the Gulf of Mexico; the protected inner Bay Channel is maintained at 33 feet by 300 feet as are the inner harbor/approach channels.
Berths 1,2,3,5, and 6 are maintained at 33 feet mean low water; berth 7 is maintained at 16 feet (barge mooring location), and berth 15 is maintained at 18 feet.
of Engineers
these channels
The port has planned for a Roll-on/Roll-off ramp to accommodate both railroad and truck pending the identification of a potential shipper or tenant.
The Port of Pensacola, FL. Ship Handling Tugs- March 2003
capacity for the facility is focused on potential international suitors, but could conceivably be used
4-15
for domestic cargoes should a tenant be identified.
A $2,000,000.00 investment is being considered for this project at the present time.
related to dredge material disposal.
With its facilities in Escambia, Bay and Jackson Counties, it is responsible for consuming approximately four million metric tons of low sulfur coal per year much of which
A barge mooring system is also identified as a priority in the Plan, to mitigate wharf fender damage presently being caused by the lay-berthing of empty barges.
The proposed location is on the east side of the port away from the deep water berths in shallow water.
This planned improvement is estimated to cost approximately $151,000 in 1999 dollars.
is barged on the Gulf Intracoastal Waterway.
With minimal influxes of capital for improved barge mooring infrastructure, truck access design features, and trans-loading capability; the Port of Pensacola could easily be positioned to be one of several "future staging points" for a Florida Gulf Coast coastwise or short-sea shipping facility.
Gulf Power reports* substantial coal barge operations along the Gulf Intracoastal Waterway into the Pensacola Crist Steam Plant electric generating facility.
2000 ­ 2,354,000 tons of coal or 1570 barge loads 2001 ­ 2,111,000 tons of coal or 1410 barge loads 2002 ­ 1,922,000 tons of coal or 1280 barge loads 2003 ­ 2,758,000 tons of coal or 1840 barges Port of Pensacola, FL. Barge Mooring Area - March 2003 *Note: Provided by Russell Ball, Fuels Manager, Gulf Power, by email on April 9, 2003; barge loads are estimated using 1,500 tons per barge loading at mean low water.
Port of Panama City (GIWW) The Port of Panama City, approximately 100 miles east of Pensacola, also currently experiences barge call activity.
Between 1999/2000 ­ 2001/2002, the Port realized on average 200 loaded barge calls per year (15/month) of mostly aggregates (Martin-Marietta), fertilizers, rolled steel, steel plate, steel pipe (Berg Steel), and even some limited container and wood pulp cargoes.
Gulf Power is extremely interested in seeing the dredging project on the Escambia River completed on schedule in 2003 to provide for more efficient fuel delivery operations.
Although this project is
approved and has been authorized for sometime, it has been held up for several years due to issues
4-16
feet of berthing capability at six berths; six transit sheds having over 470,000 square feet of capacity, bulk warehousing of 30,000 square feet and paved open storage area exceeding 300,000 square feet.
The port has one gantry crane (100 ton capacity) and one heavy lift crane (300 ton capacity) used primarily to load and unload steel product.
Major goals and objectives for the port in the near and longer term include: providing additional deep Port of Panama City, FL. Pipe Cargo Barge - March 2003
water berthing in the South and West Dock areas, developing new refurbished warehousing and heavylift cargo handling capabilities and pursuing land
The port has recently completed its West Dock rehabilitation project to better accommodate barge call activity and is currently actively pursuing its South Dock Expansion project.
The port, in conjunction with the South Dock Expansion has programmed $1,800,000.00 on reinforcement of the waterside structure; $1,500,000.00 for building and reinforcing the apron behind, and has committed $1,800,000.00 in port revenues and local funds to dredged the West Dock berths to in excess of 33 feet.
The U.S. Army Corps of Engineers has programmed $8,000,000.00 for 2003 to dredge the approaches and turning basin of the port.
The most recently completed Master Plan provides for a Bulk Terminal future concept for the renovated South Dock which is anticipated to capture much of the barge traffic that previously utilized the Appalachicola River in the past.
acquisition to accommodate water dependent activities and in developing the Port of Panama City Industrial Park (off-site approximately 5 miles, just off U.S. 231) to complement port cargo-related businesses and activities on and off port.
The port in recent years has handled over 1,000,000 tons of break-bulk general commodities, domestic
aggregate, and rolled and steel plate and pipe.
The port has Roll-on/Roll-off capability and over 3,200
Port of Panama City, FL. Coil Steel Cargo Barge - March 2003
4-17
The Barge Terminal in Northern St. Andrews Bay (services Gulf-Power's Lansing Smith Steam Generatoring Plant) currently has 600 feet of shallow draft berthing space, a concrete apron constructed of steel sheet piling, transit shed capacity of 30,000 feet, bulk transfer handling capability, and paved open storage of 90,000 square feet.
Covered railroad loading and unloading capability is also available.
Port St. Joe (GIWW) Port St. Joe (formerly St. Joseph) with its natural harbor protected by the St. Joseph's Peninsula barrier island is the oldest commercial port facility in Florida.
Its proximity to the Gulf of Mexico, pristine timber land in the Panhandle, and the 1835 construction of railroad service to the region to extract the region's natural resources made it a hub of commercial activity in the early and mid 1800's.
Cotton and timber from Florida, Georgia and Alabama were easily shipped through Port St. Joseph to Appalachicola, there transferred to rail and to ship for transport to domestic and international markets.
In 1914, a port channel was constructed 7,339 feet Port of Panama City, FL. Covered Hopper Barge West Dock - March 2003
long, 300 feet wide and 24 feet deep.
In 1937 the channel was further deepened, and in 1938 the paper
Gulf Power* has large volumes of coal moving by barge into the region to serve the Lansing Smith Power Generation Steam Plant at this location.
Actual and estimated loadings provided by Gulf Power include:
mill was constructed.
Fill from the 1937 dredging was used to construct approximately 2,600 linear feet of dock along the front of the paper mill.
During World War II, part of the acreage was set aside for petroleum storage and pipeline operations to fuel war related activities.
Over a thirty year period, ownership and
2000 - 1,069,000 tons of coal or 710 barge loads 2001 - 1,042,000 tons of coal or 695 barge loads 2002 - 773,000 tons of coal or 515 barge loads 2003 - 950,000 tons of coal or 635 barge loads *Note: Provided by Russell Ball, Fuels Manager, Gulf Power, by email on April 9, 2003; barge loads are estimated using 1,500 tons per barge loading at mean low water.
use of the petroleum infrastructure included Coastal Terminals, Gulf and Pure Oil, Southeast Pipeline Company, Standard Oil, Cities Service, Sinclair Refining Company, St. Joe Paper Company, McKenzie Tank Lines, Hess Petroleum, the St. Joe Company and ultimately the City of St. Joe.
The Port's present channel and harbor were dredged
4-18
to existing depths ranging from 35 to 37 feet in 1962.
Some limited maintenance dredging was conducted by the U.S. Army Corps of Engineers in 1973, 1980 and 1985.
Between 1940 and 1980, the port was very active and handled petroleum, cotton, timber, chemicals, paper, rosin, turpentine, and various agricultural commodities primarily for local and regional distribution.
From the mid 1980s to mid 1994, port activity declined until Material Transfer, Inc. successfully secured contracts with Panhandle utilities and other regional utilities to transport bulk coal by barge through the port; trans-load to rail road for final shipment and delivery.
Coal came from the Midwest, cross-gulf to St. Joe for distribution.
Between 1994 and 1998, Materials Transfer handled over 2,400,000 million tons per year or approximately 12,000,000 tons over the five year period.
Over 800 barge shipments terminated at the port during that time.
However, Materials Transfer lost the contracts for transport of the coal to Seminole Electric Coop., Inc.
(Putnam County-3.5 million metric tons of coal per year) and the coal once coming by barge is now wholely transported by rail road on the CSXT system bypassing Port St. Joe.
This development, as well as the closing of the paper mill adjacent to the port has somewhat hindered the ability of the port to move forward even though it is extremely well positioned to expand in other market areas.
property prompting the Port Authority to develop plans to build facilities to capture this trade.
The Port recently purchased 26 acres from St. Joe Company to be used in the future for this cargo.
Aggregate business is also being pursued although it is a high volume and low value commodity.
The harbor and ship channel from the deep water and Gulf Intracoastal was originally developed around the St. Joseph's peninsula leading into the bay to serve the dock at the former paper mill site.
The authorized project depth averages 35 ­ 37 feet deep at mean low water and the project was authorized under the Rivers and Harbors Act of 1945.
It was completed in 1962 for a total cost of $1,980,862.
However, due to lack of use, the subsequent closing and demolition of the paper mill, the controlling depth for ship channel access has been limited to 27 feet.
The Gulf County Canal is a tributary of the Gulf Intracoastal Waterway and is about six miles long.
It connects the Intracoastal Waterway to St. Joseph's Bay and the Gulf of Mexico.
The channel, including the canal, is maintained to a depth of 12 feet mean low water and a width of 125 feet.
In the early 1980s, the Port Authority paid the Florida Department of Transportation over $2,000,000.00 in local revenues to elevate the U.S. 98 George Tapper Bridge over the Gulf County Canal to 75 feet to allow for
Current market opportunities include the potential for shipment and storage of automobiles on port
unimpeded access to the port.
The existing wharf adjacent to the former paper mill is approximately
4-19
and available land to expand operations, the port is
extremely well-positioned to capture potential automobile and automobile parts exports from Mexico on car carriers and to revive the barge shipment of low sulfur coal for utility use.
It could also
become a major transshipment and repositioning hub for barge container traffic (both domestic and international) from major container shipping lines such as Maersk/Sealand and Evergreen, if the right capital investments and
incentives were to be made available.
Liner companies are eagerly looking for locations for expanding operations and/ or alleviating on-port
congestion.
Such operations should be outside of, but relatively close to the major population centers.
1,600 feet long being built in 1937 and having a mean low water depth at the berth of approximately 36 feet.
Multi-
modal transportation with truck trans-load capability must be readily available.
Contract commitments of at least 200,000 TEUs or 100,000 FEUs would provide
Due to the excellent water side access of both the Gulf County Canal and the existing berthing capacity
a reasonable threshold for viable operations for such a facility in this region.
Coal is very rate sensitive to
4-20
barge and railroad transport and delivered price to the utilities is critical in determining how this commodity will move, thus transloading operations to either truck or rail road must be efficient and cost competitive with single line rate structures.
coastwise barge and/or short-sea shipping hub locations.
This is due primarily to geographic
location, proximity to Gulf Intracoastal Waterway or Atlantic Intracoastal Waterway channels, availability of land for expansion, good land side transportation connections, environmental considerations, and
To date, Port St. Joe is a resource that has yet to be fully recognized or utilized by the State of Florida.
In its recently completed Port Master Plan, the U.S. Department of Commerce RIMSII (Regional InputOutput Model System II) was applied.
The economic impacts measured and projected were quite substantial for both the State and Gulf County.
If the port is made fully operational as planned, the model estimated that perhaps as many as 445 people could be employed, 586 new jobs could be created in the county to support port-related services and activities, and 1,287 new jobs would be attributable to multiplier effects (secondary benefits) for the State of Florida.
existing or easily constructed infrastructure necessary to accommodate future barge and short-sea shipping operations.
Given its location, availability to land, good land side connections, and proximity to the Gulf Intracoastal Waterway via the Gulf County Canal, it is well positioned given the right mix of capital and political support, to become a key player in any revival of coastwise barge container and bulk operations.
Based on the limited research conducted thus far, the five previously mentioned and currently existing port facilities described appear to offer the best locations for potential future development of either
4-21
