What is an invasive plant? "Invasive plant" is really another name for an introduced species that has become an environmental weed pest, that is, a plant which grows aggressively, spreads, and displaces other plants.
Invasive plants tend to appear on disturbed ground, and the most aggressive can actually invade existing ecosystems.
Invasive plants, like weeds, are generally undesirable because they are difficult to control, can escape from cultivation, and can dominate whole areas.
In short, invasive plant infestations can be extremely expensive to control, as well as environmentally destructive.
A small number of invasives are "native," meaning they occurred in Pennsylvania before settlement by Europeans but became aggressive after the landscape was altered.
Most invasive plants, however, are brought in from other continents, and are called variously "exotic," "alien," "introduced," or "non-native" invasives.
An aggressive plant, freed from its environmental, pest, and disease limits can become an invader of other ecosystems.
However, not all exotic, non-native, or introduced species are invasive.
This brochure lists the most troublesome invasive plants that occur in Pennsylvania and impact native plant communities.
A more complete list of invasive plants is available from the Department of Conservation and Natural Resources (DCNR)-Bureau of Forestry (BOF).
Characteristics of invasive plants Invasive plants are noted for their ability to grow and spread aggressively.
Invasive plants can be trees, shrubs, vines, grasses, or flowers and they can reproduce rapidly by roots, seeds, shoots, or all three.
Invasive plants tend to: ·not be native to North America, ·spread, reproducing by roots or shoots, ·mature quickly, ·if spread by seed, produce numerous seeds that disperse and sprout easily, ·be generalists that can grow in many different conditions, ·be exploiters and colonizers of disturbed ground.
Impact of invasive plants The biggest reason to not landscape with invasives is because they are degrading our native environments.
In fact, they are a major cause of the extinction and loss of native plants.
Plants like Kudzu, Purple Loosestrife, and Garlic Mustard are displacing native plants and degrading habitat for native insects, birds, and animals.
Endangered, rare, and threatened native species of plants and animals are especially at risk because they often occur in such small populations that make them particularly vulnerable.
Another reason to avoid invasives is that invasive plants, even when grown in a cultivated yard, can spread, escape, and cause landscape maintenance weeding problems for years to come.
In urban and suburban areas there is a good chance that the worse weeds on your property are escaped plants, like Japanese Honeysuckle, Multiflora Rose, Japanese Knotweed, and Oriental Bittersweet.
In yards, gardens, fields, and parks these plants are very expensive to control.
What can I do? The best insurance against future problems is to avoid the use of known invasive plants and educate others about the problems of invasives.
In some cases, invasive plants have been marketed as very desirable landscape plants.
This brochure lists many of the plants that are invasive in Pennsylvania.
Plants on this list should be avoided because they can escape cultivation and aggressively move into surrounding ecosystems.
One way to avoid invasives is to choose plants that are native to your area.
Natives often are adapted to a specific environmental niche, and have natural controls that keep them in balance..
Minimize landscape disturbance.
Invasive plants thrive on bare soil and disturbed ground where the native plant community has been displaced.
The key to controlling invasives is to protect healthy native plant communities.
Limit use of fertilizers.
High nitrogen levels sometimes give an advantage to weedy species that are better adapted to using plentiful nutrients for explosive growth.
For soil fertility, try using organic slow-decomposing compost and mulches.
Have a land management plan for maintenance over time.
It makes sense when designing a property to plan for future maintenance.
Lawns are maintained by weekly mowing, while gardens are often hand-weeded.
Meadows in Pennsylvania may need to be mowed every year.
Woodlands are probably the lowest-maintenance landscape; but they too will need to be monitored and invasive plants weeded out.
Scout your property annually for invasives or other problems.
The best way to control invasives is prevention, and prevention can only happen through vigilance.
Listed in this brochure are resources to help property owners.
Remove invasives before they are a problem.
Effective scouting or monitoring means that problems are found while they are still small and easily controllable.
For instance, do not let invasive plants go to seed.
Mechanical removal through digging or cutting is preferred.
Large populations of invasives may need to be stopped chemically with spot applications of herbicide by trained individuals or by following label instructions.
(Rodale Institute does not endorse the use of herbicides, but promotes the other control methods described.)
Replace invasive plants with native species.
Invasives are weeds, good at exploiting bare soil and empty niches.
When you remove an invasive plant, unless there is another plant substituted, the invasive will tend to come right back.
What grows in the future depends, to a large extent, on what is there now; so it is important to fill that niche with a plant that will provide seed for the future.
Remove invasives first when their densities are low.
This gives the most immediate success because invasive plant control works best where there is a functioning native plant community still in place which can move right into the empty niche.
1) Avoid using known invasive plants 2) Minimize landscape disturbance 3) Protect healthy native plant communities 4) Limit use of fertilizers 5) Have a land management plan for maintenance over time 6) Scout (and keep scouting) 7) Remove invasives before they become a problem 8) Replace invasive plants with native species 9) Remove invasives first where their densities are low.
A race against time Recognition of the problem of invasive plants is growing, at the same time as damage to native ecosystems is mounting.
It is literally a race against time as native plant communities are lost.
Recognizing invasive plants and the damage they can cause is essential to stopping their spread and protecting native vegetation.
Recent publications specifically on invasive plant control and a good field guide can help identify what plants are native, what plants are introduced, and which tend to spread aggressively.
Try to learn as much as possible about this issue.
The Internet is an excellent way to access the rapidly growing body of information on this topic.
For more information Printed resources "Invasive Plants, Weeds of the Global Garden."
1996.
Brooklyn Botanic Garden, 1000 Washington Avenue, Brooklyn, NY 11225.
ISSN #0362-5850 Brown, Lauren.
1979.
Grasses, and Identification Guide.
Boston: Houghton Mifflin.
ISBN# 0-395-27624-1 Hoffman, Randy and Kearns, Kelly, eds. 1977.
Wisconsin Manual of Control Recommendations for Ecologically Invasive Plants.
WI BER, WIDNR, PO Box 7921, Madison, WI 53707.
"Landscaping With Native Plants."
1998.
Brochure available from PA Dept. of Conservation and Natural Resources, Bureau of Forestry, PO Box 8552, Harrisburg, PA 17105-8552.
Marinelli, Janet.
1998.
Stalking the Wild Amaranth, Gardening in the Age of Extinction.
New York: Henry Holt.
ISBN# 0-8050-4415-9 Natural Areas Journal.
Natural Areas Association (NAA), 320 South Third Street, Rockford, IL 61104-2063.
ISSN# 0885-8608 See Internet site.
Newcomb, Lawrence.
1977.
Newcomb's Wildflower Guide.
Boston: Little, Brown, and Co.
ISBN# 0-316-60441-0 Petrides, G.A. 1988.
A Field Guide to Eastern Trees.
Boston: Houghton Mifflin; Peterson Field Guide Series, No. 11.
ISBN# 0-395-46732-2 Rhoads, A.F. and Klein, W.M. 1993.
The Vascular Flora of Pennsylvania.
American Philosophical Soc. 104 S. Fifth Street, Philadelphia, PA 19106.
ISBN# 0-87169207-4
Stein, Sara.
1997.
Planting Noah's Garden, Further Adventures in Backyard Ecology.
Boston: Houghton Mifflin.
ISBN# 0-395-70960-1 Tennessee Exotic Pest Plant Council.
1997.
Tennessee Exotic Plant Management Manual.
From: Friends of Warner Parks, 50 Vaughn Road, Nashville, TN 37221.
Tel (615) 370-8051 Text on Internet site.
Virginia Department of Conservation and Recreation.
Invasive Alien Plant Species.
Dept. of Conservation and Recreation, Div. of Natural Heritage, 1500 E. Main Street, Suite 312, Richmond, VA 23219.
Tel (804) 786-7951 Text on Internet site.
Westbrooks, R.G. 1998.
Invasive Plants: Changing the Landscape of America, Factbook.
Federal Interagency Committee for the Management of Noxious and Exotic Weeds (FICMNEW); Washington, D.C. 109pp., US Government Printing Office, Washington D.C. 20402.
See Internet site.
Internet Brooklyn Botanic Garden, Invasive Plants, www.bbg.org/gardening/natural/invasive Fed.
Interagency Committee for the Management of Noxious and Exotic Weeds, refuges.fws.gov/ficmnewfiles.ficmnewhomepage.html Morris Arboretum PA Flora Project, www.upenn.edu/paflora Plant Conservation Alliance, Exotic Plants Working Group, www.nps.gov/npci/epwg Natural Areas Association, www.natareas.org The Nature Conservancy, www.tnc.org.tncweeds.ucdavis.edu Pennsylvania DCNR, Bureau of Forestry, www.dcnr.state.pa.us/forestry/pndi Tennessee Exotic Pest Plant Council, www.webriver.com/tn-eppc VA Dept. of Conservation and Recreation list of invasive plants, www.state.va.us/~dcr/dnh/invproj.htm President Clinton's Executive Order on Invasive Species, signed February 3, 1999, www.nbii.gov
To be included at the bottom of the list: * Cultivars are cultivated varieties of plant species, bred for predictable attributes like shorter height, showier flowers, or colored foliage.
An example is Norway Maple `Crimson King.
Cultivars of invasive species may be less aggressive than the straight species.
If you choose to plant a cultivar of an invasive species on this list, ask the nurseryman about the potential for this cultivar to be invasive.
(Designate invasive species with cultivars with a star on the list) Situational: These species are commonly planted for quick groundcover but can be a serious problem when they establish in a native plant community.
either by seed dispersal or garden clippings discarded carelessly.
