Guard Detail Oct-Dec 03.qxd 9/26/2003 2:37 PM Page 1 AC HRONICLE OF THE M ISSISSIPPI N ATIONAL G UARD 125th NGAUS Conference, Biloxi, MS Sept. 15-17 114th Military Police Guard Air Force One during presidential visit to Fort Hood C-17 Conversion Program "Coming Together" 113th Military Police Arrive Home Guard Detail Oct-Dec 03.qxd 9/26/2003 2:38 PM Page 2 4 5 6 GUARD DETAI L The GUARD DETAIL is published three times a year by the Public Affairs Office of the Mississippi Military Department under the provisions of AR 360-81.
The opinions expressed in the GUARD DETAIL are those of the writer and do not necessarily reflect the official views of the Mississippi Military Department or the National Guard Bureau unless so indicated.
This is an unofficial publication and is distributed free to Guard members and other interested persons.
CONTENTS Mississippi to host 126th NGAUS Conference Thousands expected for activities on Gulf Coast .
.4 Mississippi soldier one of top recruiters in U.S. .
.5 Mississippi's first African-American Chief's 54 Award winner War Eagles . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
.6 114th MPs Multi-faceted in War and Peace An American Soldier missing home in Iraq . . . . .
.8 Thoughts of a soldier to family back home MISSISSIPPI ADJUTANT GENERAL Major General James H. Lipscomb III PUBLICATION STAFF Lt. Col. Tim Powell, Director, Public Affairs Maj. Danny Blanton, PA Specialist/Editor 1st Lt. Chris Patterson, Staff Writer/Video Sgt. Maj. Bill Jones, Staff Photog/Cartoonist Master Sgt.
Sandy Ates, Staff Writer/Layout All correspondence should be addressed to: Editor, (NGMSCSP), Guard Detail, P. O. Box 5027, Jackson, MS 39296-5027.
(601) 313-6271, DSN 293-6271, FAX (601) 313-6176.
Email: tim.powell@ms.ngb.army.mil.
Be sure to check out the Public Affairs web page at: http://www.ngms.state.ms.us.
You may also look for unit deployment pages at this site--click on PICTURES AND INFO ON MOBILIZED UNITS.
Brandon's Bravest . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
.17 113th MPs Redeploy from Enduring Freedom Welcome Home 113th MPs Photos of Homecoming . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
.10 Hurdles Cleared by IronHorse. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
.12 223rd Engineers get palace duties 172nd Airlift Wing Countdown. . . . . . . . . . . . . .
.14 Air Guard Unit Busy In July Bringing Them Home . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
.18 183rd AES members serve special unit mission Soldiers In The News . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
.19 On My Command . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
.20 2 GUARD DETAIL, OCTOBER-D ECEMBER 2003 Guard Detail Oct-Dec 03.qxd 9/26/2003 2:41 PM Page 3 A CHRONICLE OF THE MISSISSIPPI NATIONAL GUARD Volume 11, No. 2, October-December 2003 9 12 14 ON THE FRONT COVER Members of the Mississippi Army National Guard's 114th Military Police Company, Clinton, discuss security measures for guarding Air Force One, as President Bush visits with troops at Ft. Hood, Texas.
Pictured from left are Cpl.
Mike W. Smith, Clinton; Pfc. Michael E. McGee, Canton and Pfc. Lacey J. Travis of Clinton.
The three are part of the 114th Military Police Company currently deployed at Ft. Hood in support of Operation Enduring Freedom.
Photo by Staff Sgt.
John Makamson, 102 MPAD GUARD DETAIL, OCTOBER-D ECEMBER 2003 3 Guard Detail Oct-Dec 03.qxd 9/26/2003 2:42 PM Page 4 Mississippi to host the 125th NGAUS by Lt. Col. Tim Powell, State Public Affairs Officer Thousands of Army and Air National Guard officers and family members from all 54 states and territories will converge on Mississippi's beautiful Gulf Coast in midSeptember, as the city of Biloxi plays host to the 125th conference of the National Guard Association of the United States (NGAUS).
The Gulf Coast Coliseum, where most events will occur, will be bustling with activities both inside and out beginning September 15-17, 2003.
While business meetings convene on the conference floor alongside a huge exhibition hall, many social activities will take place on the coliseum grounds and at other points of interest on the Gulf Coast.
"We're extremely excited about hosting the 125th NGAUS Conference," said Maj. Gen. James H. Lipscomb III, the adjutant general of Mississippi.
"The Mississippi Gulf Coast is known as the `Playground of the South' and for good reason.
My goal is to make everyone's visit a great experience."
While there is something for everyone on the Mississippi Gulf Coast, from golf and water sports, to gaming action in numerous casinos along the white sand beaches, conference committees have planned many activities for the attendees to enjoy before and during the conference.
Golf tournaments kick off the action at Shell Landing and Broadwater Sun courses followed by The Adjutant General's Reception featuring "Mississippi Delta Blues" along with southern fried cuisine.
Company grade and warrant officers will mix and mingle at their own reception, and a 5-K run will offer a competitive spirit for all.
Governor Ronnie Musgrove will host his reception on the coliseum grounds with a parade, fireworks and plenty of food to please any palate, and spouses will enjoy a shopping paradise with plenty of food and entertainment at the "Mississippi Market Place" on the Beauvoir grounds.
Social activities will conclude on the evening of the 17th, with everyone attending the formal states' dinner at the Coliseum Convention Center.
"This had been a monumental task for all of our committee chairmen and their committee members," said Col. Bradley MacNealy, general chairman for the 125th NGAUS Conference.
"It's taken a lot of work from a lot of hard 4 GUARD DETAIL, OCTOBER-D ECEMBER working people to make this conference a success, and we could not have done it without any of them."
MacNealy also attributes much of the planning success to the Gulf Coast Convention and Visitors Bureau for helping acquire sponsorships from many Gulf Coast-area businesses.
"The support we've received from the Gulf Coast area has been monumental," MacNealy said.
"It takes a good business environment like the Gulf Coast area to help bring a conference of this size to Mississippi.
And, it's a great economic boost for the Gulf Coast area as well."
And a boost it will be.
Attendance at the conference is expected to exceed 4,000 people who will all be staying in local hotels and eating in many local establishments, so it's a win-win situation for all.
But, Lipscomb emphasizes the conference is not all about entertainment and social activity.
"This is where we discuss important issues affecting the National Guard nationwide.
As a result of all the National Guard deployments, the war on terrorism and the war with Iraq, the 2003 conference is happening at a critical time for us to establish our National Guard position for the future," Lipscomb said.
Scheduled speakers during the conference are Governor Ronnie Musgrove, U.S. Congressman Gene Taylor, Secretary of Defense Ronald Rumsfeld, Assistant Secretary of Defense Paul McHale and Army Chief of Staff Gen. Peter J. Schoomaker.
2003 Guard Detail Oct-Dec 03.qxd 9/26/2003 2:42 PM Page 5 Mississippi soldier one of the top recruiters in the United By Sgt.
First Class Tommy Moore, R
Not only did they pull him through, they put him on top as one of the best recruiters in the nation.
Recently Pointer was announced as recipient of the Chief 's 54 Award by the Chief of the National Guard Bureau, Lt. Gen. H. Steven Blum, and will be presented the award during a ceremony in Washington, DC.
He was also recognized as being the first African-American recruiter to earn the award in Mississippi, and recently was given special recognition by Mississippi Governor Ronnie Musgrove and State Adjutant General, Maj. Gen. James H. Lipscomb III, during a ceremony held at the Governor 's Mansion in Jackson.
S Sergeant First Class Michael Pointer (left) is given a special presentation from Mississippi Governor Ronnie Musgrove (center) and State Adjutant General Maj. Gen. James H. Lipscomb III, during a recent ceremony at the Governor 's Mansion in Jackson, honoring Pointer for his recognition as Chief's 54 Top Recruiter Award recipient by the National Guard Bureau, Washington, DC.
Photo by Sgt. 1st Class Mark Weilenman, R
His recruiting territory includes Drew High school, Ruleville Central High School, S.V. Marshall High School, Amanda Elzy High School, J.Z. George High School, and Mississippi Valley State University.
Pointer enlisted 51 young adults into the Mississippi Army National Guard with 40 of them having never served in the military.
The National Guard offers many opportunities for young people.
They can receive up to $55,000 in pay and tuition assistance for a six year enlistment.
Monetary benefits are not the only incentive for military service.
Enlistees receive resume' building experience and have a variety of jobs to choose from, in addition to a retirement from a part-time job.
Pointer began his military career with Battery A, 1st Battalion, 114th Field Artillery in Drew, Miss. on Aug. 9, 1985.
He attended basic and advanced training at Fort Sill, Okla.
He began work full-time as the Administrative Noncommissioned Officer with Battery A, 1st Bn, 114th Field Artillery on Feb. 1, 1989, moving to the recruiter position on Oct. 15, 1996.
The Army National Guard is a family tradition for the Pointers.
The son of James and Canary Pointer of Drew, Michael Pointer is following in his father 's footsteps.
Michael's father is the first sergeant for Battery A, his brother-in-law is a member of the Guard and he recruited his daughter, Markita, into the Guard in 2002.
Pointer says that his other children are planning to join the National Guard in the future.
Pointer and his wife, Patricia, have been married for six years.
They have five children; a son, Maurice and four daughters, Markita, Meisah, Mashay and Kimyatta.
They reside in Drew, where Michael is active in Little League baseball and softball as a referee.
He also is a substitute teacher.
As members of the Holly Grove Missionary Baptist Church, he said that his faith and his church are very influential in his life.
His advice to other recruiting and retention NCOs is, "If recruiting is really what you want to do, prepare your family.
You have to have faith in God and a strong family."
Pointer said that he and his wife crossed paths with each other many mornings.
"It can take long working hours to be successful," he said, adding, "and without the support of your family, you cannot expect to excel.
I am blessed with my wife; she stood by me through everything."
GUARD DETAIL, OCTOBER-D ECEMBER 2003 5 Guard Detail Oct-Dec 03.qxd 9/26/2003 2:42 PM Page 6 1 1 4 t h M i l i t a r y P o l i c e P r o v i d e M u l t i -F a c e t e d S e c u r i t y I n F War and Peace After splitting a year providing force protection at Fort Campbell, Ky. and guarding prisoners at Camp X-Ray at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, the National Guard unit comes prepared to take on Fort Hood's law enforcement duties.
By Staff Sgt.
John Makamson, 102nd Mobile Public Affairs Detachment The 114th Military Police Company, based in Clinton, is soaring to new heights while on deployment for Operation Enduring Freedom.
The guardsmen, also known as the "War Eagles," are facing new challenges head-on and are showing their active duty counterparts that the men and women of the Mississippi Army National Guard are willing to stand shoulder to shoulder in the fight for freedom.
The members of the 114th are shouldering their share of the load, plus a whole lot more.
The military police company was recalled to active duty for the second time in support of Operation Enduring Freedom.
The soldiers of the 114th recently completed a one-year tour of duty at Fort Campbell, Ky and Guantanamo Bay, Cuba.
During their deployment the unit provided force protection at Fort Campbell and then was tasked with guarding the detainees at Camp X-Ray in Cuba.
This will make the third duty station for the "War Eagles" in two years.
"The 114th has a history of deployments in our lineage.
Our his6 GUARD DETAIL, OCTOBER-D tory speaks for itself.
The 114th is there when a force is needed to protect the state from within, such as a natural disaster like a hurricane down south or during an ice storm up north.
We can do anything from a law and order mission on state side deployments to force protection in the continental U.S. or deploy abroad and use our combat military police skills on the battlefield," said Capt. Robert Bartran, Commander of the 114th.
"We come well trained for it.
We are one of the two units with a Forward Support Package in the state of Mississippi.
That Forward Support Package designation gives us extra time, equipment and funds for training.
So we are ready for the call when it is given to us and we then can respond appropriately," said Bartran.
The members reported to their armory in Clinton on February 23, 2003.
While some members of the unit are staying in Mississippi to protect our airports and other assets here, other members traveled to their mobilization station at Fort Hood, Texas in February.
They were welcomed to the 89th Military Police Brigade on March 17 in a mobilization ceremony at Gauntlet Field in Fort Hood.
The main effort for the 114th while assigned to the 89th will be a law and order mission for Fort Hood.
The military police refer to this as "working the road", which involves spending a lot of time in a patrol car, making the rounds and keeping soldiers and families of Fort Hood safe.
"Here at Fort Hood we are actually performing a law and order mission.
We are going on police patrols, just like you would find at any civilian police department.
We get calls over the radio for traffic stops to domestic disturbances.
Any activities that a regular law enforcement agency performs we will perform also," said 1st Sgt. Darrel L. Masterson, of Madison.
The guardsmen will remain at Fort Hood during their tour of duty, while their active duty military police counterparts are deployed on overseas operations.
ECEMBER 2003 Guard Detail Oct-Dec 03.qxd 9/26/2003 2:43 PM Page 7 During this time, all new incoming active duty soldiers reporting to the 89th from their Advanced Individual Training will be assigned to the 114th.
In addition to their normal police duties, the guardsmen shoulder the additional responsibility of training the newly attached active duty soldiers and preparing them for war.
"This is an outstanding opportunity for some of our junior leaders.
This is the first time in their careers that they are getting to lead soldiers in this kind of environment, which will really help them in the future," said Master Sgt.
John Chisum, operations sergeant for the 114th.
This unique combination has created a consolidated Mississippi Army National Guard and active-duty MP unit.
"We have been intermixed with active duty soldiers; this is a first for the Military Police Corps and a first for us as Mississippi military police to work hand in hand with our active duty counterparts within the company," said Sgt. 1st Class Chad Wardlaw.
"When we deployed we only had two soldiers that were below the rank of E4.
Our NCOs had senior Sgt. Willie Warren of Canton, leadership and duty personnel on the Mark19 no one to train.
We were then assigned new active duty personnel to our unit.
Their ranks were E-3 and below so it gave our NCOs an opportunity to train and use their skills that they developed during their many years in the military," said Bartran.
Sgt. Clyde Keathley, from responsibilities while at Fort Hood.
They are tasked to act as a special reactionary force if a weapon of mass destruction were to go off in the area.
If the need arises they could be used as a quick reactionary force to provide additional support in the area close to Fort Hood.
The "War Eagles" have an even more critical task to shoulder.
They have the honor of protecting the President of the United States and Air Force One, the President's dedicated aircraft.
"We provide presidential security for the President of the United States when he is visiting in Texas.
Occasionally we have the opportunity to do this several times a month.
We currently have several of our members dedicated to that duty," said Bartran.
This is a task the 114th MP gladly shares with the United States Secret Service.
"Protecting the President has been the highlight of being deployed.
The President is our boss, the Commander-inChief and protecting him is a great honor," said Wardlaw.
The U.S. Army has identified a critical shortage of military police.
This makes the members of the 114th a highly valued asset to today's U.S. and a member of the 114th Military Police Company, Clinton, provides instruction to active military.
Grenade Launcher at Fort Hood, Texas.
Photo by Staff Sgt.
John Makamson, 102 MPAD.
In this critical time in our standards, we take the same physination's history, the members of the cal fitness test, we have the same Mississippi Army National Guard are motivation, the same love for the once again answering the nation's country as they do.
I feel the active call, standing shoulder to shoulder duty components have come to with their fellow brothers and sisters respect and appreciate us greatly," in arms during Operation Enduring said Wardlaw.
Freedom.
The MP's have many additional 2003 7 Brandon, has been a police officer with the University Medical Center for two years, "Dealing with other people, being around people of different cultures, interacting with active duty members and meeting people from all around the country is one way I have benefited from being in the consolidated MP unit," Keathley said, "No one has looked down at us as National Guardsmen.
As a matter of fact, most soldiers look up to us because a lot of us are policemen in the civilian world.
The soldiers ask us about our experiences from working in law enforcement."
These part-time soldiers are showing that they come with a fulltime commitment and are willing to do what it takes to ensure mission success, noted Bartran.
"The members of the Army have come to see over the last couple of months that we train to the same GUARD DETAIL, OCTOBER-D ECEMBER Guard Detail Oct-Dec 03.qxd 9/26/2003 2:43 PM Page 8 An American Soldier missing home in Iraq Journal Entry 23 July 03 Today I attended the funeral precession of the first soldier lost under the 130th Engineer Brigade as well as under our command.
Even though I did not know this soldier I feel very sad.
He wasn't just anybody; he was a U.S. Soldier here fighting for the American way of life.
We all in our hearts grieve for every fallen soldier.
These soldiers will never be forgotten.
People should realize that there are people out there that do not like us and are praised when they commit suicide in order to harm or kill us.
This is a different country.
This is not America.
They did not grow up with toys like we did.
They grew up with RPGs and Aks.
They do not see that we are helping them and a lot of people will do whatever it takes to destroy our efforts.
We are in the middle of a dogfight for control over a country.
We have to play by the rules in a fight where no one else has rules.
We must always be aware and alert of everything because nowhere in orders will you find a guarantee to go home sitting up straight.
Every soldier is precious.
A lot of us do not realize why we are here.
We are here to help people in need.
We are here because Saddam had the means to attack us and he would have eventually grown brave enough to do so.
We have seen how vulnerable we are in America.
We have many rights and freedoms that people in other countries only dream about.
We as Americans have grown to take these things for granted.
Two years ago we were tested in our patriotism.
Our patriotism flourished over everything and for a brief moment we were a United Nation.
Our leaders saw fit to go out in the world and hunt down these terrorists before they attacked us again.
We have succeeded in this in many ways.
Our hunt however is not over.
I feel that once again America has showed that it will not be pushed aside so easily.
We are over here in Iraq now to make sure that the regime that we crushed cannot come back in any form whether it is Saddam himself or someone else.
Although the war is over hostilities continue throughout the country.
Almost daily we lose soldiers to these renegades.
We will not be easily scared away and our courage will grow continuously if not for ourselves then for those who have died defending our freedom.
So many here give up so much that I have a hard time understanding anti-war protesters.
Daily almost 200,000 soldiers put their life on the line for w our freedom and the freedom for those whom may have never known freedom.
That is what keeps me going and keeps my chin up.
Daily I grow stronger in my love for America and the things I have taken for granted all my life.
I think maybe that everyone in America should have to serve in the military in a situation like this one and then I believe that America would be able to overcome a lot of its downfalls.
Its downfalls are so simple.
It's not the government.
It's the lazy and unpatriotic people that take advantage of those who believe in a United Nation.
My views and philosophies have changed a lot since I have come here to Iraq but one thing never will change.
I Love America .
Spc. Bryan Baldwin,168th Engineer Group Journal Entry 28 May 03 As I sit here in this vast land of turmoil, I look and absorb the lives around me.
What I see is a number of people who unknowingly risk everything for the American way of life.
These courageous few do not realize the impact they make on today's world.
The things these Americans lose are priceless.
All lose time with their families.
Some will miss their child's first step or even their child's birth.
They will miss birthdays and holidays.
Some will miss family events that haven't been missed in decades.
Then there are those who will lose their lives.
All these things are given voluntarily by some of the greatest people in the world today.
The times and opportunities that are lost are taken for granted by most people but for these soldiers the little things mean a lot and will be cherished always.
I know all these things because I am one.
I am an American soldier missing home in Iraq.
Spc. Bryan Baldwin, 168th Eng Gp 8 GUARD DETAIL, OCTOBER-D ECEMBER 2003 Guard Detail Oct-Dec 03.qxd 9/26/2003 2:44 PM Page 9 Photo by Sgt. Maj. Bill Jones, Staff Photographer Brandon's Bravest 1 13th MPs Redeploy from Operation Enduring Freedom By Master Sgt.
Sandy Ates Photos on Pages 9-11 by Sgt. Maj. Bill Jones "There's my daddy," exclaimed a small child as she watched the buses pull up.
Hundreds of family members, friends and well-wishers braved searing temperatures and muggy humidity to get a glimpse of soldiers returning home Sunday, Aug. 24, 2003 at the 113th Military Police Company's armory in Brandon.
As the soldiers stepped off the buses cheers of joy could be heard and colorful banners covered the parking area.
The 113th was mobilized from Brandon in January 2003, and deployed overseas to various countries where they conducted military police work in Pakistan, Uzbekistan, and Afghanistan.
The MP's marched in formation down the long drive and came to a halt before a long line of dignitaries there to welcome the 140 soldiers of the 113th back home.
Gov. Ronnie Musgrove presented his handshake to each policeman/woman and followed it with a presentation of the National Defense Service Medal and the Armed Forces Reserve Medal with M Device.
Major Kim Jackson, executive officer of the 112th Military Police Battalion in Canton, presided over a spe- cial ceremony to honor the 113th MP's for their service to country.
Shannon Crain sang the National Anthem, followed by an invocation by pastor Christopher Armstrong.
Brandon Mayor Roe Grubbs addressed the soldiers noting that each one of them were heroes as far as he was concerned.
"Thank you families for your sacrifice of the men and women who departed in January to serve their country," said Grubbs.
State Adjutant General, Maj. Gen. James H. Lipscomb III, said to his soldiers, "Welcome home! Mission accomplished and a job well done.
I thank you for making the sacrifice and to your families for their sacrifices."
Gov. Musgrove, who has been there for each soldier or airman being deployed or redeploying from the Mississippi National Guard said he was so very proud of these guardsmen.
"I'm looking over the finest unit the U.S. has ever seen.
We are glad to have you home--2.8 million people in Mississippi also welcome you home," said Musgrove.
They will need time to rest and spend time with their family members, and they most certainly deserve that and more.
We salute you! GUARD DETAIL, OCTOBER-D ECEMBER 2003 9 Guard Detail Oct-Dec 03.qxd 9/26/2003 2:45 PM Page 10 10 GUARD DETAIL, OCTOBER-D ECEMBER 2003 Guard Detail Oct-Dec 03.qxd 9/26/2003 2:46 PM Page 11 GUARD DETAIL, OCTOBER-D ECEMBER 2003 11 Guard Detail Oct-Dec 03.qxd 9/26/2003 2:46 PM Page 12 Cpl. Vernon R. O'Donnell 350th MPAD, Task Force Ironhorse TIKRIT, Iraq The removal of Saddam and his dictatorship led to widespread looting in Iraq and few places were hit as hard as Saddam's former palatial grounds in Tikrit.
Couches, pictures, circuit breakers and boards, air conditioners - everything was fair game until Task Force Ironhorse moved into the compound.
All of the looting left the Task Force missing necessary items in order to effectively use the compound and improve the standard of living of the soldiers staying there.
A handselect team from the 223rd Engineer Battalion out of Calhoun City, Miss., has been tasked with fixing these problems throughout Forward Operating Base Ironhorse, Tikrit.
"We work on electrical, water, sewer systems, air conditioners, everything really," said Sgt. Barry D. Cannon, normally a carpentry and masonry expert with the 223rd.
The team of noncommissioned officers from the Mississippi National Guard has a variety of skills from both their specialties in the Army and their civilian professions.
"When we first got here, we were working on all the generators, getting electricity up and running," said Cannon, "and this pertains to what I do back home as a civilian."
According to Cannon, this was one of the most difficult tasks they have had because the wiring in Iraq is different than back in the states.
There are no color codes for the wires, like in America, and this caused the engineers to go through a trial-and-error process until an agreement with local Iraqis was finalized.
"We work with the Iraqis five days a week," said Sgt. James Edwards, a carpentry and masonry specialist.
"They help with anything and have been really useful in getting the electricity working."
The Iraqis helped with transitioning the electricity source from generators to the main power grid, said Cannon.
This shift from generator power has improved the living conditions all of the soldiers staying at FOB Ironhorse.
This has been a drastic improvement because of the stability of the main power in comparison to a generator.
Although working with the Iraqis has greatly helped 12 GUARD DETAIL, OCTOBER-D ECEMBER the engineers in accomplishing their mission, there were the typical problems that have faced soldiers throughout Iraq.
"At first it was hard to understand what they were saying or doing," said Cannon, "but now we get along better.
It helps that they are smart and know what they are doing."
The six-man team from Mississippi and the six-man group from Tikrit have developed camaraderie from working together every day.
Both groups have nicknames for all of the members of the other group, and there is constant joking between the groups despite the language barrier.
The guardsmen have had other hurdles in developing the infrastructure of the Tikrit palatial compound.
"When we first got here, we had to walk everywhere because we had no vehicles," said Cannon.
According to Staff Sgt. Lynn Toler, the team leader for the group, "Everybody found out we were from Mississippi and thought we were all hillbillies.
Now that everything is getting fixed, they all love us and we get a lot more support."
The engineers have completed many undertakings in addition to working on the electrical issues here in Tikrit.
"We got the washers, dryers, and presses working at the PX," said Cannon.
"We built the shelving at the PX and our current priority is the `R and R' sites and the MWR building."
The Rest and Relaxation sites have been made functional with the intent of allowing line troops who are staying in the field a few days rest while they are here in Iraq.
The Morale, Welfare, and Recreation building is intended for use by all soldiers in order to help relieve the stress of being stationed in a combat zone.
The small team of experts from the 223rd Engineer Battalion has an expansive mission with an assortment of differing duties to complete.
Without the team's work, the soldiers of Task Force Ironhorse would have a considerably lower standard of living.
2003 Guard Detail Oct-Dec 03.qxd 9/26/2003 2:47 PM Page 13 WATER STUDY--(top photo)
223rd Engineers, Staff Sgt. Lynn Toler, Sgt. James Edwards and Sgt. Terry Garner study the water system for an MWR building in Tikrit, Iraq, where members of the unit are part of Task Force Ironhorse.
PLUMB READY--(right photo)
Sgt. Darrell Franks, a Mississippi Army National Guardsman and a civilian maintenance man whose normal job is carpentry/masonry, fixes the sinks at one of the R
NEW POWER--(bottom left photo)
Mississippi Army Guardsman, Sgt. Barry D. Cannon helps a civilian contractor replace the circuit board in one of the failed dictatorship's old palaces in Tikrit.
Photos by the 350th MPAD, Task Force Ironhorse PAO.
GUARD DETAIL, OCTOBER-D ECEMBER 2003 13 Guard Detail Oct-Dec 03.qxd 9/26/2003 2:48 PM Page 14 172nd Airlift Wing Articles by Master Sgt.
Sandy Ates Photographs by Master Sgt.
Andy Miller and Tech.
Sgt. David Longmire There was still plenty of celebrating going on at the Mississippi Air National Guard's 172nd Airlift Wing (AW) Jackson, Miss. after July 4, 2003.
In fact, it was just the beginning of the celebrating for Guard members who, along with others, have been counting down the months for the arrival of something big--the C-17 Globemaster III.
U N I T C E L E B R A T E S 50 TH ANNIVERSARY Someone said it was the biggest cake they had ever seen.
A blaze of red, white and blue, and images of the past and present adorned a four and a half foot by eight and a half foot birthday cake honoring the 172nd Airlift Wing's 50th anniversary on July 12.
Airmen and their family members gathered for Family Day fun and games followed by a formal cake-cutting ceremony hosted by the wing commander, Col. William B. `Blair ' Jernigan.
State Adjutant General, Maj. Gen. James H. Lipscomb III, and Assistant Adjutant General-Air, Maj. Gen. Harold A. Cross, joined the unit in celebrating its its many successes over the past 50 years.
Special guest, Missississpi Governor Ronnie Musgrove, commander-in-chief of the Mississippi National Guard, gave praise to the unit for its service around the world and noted the many historical `firsts' earned by unit membership over the past 50 years.
"For a birthday party, we need a cake," said Jernigan as the 50 candles were lit.
Stepping up to the massive cake, Col. Jernigan, Gov. Musgrove, Generals Lipscomb and Cross, and three charter members of the first unit roll call, Charles E. Ramsey, Jr., James C. Mayo and Connor Brown, blew out the flames on the candles with a wish of continued success for the future of the 172nd AW.
"For a birthday party, we need presents," said Jernigan to the large crowd.
"I can think of no more deserving recipients of a birthday present than three of the unit's original members when the wing was given birth in 1953."
Ramsey, Mayo and Brown were then presented the commander 's special coin as a token of appreciation--on behalf of the entire wing.
A final `birthday gift' was given to the entire unit by General Cross who presented the wing with its 10th Outstanding Unit Award.
"It is very rare that an Air National Guard unit achieves this number of awards," said Governor Musgrove, praising the unit for its professionalism and dedication.
The 50th anniversary celebration was the beginning of the countdown for better things to come for the 172nd Airlift Wing.
14 GUARD DETAIL, OCTOBER-D ECEMBER 2003 Guard Detail Oct-Dec 03.qxd 9/26/2003 2:49 PM Page 15 MISSISSIPPI ONE...MISSSISSIPPI TWO C -1 7 A r r i v a l C o u n t d o w n 1 COMMANDER NOTES HISTORICAL IMPORTANCE A century ago, two brothers, Wilbur and Orville Wright, made history when they took their first flight from Kitty Hawk, North Carolina.
A Centennial of Flight celebration will be held December 17, 2003, to recognize the fearlessness and determination of these first two American aviators who made the first flight.
Nearly a half-century later, on July 1, 1953, the 172nd Airlift Wing began making its own phenomenal aviation history when they became the first Air National Guard unit in the country to fly night photo reconnaissance.
That unit 'first' has had a domino effect, and here we are a half-century later, steadily culminating so many firsts, that people all over the world know about them.
"That reputation hasn't come easy, as the Wright brothers would probably tell you, if they were still with us today," said 172nd Airlift Wing commander, Col. William B. Jernigan to members of the unit.
"All of our members, past and present, know fearlessness, determination and sacrifice; I know that, your spouses and family know that, as does our president, governor, congressional leaders past and present, and the many people around the world we've committed to serve."
"This year, we celebrate our birthday.
We celebrate our achievements; we celebrate our history; we celebrate each member who has stepped up to the plate and taken an oath to their God and country," said Jernigan.
"It may have been a century ago that aviation history began, but in less than half that time, you, and the many others before you, have pushed aviation history far forward into a new millennium.
It is truly an honor to be commander of this unit, and have the rare privilege to have such a fearless, determined, and professional group of men and women with which to serve."
(Above) The 172nd Airlift Wing's 50th Anniversary celebration in July called for a big cake and a lot of folks to blow out the 50 candles.
Blowing out the candles are from left 172nd Airlift Wing commander, Col. William B. "Blair" Jernigan; Maj. Gen. Harold A. Cross, commander, Mississippi Air National Guard; charter members of the first roll call for the unit, Charles E. Ramsey, Jr., James C. Mayo and Connor Brown; State Adjutant General Maj. Gen. James H. Lipscomb III, and Mississippi Governor Ronnie Musgrove.
(Left) Maj. Gen. Harold A. Cross, commander Headquarters Air National Guard and Asst.
Adjutant General-Air (left), presents 172nd Airlift Wing Commander, Col. William B. Jernigan (right), the 172nd Airlift Wing's 10th Air Force Outstanding Unit Award plaque as State Adjutant General, Maj. Gen.James H. Lipscomb III, and Governor Ronnie Musgrove applaud the unit for it's exceptional performance.
M i s s i s s i p p i G u a r d v i s i t s n e w e s t C -1 7 s 1 Long Beach, Calif.--Major General James H. Lipscomb III, is the Adjutant General of Mississippi -- the state's-highest ranking uniformed military officer.
But on July 31 during a tour of the Long Beach C-17 assembly facility, the two-star general may have felt more like a "kid in a candy store," as he and a delegation from the Magnolia State visited the eight C-17s earmarked for delivery to Mississippi beginning in December.
"We are just delighted to be here today to see these aircraft come together and to know the future that it brings for our people, for our state, and for the Air National Guard.
(Continued on page 17) GUARD DETAIL, OCTOBER-D 2003 ECEMBER 15 Guard Detail Oct-Dec 03.qxd 9/26/2003 2:53 PM Page 16 Mississippi One is ready for its nose to be joined with the fuselage at the Boeing plant in Long Beach Calif.
Several from Mississippi attended the C-17 joining ceremony host1 ed by Boeing July 3.
Mississippi One is presently sched uled for its first flight to its home in Jackson on Dec. 17.
This date also marks the 100th Year of Flight History for this nation.
The photo to the right (above) shows Mississippi State Adjutant General, Maj. Gen. James H. Lipscomb III ready to put in the first rivet. (below) are Mississippians participating in the C-17Joining Ceremony at 1 Boeing.
(Photo by Sgt. Maj. Bill Jones, staff photographer) 16 GUARD DETAIL, OCTOBER-D ECEMBER 2003 Guard Detail Oct-Dec 03.qxd 9/26/2003 2:54 PM Page 17 (Continued from page 15) Traveling with Lipscomb were civic leaders from neighboring communities surrounding the Jackson Air National Guard Base, including National Guard staff, elected officials, business leaders, educators, and news crews from two Jackson area television stations.
All made the fivehour flight aboard a guard Vietnam-era C-141 Starlifter.
After welcoming the group to the assembly facility, Boeing's Vice President and General Manager Howard Chambers introduced employees at each of the eight locations where Jackson aircraft were in various stages of assembly.
Photos taken at each stop along the way will become cherished keepsakes for those fortunate enough to make the trip to get first glimpses of the much-heralded Globemaster IIIs.
"A year ago we also hosted some of our friends from Mississippi," Chambers said.
"The Governor was able to fly the C-17 simulator.
But today we had the opportunity to share all eight airplanes that the Mississippi National Guard will receive -- we're very pleased," Chambers said.
After installing a fastener in the forward section of "Mississippi One," where his first C-17 is coming together in the "major join" assembly tool, General Lipscomb again addressed his fellow Mississippians and a gathering of production employees in building 54.
"When these aircraft are on board in Jackson, we will be the best there is because our people are, in fact, the best-of-the-best," he said.
"And we know that the people who manufacture this aircraft are the best-of-the-best."
GUARD DETAIL, OCTOBER-D ECEMBER 2003 17 Guard Detail Oct-Dec 03.qxd 9/26/2003 2:56 PM Page 18 Bringing Them Home by Master Sgt.
Sandy Ates These men and women are the real heroes.
A special group of men and women who play a very important part in Operation Iraqi Freedom.
Though most may not recognize the unit designation, this special unit is critical in day-to-day operations in support of Operation Iraqi Freedom.
The 375th Expeditionary Aeromedical Evacuation Squadron/Detachment 1 located at Andrews Air Force Base (AFB) in Maryland, was activated (as the 775th EAES) under the Integrated CONUS Medical Operations Plan (ICMOP) on April 8, 2003 and launched its first mission on April 12.
The 375th, according to commander Lt. Col. Peter A. Mercier and member of the Mississippi Air National Guard's 183rd Aeromedical Evacuation Squadron (AES) at Thompson Field in Jackson, is the first unit of its kind.
"We are presently staffed with 62 members comprising members of the 183rd AES in Jackson, Miss.; 167th AES, Shepherd Field, W. Va.; 459th AES, Andrews AFB, Md.; 914th AES Niagara Falls Air Reserve Station, N.Y.; 349th AES, Travis AFB, Calif.; 446th AES, McChord AFB, Wash. and the 1st AES, Pope AFB, S.C.," Mercier noted, adding, "These are Air National Guard, Reserve and Active Duty personnel, with the largest group of folks coming from Mississippi (25 personnel)."
The purpose and function of the EAES is to provide support for the missions originating at and transiting through the deployment location.
At Andrews AFB, this involved supporting the C-9, C-141, C-130, C-21, and other types of aircraft involved in the airlift of patients requiring transportation to medical care facilities around the world and CONUS in support of Operations Iraqi Freedom and Enduring Freedom.
According to Mercier, training was an integral part of the mission at Andrews.
Training and certification was accomplished for personnel on non-primary aircraft.
This resulted in all personnel being able to function on aircraft not normally used by their home base units/squadrons.
Inservices on various medical techniques, patient care issues, critical care equipment, life support, ACLS (Advanced Cardiac Life Support) were presented enabling members to maintain their qualification and continuing education requirements.
"A vast pool of talent, experience, and knowledge was available and used in this, coming from the members themselves," said Mercier.
"These members demonstrated that members from different locales, tradition and normal mission operations taskings, could come together and quickly establish a unit capable, willing and ready to seamlessly integrate into the Patient Airlift Medical System which is so vital to the needs of the service, nation and world mission."
Mercier, in a report to the Adjutant General of Mississippi, showed as of Aug. 3, 2003, the unit flew 128 missions and cared for 2,018 patients.
"The men and women of the 367th crew an average of 16 missions each week as well as shouldering the responsibility of providing all ground support duties necessary with the launche and recovery of all air evacuation missions transiting Andrews," said Mercier.
"They were often the first CONUS located personnel encountered by the patients as they set foot on American soil.
It was an honor felt by all members of the squadron to be able to greet these fellow service members and say, `Welcome Home'".
Lt. Col. Phillip M. Priddy (left), Deputy Commander for the 375th Expeditionary Aeromedical Evacuation Squadron (Det 1)at Andrews Air Force Base, Maryland, and member of the Mississippi Air National Guard's 183rd AES at Thompson Field in Jackson, Miss. grabs an oxygen tank to assist in caring for one of the patients on one of his mission flights.
He is surrounded by other members of the 375th.
AF Photo Mississippi Air National Guardsman, Capt. David Strickland (right) is assigned duties as the officer-in-charge of medical equipment for the 375th EAES.
Here he ensures all medical equipment is functioning properly while inflight to Andrews Air Force Base.
AF Photo Members of the 375th EAES prepare to take aboard patients for transport to Andrews AFB, Maryland where they will receive medical care.
AF Photo 18 GUARD DETAIL, OCTOBER-D ECEMBER 2003 Guard Detail Oct-Dec 03.qxd 9/26/2003 2:56 PM Page 19 SOLDIERS IN THE NEWS Chief of Staff Army Supply Excellence Award Program Congratulations are in order for two MSARNG units that participated in the Chief of Staff Army Supply Excellence Award Program competition.
� Co G, 185th AVN in Meridian, Miss., is a winner in Category "A", MTOE Unit Level I (A) Company with Property Book.
Congratulations to Staff Sgt.
Sam McKee.
� The HQ, State Area Command (STARC) PBO Office, Jackson, Miss., was the runner-up in Level II, TDA Upper (Large).
Congratulations again to Chief Warrant Officer Four Dennis Stewart and Sgt. 1st Class Kenneth "Shorty" Gammill.
36th Philip A. Connelly Competition The Philip A. Connelly is an annual competition to determine the best Field Kitchen.
This competition is held through the seven Regions established to cover all fifty states.
Mississippi is in Region II.
Congratulations go out to Service Battery, 1st Battalion, 114th Field Artillery, Water Valley, Miss., for winning the National Guard Bureau (NGB) Region II Field Kitchen Category Reserve Component.
They will be competing for the Department of the Army (DA) Level Award on October 5, 2003, at Camp McCain, Miss.
Congratulations to Capt. Cochran, Chief Warrant Officer Three Pittman, Sgt. 1st Class Green and the entire cook section for an outstanding job.
SUPPLY EXCELLENCE AWARDS--From left are Chief Warrant Officer Four Dennis Stewart, State Area Command (STARC) Property Book Officer (PBO) winner; Sgt. 1st Class Kenneth Gammill, PBO NCO STARC; Staff Sgt.
Sam McKee, MTOE Company with PBO Award and Maj. Gen. James H. Lipscomb III, State Adjutant General.
Photo by Sgt. Maj. Bill Jones, Staff Photographer Chief of Staff Army Deployment Excellence Award ON MY COMMAND Congratulations to the 66th Troop Command for the winning of the 2002 "Chief Of Staff Army Deployment Excellence Award" Supporting Unit Small.
The evaluation was based on the support provided by the 66th Troop Command during the successful deployment of the 220th Finance Company.
in support of Operation Joint Forge, BosniaHerzegovina.
The 66th Troop Command competed against some of the top units in the nation in categories dealing with logistics deployment planning and execution.
The assistance provided by the 66th Troop Command helped to ensure that all requirements and deployment time lines were met by the 220th Finance Co.
Congratulations go to Sgt. Maj. Stamper and Master Sgt. Littrell for a job well done.
Army Award for Maintenance Excellence (AAME) Congratulations to the Army Award for Maintenance Excellence (AAME) winners in the State, Regional, National Guard Bureau Level and National Level competitions.
Listed below are the categories and winners.
Each unit and organization is to be highly commended for their efforts and hard work.
STATE AWARD: Small MTOE: 210th Finance Battalion, Jackson, M: Maj. David Jolly Medium MTOE: Headquarters and Headquarters Battery 1/114th FA, Greenwood, Miss.
Chief Warrant Officer Two Bland, Sgts. 1st Class Harris and McKay, and Staff Sgt.
Taylor Large TDA: CSMS#1, Camp Shelby, Miss: Lt. Col. Mark Prine REGIONAL AWARD: 210th Finance Battalion, Jackson, Miss.
CSMS#1, Camp Shelby, Miss.
NGB AWARD: 210th Finance Battalion, Jackson, Miss.
DEPARTMENT OF THE ARMY AWARD: 210th Finance Battalion, Jackson, Miss.
GUARD DETAIL, OCTOBER-D ECEMBER 2003 19 Guard Detail Oct-Dec 03.qxd 9/26/2003 2:56 PM Page 20 Late-Breaking News About Your B Educational Benefits New Graduate Degree Programs Offered The Mississippi National Guard is proud to announce the new graduate degree programs available through William Carey College and Belhaven College.
William Carey is offering a Master of Business Administration and Belhaven is offering a Master of Science in Management.
With these two programs, Army Guard members statewide have the opportunity to receive a Master's Degree free of cost except for books.
Because Air Guard does not offer a Tuition Assistance program similar to the Army, Air Guard members will have to pay a reduced fee to each college.
William Carey College has agreed to extend the relationship with the Mississippi National Guard with few changes.
The location of their classes will be at the AVCRAD Facility in Gulfport.
If there is enough interest, they will consider holding classes at Camp Shelby also.
Belhaven will hold classes at Jackson and Senatobia.
Both colleges need from 25-30 students at each location to justify having the classes.
There are several advantages to these programs.
The classes will be made up of only military personnel.
This works well for both the colleges and the students.
The colleges understand the demands placed on the servicemembers and compensate accordingly.
The students, because of their diversity and maturity, bring more job and life experiences into the classroom than in a traditional setting.
Both colleges are requiring the GMAT.
The fee for the exam can be reimbursed to both Army and Air Guard members.
The realistic start date for each program is January for Belhaven and February for William Carey.
The POC for these programs is Staff Sgt. Jeff Haycraft of the Education Services Office, 601-313-6355, jeffrey.haycraft@ms.ngb.army.mil.
Troops-To-Teachers Benefit If have been in the National Guard for 10 years and are currently teaching in a public school, you are eligible for a $10,000.00 bonus paid through Troops-To-Teachers.
To receive the bonus, you must agree to teach for three more years.
The bonus will be paid out over that three-year period.
The POC for this program is SSG Jeff Haycraft of the Education Services Office, 601-313-6355, jeffrey.haycraft@ms.ngb.army.mil G UARD D ETAIL Mississippi National Guard Public Affairs Office (NGMS-CSP) P. O. Box 5027, Jackson, MS 39296-5027 For Official Use Only PRSTD STD US POSTAGE PAID NIAGARA FALLS, NY PERMIT NO. 28
