National and State Perspective National Where do noxious weeds come from and how are they spread? Noxious weeds, non-native invaders, began to appear and spread with European settlement and continue to arrive today.
Most of Oregon's least desirable weeds are of Mediterranean, European, and Asian origin.
The introduction of non-native invasive plants has increased dramatically in the past decade due to the increased ease and speed of world travel and the expansion of global commerce (Cohen and Carlton 1998).
Local spread of noxious weeds can be natural with wind, water, and animals; but human activities such as, recreation, vehicle travel, and the movement of contaminated equipment, products, and livestock often greatly increase the distance and rate of dispersal.
Noxious weeds are of great significance on a national level.
For example purple loosestrife, originally introduced as an ornamental in the 1880s, is now a weed in all of the lower 48 states.
Purple loosestrife encroaches on native wetlands, rivers, streams, ponds and lakes impacting water quality and reducing the populations of 44 native plant species as well as impacting song bird, water fowl, amphibian and other wildlife habitat (Blossey 1999).
Wetlands infested with purple loosestrife often lose half of the native vegetation and it is not uncommon to have complete stands of purple loosestrife (Westbrook 1998).
Annually, $45 million in direct costs are attributed nationally to purple loosestrife.
Controlling purple loosestrife provides an estimated benefit to cost ratio of 27:1.
For every dollar spent on eradication, prevention, or control, there is an associated $27 benefit (OTA 1993).
Purple loosestrife is one example of many noxious weed problems on a national level.
Overall, noxious weeds cause an estimated $27 billion in losses to crop, pasture, and forest production in the U.S. each year (Pimentel, 1999).
They alter natural ecosystems by impacting native plant communities, watershed health, wildlife, and recreational use.
An estimated 5,000 invasive non-native weeds now occur in U.S. natural areas (Pimentel, 1999).
The Departments of Agriculture in 11 western states estimate there are 70 million acres of private, state, and federal lands infested by noxious weeds, which are increasing and spreading at an alarming rate of 12 to 14 percent each year (Asher, 1998).
The spread of noxious weeds has been described as a "biological wildfire raging out of control."
National concern about noxious weeds has recently been emphasized by the President's Executive Order 13112 on Invasive Species released February 3, 1999, (see Appendix 2) and the Plant Protection Act (PPA) signed into law on June 20, 2000.
Purple loosestrife 12 Oregon Noxious Weed Strategic Plan State Oregon has a diverse range of land use and natural resource interests including agriculture, forestry, conservation, wildlife, recreation, and urban needs.
Noxious weeds are adversely affecting all Oregonians by impacting all of these interests.
Oregon loses over $83 million annually to just 21 of the 99 state-listed noxious weeds (see figure a, below).
The true impact of all noxious weeds in Oregon may be as much as four times this amount.
Six of the 21 weeds were assessed to look at their potential impacts (see figure b, below).
If not controlled, these six weeds alone may cause an additional $54 million in future losses (Radtke 2000--see Appendix 3).
Environmental Health Invasive noxious weeds directly impact Oregon's environmental health.
An important measure of environmental health is the lack of non-native plants.
Invasion by non-native plants is considered one of the most serious threats to rare and endangered species.
Concern for invasive noxious weeds has increased dramatically due to the threats and impacts they have on natural areas.
Among the many ecological impacts are: direct exclusion and competition with native plants; negative effects to wildlife; alteration of soil chemistry and nutrient cycles; alteration of hydrology and stream flow; changes to the physical environment; and disruption and alteration of community succession (Huenneke 1996).
(Figure a) (Figure b) Oregon has a history of being a leader in the field of noxious weed management and providing successful weed control programs.
For example, the 1975 Legislature amended Oregon weed law (ORS 452) to include tansy ragwort, a widespread poisonous weed responsible for killing livestock (see Appendix 6, Table 1) and crowding out desirable forage and native plants.
Prior to successful control of tansy ragwort, there was an estimated economic loss of $5 million per year.
Due to a successful biological control program in western Oregon, and an ongoing containment program in central and eastern Oregon, impacts have been reduced to low levels.
A 1993 study estimated the economic benefit of controlling tansy ragwort to be 13:1; for every control dollar spent, $13 of benefit is derived.
(Radtke 1993).
13 State Aquatic Nuisance Species Management Plan Tansy ragwort infestation before release of biological control agents Same site five years after release of biological control agents Achievements, such as the control of tansy ragwort, are significant in maintaining Oregon's economic viability.
As natural resource stewards, Oregonians must seek opportunities to prevent the introduction and spread of new problem weeds and reduce the impacts of established noxious weed populations.
The Oregon Progress Board is responsible for maintaining a 20-year strategic plan for the state, Oregon Shines, and developing Oregon Benchmarks.
The benchmarks provide 90 indicators of economic, social and environmental health and are used to track Oregon's success in achieving Oregon Shines goals.
Existing and pending Oregon Benchmarks (OB) affected by noxious weeds include: OB 77, percentage of Oregon wetland acreage maintained or increased; OB 88, percentage of native plant species that are healthy; OB 89, the number of nuisance invasive plant or animal species established in Oregon.
Proposed and developmental benchmarks for 2001-2003 biennium include: OB 2024, the amount of intact or functional riparian vegetation found along stream and rivers; OB 2026, the condition of intertidal and near shore marine areas; OB 2027, the portion of agriculture or rangeland managed with sustainable practices.
The Oregon Progress Board also publishes a State of the Environment Report.
In this report, the number of nuisance invasive species is listed as one of 18 selected indicators of ecosystem health.
Hydrilla and many other aquatic nuisance species are serious threats to Oregon's water resources.
Aquatic weed management is also addressed in the State Aquatic Nuisance Species (ANS) Management Plan developed by Portland State University, Center for Lakes and Reservoirs.
The state ANS plan recommends specific actions needed for comprehensive management of aquatic nuisance plants and animals.
(photo courtesy of Center for Aquatic Plants, University of Florida.)
Current Management Roles and Authorities There is a need for effective and efficient statewide noxious weed management.
State, county, and federal governments are responsible for implementing and maintaining control programs.
Currently, these three entities provide different levels of management, while working towards a common objective.
Private land managers also play an 14 Oregon Noxious Weed Strategic Plan essential role in the effective management of noxious weeds.
About half of Oregon's 61 million acres are under public management and the balance is private.
Noxious weeds do not respect ownership or political boundaries.
Thus, there is a need for all resource interests to work toward common solutions for noxious weed management.
ODA Program The Oregon Department of Agriculture (ODA) Noxious Weed Control Program provides statewide leadership and coordination.
The general fund budget for the Noxious Weed Control Program is $786,000 for the 1999-2001 biennium.
This budget supports noxious weed control projects, detection and control of new invasive noxious weeds, implementation of biological control, technology transfer, education, inventory, mapping, database management, and assistance to land managers.
County Programs Organization at the local level is an important role for Oregon's weed control efforts.
County programs are the primary source of this support.
In addition to providing local assistance and implementing control projects, county programs enforce the state weed laws.
Currently however, only 15 of Oregon's 36 counties have active weed control programs.
Overall spending for noxious weed management by county programs during 2000 is estimated at $2.6 million.
State and Federal Agencies State and federal agencies manage roughly half of Oregon lands.
As major land stewards, these agencies exercise a significant role in the implementation of effective weed management statewide.
Many state and federal agencies have developed cooperative partnerships with ODA and county weed control programs to implement a variety of control activities.
Federal land management agencies currently have an estimated annual budget of $2.25 million for noxious weed control activities in Oregon.
State agencies (excluding ODA) estimate current spending for noxious weed control at $250,000 per year.
Private Land Managers Individuals also play a significant role in noxious weed management.
Landowners, organizations, and citizens participate in weed control activities, weed boards, and assist by reporting new infestations.
Most Land Ownership in Oregon Private ownership Public Ownership Oregon Department of Agriculture (ODA) 1999-01 Biennium In the course of the 1999-01 biennium, a number of new programs and priority projects arose.
The development and administration of a new grant program enabled the Oregon State Weed Board (OSWB) to monetarily support weed control efforts throughout the state.
Small broomrape, which has the potential to disrupt agricultural production, was surveyed, inventoried, and quarantined.
Kudzu, an aggressive invasive vine, was found in limited distribution in Oregon.
Early detection of kudzu enabled the program to respond quickly with eradication and statewide awareness.
15 importantly, they can promote and use sustainable practices, and advocate the preservation of the natural environment.
Roles and Authorities A number of state and federal agencies, counties, and universities are actively involved in noxious weed control.
The major cooperators in noxious weed management are listed along with a brief description of their roles in Appendix 6.
Appendix 6, Table 2: Roles and Responsibilities, State Department of Agriculture and Counties Appendix 6, Table 3: Roles and Responsibilities, Universities and Research Centers Appendix 6, Table 4: Roles and Responsibilities, Oregon State Natural Resource Agencies Appendix 6, Table 5: Roles and Responsibilities, Federal Land Management Agencies Laws, regulations, and policies that grant governing agencies authority to conduct weed control activities are summarized in Appendix 4.
16 Oregon Noxious Weed Strategic Plan
