Minor Project Permit Applicant's Handbook Chapter 1 A. B. C. D. Chapter 2 Frequently Asked Questions About the Minor Permit Application Process 1.
What is a Minor Project Permit? ................................
2.
How do I know if my project needs an Agency permit? ..............
3.
Where can I obtain a JIF or permit application? ....................
4.
How long does it take to obtain a Minor Project Permit? ............
3 5.
Why does the permit application form ask so many questions? ........
6.
Can the Agency ask for more information than the application requests? .........................................
7.
What does the Agency do when it receives an application? ...........
8.
What can an applicant do to help assure a timely decision? ...........
9.
What can applicants do to design approvable projects? ..............
Chapter 3 Application Instructions for the Minor Project Permit .........................
7-18 Chapter 4 Tips on Drawing Lot Lines and Site Plans ...................................
19 Sample Site Plan Map ...................................................
20 The Adirondack Park ...............................................
The Adirondack Park Agency ........................................
Statutes Administered by the Agency .................................
1 Resources Available to Applicants ....................................
1 1 -2 2
3 3 3 -4 4 4 5 6 6
Minor Project Permit-Applicant's Handbook November 2000
Chapter 1 A.
The Adirondack Park
The Adirondack Park was created by the Legislature in 1892 in response to public concerns about the State's water supply and the over-harvesting of timber.
Today, the Park includes all or parts of 12 counties and is 6 million acres in size.
State-owned lands, approximately 2.3 million acres (38%), are constitutionally-protected Adirondack Forest Preserve lands.
The remaining 3.7 million acres (62%) are private lands devoted primarily to residential and commercial development, forestry, agriculture, and open space recreation.
B.
The Adirondack Park Agency
The Adirondack Park Agency Act was passed by the New York State Legislature in 1971 and created the Adirondack Park Agency to function as an independent, bi-partisan state agency.
It is charged with developing long-range land use plans for the public and private lands within the Adirondack Park.
The Adirondack Park State Land Master Plan was adopted by the Agency and signed by the Governor in 1972.
In 1973, the Adirondack Park Land Use and Development Plan pertaining to the Park's private lands was adopted into law by the Legislature.
The ultimate purpose of the Agency is to protect and preserve the important natural and man-made resources of the Park while assuring well planned development.
C.
Statutes Administered by the Agency
The Agency administers three state statutes within the Park: the Adirondack Park Agency Act (1971), the Wild, Scenic and Recreational Rivers Act (1972), and the Freshwater Wetlands Act (1975).
Under the Adirondack Park Agency Act (Executive Law Article 27), among other requirements, a permit is required for certain new land use and development and subdivisions of land that occur within certain designated "land use areas" as shown on the Adirondack Park Land Use and Development Plan Map.
Private lands are in six categories: Hamlet, Low Intensity Use, Moderate Intensity Use, Rural Use, Resource Management, and Industrial Use.
A permit is also required for subdivisions and development in designated "critical environmental areas," including sites that have wetlands, are at elevations of 2,500 feet or more, or are within 1/8 mile of certain Forest Preserve lands.
Minimum shoreline building setbacks, minimum lot widths and vegetative cutting restrictions apply to all navigable lakes, ponds, rivers and streams.
The shoreline restrictions apply whether or not an Agency permit is required for new land uses and development or new subdivisions.
On-site wastewater treatment (septic) systems must meet the 100 foot setback from all lakes, ponds, rivers
and streams, including intermittent streams.
Under the Freshwater Wetlands Act (Environmental Conservation Law, Article 24), permits are required for certain regulated activities on private and State lands within freshwater wetlands and their 100 foot adjacent areas.
Those activities include dredging, filling or draining wetlands; erecting structures; building roads; clearcutting vegetation on more than 3 acres; and new land use and development or subdivision.
Permits are also required for installing on-site wastewater treatment systems in a wetland or within 100 feet of one.
Under the Wild, Scenic, and Recreational Rivers System Act (Environmental Conservation Law Article 15, Title 27), a permit is required for certain new land use and development or subdivision of land on private lands generally within one-quarter mile of designated wild, scenic and recreational river areas located within the Adirondack Park and generally outside of areas classified as Hamlet and Moderate Intensity Use.
In its review of applications, the Agency works closely with other regulating agencies such as the New York State Department of Environmental Conservation, the Office of Parks, Recreation and Historic Preservation, the United States Army Corps of Engineers and local governments.
D.
Resources Available To Applicants
Copies of the following documents are available at the Agency headquarters on Route 86 in Ray Brook at no charge: Adirondack Park Agency Act Adirondack Park Agency Rules and Regulations Adirondack Park State Land Master Plan Adirondack Park Land Use and Development Plan Map and State Land Map A Citizen's Guide to Adirondack Park Agency Land Use Regulations Electronic copies of the Adirondack Park Agency Act and the Agency's Rules and Regulations may also be found at the Agency's website at www.sps.state.ny.us.
Copies of floodplains maps are usually available for review at town and village halls and official wetlands maps are available at county offices.
Chapter 2 Frequently Asked Questions About the Minor Project Permit 1.
What is a Minor Project Permit? A Minor Project Permit is required for certain regulated activities within the Adirondack Park depending on the location or land use area.
A minor a) the division of land into two lots, parcels or sites, usually for the lease or gift; b) the construction of a single family dwelling on an existing or new c) the installation of a mobile home on an existing or new lot.
2.
How do I know if my project requires an Agency permit? You can call, write or visit the Agency's Jurisdictional Inquiry Office at the Agency office in Ray Brook.
The staff can give general advice regarding a project and specific information regarding Agency regulations.
However, the only determination binding upon the Agency is one made in writing based upon a specific written project proposal from you.
To obtain a written binding jurisdictional determination, complete and return a Jurisdictional Inquiry Form.
If the Agency's written determination states that the proposed activities are jurisdictional and require an Agency permit, a permit application will be sent to you.
3.
Where can I obtain a Jurisdictional Inquiry Form (JIF) or permit application? JIFs and permit applications can be obtained at the Adirondack Park Agency offices, at Route 86, Ray Brook, New York.
You can pick up the application in person weekdays between 8:30 and 5:00 or you can call the Agency at (518) 891-4050 and ask that the JIF or application be mailed to you.
These forms may also be obtained in some municipal offices.
In the future, these will be available on the Agency's website.
4.
How long does it take to obtain a Minor Project Permit? The Agency tries to make a decision on an application as quickly as it can.
However, by statute, the Agency has up to 45 calendar days from the time an application is determined to be "complete" to review the permit application and reach a decision.
When the initial application is received at Agency offices, it is date-stamped, beginning a maximum 15 calendar-day review period for staff to determine if the application is "complete."
An application is determined to be complete when all the application questions have been fully and accurately answered and all the required attachments have been completed and submitted.
If the initial application is deemed complete, the day it was datestamped in begins the maximum 45-day decision review period.
If approvable, the Agency will issue a permit within the 45 days.
the boundaries of project can be: purposes of sale, lot; and
If a variance of approval standards is required, or staff recommends disapproval of the project as a result of the application review, a public hearing will be scheduled.
This extends the deadline for a final Agency decision on the application.
The Agency cannot disapprove a permit application unless it first holds a public hearing.
The review process can take longer if an application is deemed "incomplete."
Within 15 calendar days of receiving an application, the Agency must notify the applicant by certified mail if it is "incomplete."
The "Notice of Incomplete Permit Application" includes a concise statement of the information required to complete the application.
If the Agency fails to mail such notice within such 15-day period, the application is automatically deemed "complete."
The day the Agency receives the requested information from the applicant begins a new 15 calendar-day period for Agency review of the additional information to determine completeness.
If the additional information does not complete the application, a second notice of incomplete application will be sent via certified mail within the 15-day period.
If the additional information received is determined by the Agency to "complete" the application, the maximum 45-day decision review period begins the day the application is deemed complete.
5.
Why does the permit application form ask so many questions? The determination of Agency jurisdiction and the conditions under which a permit can legally be issued must be assessed under all three statutes administered by the Agency.
These statutes require the Agency to conduct a comprehensive review of many different development considerations.
For development or subdivisions which require an Agency permit under the Adirondack Park Agency Act, the Agency must first determine that the project would: a) be consistent with the Adirondack Park Land Use and Development Plan; b) be compatible with the character description and purposes, policies and objectives of the land use area where the project would be located; c) be consistent with the overall intensity guidelines (building densities) for the land use areas involved; d) comply with the shoreline restrictions if applicable; and e) not have an adverse impact upon the natural scenic, aesthetic, ecological, wildlife, historic, recreational, or open space resources of the Park.
The application asks questions to develop a clear understanding of the following: the applicant's legal interest in the project property; the location of the project site; the development and subdivision history of the site; the applicant's proposal; existing site conditions (e.g., surface waters, wetlands, slopes, soils) that would affect any proposed construction or other development; and prior contact between applicant and Agency and other reviewing agencies.
6.
Can the Agency ask for more information than the application requests? Yes.
The Agency has authority to request additional information from the applicant beyond that requested in the application with regard to any relevant matter related to the proposed project.
Additional information is generally requested for Minor Project applications when the scope of the project is unclear, the project site has difficult conditions or sensitive resources, or the history of the site is unclear.
7.
What does the Agency do when it receives an application? When an application is received at the Agency office, it is date-stamped and an Agency project review specialist in the Regulatory Programs Division is assigned to review the project application.
You will receive a Project Notice Form verifying the received date and the person assigned.
The project review specialist will coordinate with the Agency's legal staff to clarify any legal issues and with Agency Resource Analysis and Scientific Services staff to assess natural resource and engineering considerations, such as shoreline restrictions, wetlands, soils, protected plant and animal species, and on-site wastewater treatment system designs.
The project review specialist may call the applicant to clarify information contained in the application.
If the application is incomplete, the project review specialist will send a certified letter listing the information required to complete the application.
Once the project review specialist determines that the application is complete, a maximum 45-day review period begins during which the Agency must approve the project and issue a permit or direct it to public hearing.
The project review specialist will schedule an on-site visit with the applicant to review conditions on the site of the proposed land use and development or subdivision.
The project review specialist may suggest ways in which the applicant can modify the project so that it meets minimum standards and guidelines, is more compatible with the land use area it is within and avoids undue adverse impacts on the natural, scenic, ecological, wildlife and other resources of the park.
If approvable, the project review specialist will develop a permit that: explains Agency jurisdiction, makes findings of fact about the project history, site conditions, the proposed land use and development, analyzes potential adverse impacts, and, if necessary, contains specific conditions that will help assure that the completed project is consistent with the Adirondack Park Land Use and Development Plan and all applicable rules and regulations.
8.
What can an applicant do to help assure a timely decision on their application? An applicant should fill out the application form completely and accurately by following the application instructions.
An applicant can also promptly provide any requested additional information that helps to clarify the proposed project.
The more thorough and accurate the information submitted, the quicker the Agency can reach a decision.
If you obtain professional help to conduct any required site analyses and tests (e.g., wetland boundary flagging, soils and slopes tests for wastewater treatment systems) and can provide the necessary detailed site information, the review period will be shorter.
If you need site analysis help from Agency staff, you must be prepared to wait to complete your application until that field work can be scheduled.
At any time during the application review process, the Agency may require that supplemental information be submitted.
If during this process, an applicant substantially changes the project from that described in the original application, the Agency will deem the revision a new application and a new review period will commence.
9.
What can applicants do to design approvable projects? Applicants can use available resources such as "A Citizen's Guide to Adirondack Park Agency Land Use Regulations" and the Adirondack Park Rules and Regulations or seek professional assistance to design projects that meet the approval criteria.
Above all, applicants should be careful to select areas on their properties that are most suitable for the proposed use or development.
In general, residential building sites that are relatively flat, are not located in or near wetlands or floodplains, have well-drained deep soils, have easy access to private or public roads, and have existing vegetation that can be preserved to screen the proposed development will more likely be approved and with few permit conditions.
In contrast, projects with difficult site conditions may not be approvable or, if approved, will result in permits with many conditions and, possibly, require modification.
Difficult sites are also usually more expensive to develop.
CHAPTER 3 INSTRUCTIONS FOR FILLING OUT THE MINOR PROJECT PERMIT APPLICATION These instructions are intended to assist applicants in filling out the Minor Project Permit Application.
The text describes what information is needed and why the Agency requests this information.
The Section numbers refer to the sections on the permit application.
If you do not know if your project requires an Agency permit, call the Agency's Jurisdictional Inquiry Office at (518) 891-4050 for initial assistance, complete a Jurisdictional Inquiry Form (JIF) and submit it for a written determination.
If your project requires a permit, you will receive a letter saying so and describing any shoreline restrictions and other standards that apply as a matter of law and you will be sent a permit application.
Remember, it is a violation to undertake a project which requires an Agency permit before that permit is issued and recorded.
Undertaking a project includes such activities as constructing a driveway, clearing trees for a building or wastewater treatment system location, drilling a well and similar sitepreparation activities.
However, property surveys, soils testing, and similar activities to prepare the application are allowed without a permit.
Other State agency or local government permits may be required.
A municipal building permit or a NYS Department of Environmental Conservation permit does not substitute for an Agency permit nor does an Agency permit satisfy the requirement for other local, state or federal permits.
Section 1.
Project Sponsor(s): person or persons who make application for Agency approval, often Agency regulations require the project sponsor(s) to have legal interest sponsor is often the landowner, but may also be the person who has property.
The project sponsor(s) is the referred to as the "applicant."
in the property.
The project contracted to buy or lease the
Provide the name, address, day-time telephone numbers, and FAX number (if available) for each project sponsor.
Section 2.
Current Property Landowner(s) legal owner(s) of the project site is required for a complete application.
the names of all persons whose names appear on the current deed of record to If the current property landowners are not the project sponsors, they must s" and sign the application.
If a person on the deed is deceased, this should be
Identification of the Accordingly, provide the subject property.
become "co-applicant indicated.
Section 3.
Project Sponsor's Legal Interest in Project Site
You must have a legal interest in the project property in order to apply for a permit.
A legal interest means that you must currently own the property, have an option to buy the property (such as a signed purchase agreement) or have a signed lease to use and develop the property.
ATTACHMENT A - Copy of Deed and Purchase Contract or Lease You must attach and label as "Attachment A" a complete copy of the current recorded deed for the project site, with date, book and page of recordation with the County Clerk.
If you are the project sponsor and not the current landowner, you must attach relevant portions of an executed purchase contract or agreement to lease the property in order to establish your legal interest in the project property.
You may "black out" on the submitted copy sensitive information such as the purchase or lease price.
Section 4.
Prior Agency Contact
Fill this in if you, your representative or an earlier owner have had any previous contact with Agency staff concerning this project property.
List any permits, jurisdictional determinations, enforcement cases or wetland boundary flagging by the Agency.
Notice of prior Agency contacts and actions relating to this project site or any related project will help Agency staff review your project.
Past Agency permits may have allocated building rights or limited development.
The Agency may have files from previous applications that help clarify the property history and past development activities.
In some instances, a new permit may not be needed if a permit previously issued for the site can be amended.
Note that Agency regulations prohibit project review and issuing a permit if there is an unresolved violation at the project site.
Section 5.
Property Location
The exact location of the project site must be provided.
If the project site is located in more than one municipality or county, identify both municipalities and both counties.
The Tax Map Identification Number can be found on your Real Property Tax Bill for town and school taxes.
It is a three-part hyphenated number that looks like this example: 40.16-3-09.
The number and a copy of the tax map can also be obtained by contacting the Town Assessor's Office or the County Real Property Tax Service Office in the county where the project site is located.
Information about surface waterbodies is important because the Adirondack Park Agency Act establishes restrictions on shoreline subdivisions and development.
Section 6.
Property Site History
Fully answer all questions in this section and provide the required attachments as it is important for the Agency to be able to review all land transactions that involved the project site back through and including May 22, 1973, the enactment date of the Adirondack Park Land Use and Development Plan.
The Agency uses this information along with the "land use area" classification of the site to calculate the "overall intensity guidelines" (building density requirements) governing the project site.
Different approval criteria exist for each type of designated land use area, including allowable types of uses, building densities, average lot sizes, shoreline lot widths and setbacks.
The Adirondack Park Land Use and Development Plan Map classifies all private lands in the Park into six categories: Hamlet, Low Intensity Use, Moderate Intensity Use, Rural Use, Resource Management and Industrial Use.
Certain "grandfathering" clauses apply to certain land use and development that existed prior to the August 1, 1973 (the effective date of the Adirondack Park Land Use and Development Plan).
While these "pre-existing" uses and development are not subject to Agency review, certain expansions are.
Special grandfathering provisions were also established for single family dwellings on existing vacant lots and for conveyances of land by gift, devise or inheritance to immediate family members.
Agency staff will discuss any applicable "grandfathering" provisions with you.
The project history information is also used to determine whether any violations related to the project property are outstanding, i.e., whether the required Agency permits were obtained for jurisdictional subdivisions or new land uses and development that occurred on the property after May 22, 1973.
ATTACHMENT B - Property Deeds Back Through May 22, 1973 Copies of property deeds can be obtained by contacting the county clerk's office in the county where the project site is located and may be attached to a property abstract.
The property deeds describe the property boundaries and the property owners and the date of conveyances.
ATTACHMENT C - Property Boundary Map Attach and label a full scale copy of a survey map, the current real property tax map, or a topographic quadrangle map clearly showing the property boundaries of the project site and any tax parcel or lot that the project site was part of on May 22, 1973.
This map is used to ascertain the exact project location and the boundaries of the project parcel.
Since a landowner may own many different parcels within the same town or county, it is important that the project site be precisely identified.
This map is also used by Agency staff to find the project site when they make a site visit.
The Agency also uses the property boundaries to determine if shoreline restrictions apply.
7.
Historic Preservation Resources
Sections 801 and 805(4) of the APA Act provide for the general protection of historic resources in the Adirondack Park; a separate state law also requires the Agency to protect historical and archeological resources.
In coordination with the NYS Office of Parks, Recreation and Historic Preservation (OPRHP) staff, on-site structures which are 50 years old or more must be assessed for historic structure eligibility and potential historic significance and to minimize project impacts.
ATTACHMENT D - Photos of Buildings Greater Than 50 Years Old If the project site or property has any major buildings (e.g., houses, barns, commercial buildings) that are more than 50 years old, attach and label, as ATTACHMENT D, separate sheets of 8-1/2" X 11" paper with labeled photographs of each such building.
The photos must have been taken within the last two years and should show all sides of the building(s) and the setting around those buildings.
Show where the photos were taken on your site plan map.
If any historic structure will be removed, relocated, reconstructed or significantly altered, please provide detailed plans.
The Agency's Historic Preservation Officer will conduct an initial review of the photographs and determine whether additional coordination with the NYS Office of Parks, Recreation and Historic Preservation (OPRHP) is required.
The Agency requests this information because buildings that are more than 50 years old may be eligible for inclusion on the State or National Register of Historic Places.
The Agency is required to contact OPRHP regarding any such buildings that may be destroyed, relocated or significantly altered as a result of new construction nearby.
If the project site or adjacent areas contain any structures or districts which are listed or deemed eligible to be listed in the State or National Register of Historic Places, the project will be referred to the OPRHP, under section 14.09 of the State Historic Preservation Act of 1980.
State and federal historic property laws do not prohibit the removal, relocation, or reconstruction of private buildings but may affect the nature or extent of Agency action with respect to an applicant's proposal.
OPRHP staff may visit your property to determine if any buildings do qualify for inclusion on the state or national registers.
They may suggest ways in which you could carry out your project so that the building and site could retain those characteristics that make the building or property eligible.
Most single family dwellings are not candidates for inclusion on the register.
To be candidates, buildings must usually be of a unique architectural character and be relatively intact or must have had some particular significant event related to them or were designed by a notable architect.
In addition, your project site may have significant archaeologic or landscape resources which have already been surveyed or OPRHP may require that you have an archaeologic site survey conducted on your property.
The Agency consults with OPRHP in assessing potential impacts on these archaeologic and landscape resources.
Section 8.
Proposed Subdivision of Land
If your project involves the subdivision of land, answer all questions in this section.
If the project does not involve subdivision of land, answer NO to the first question and go on to Section 9.
If your project involves subdivision into three or more lots, call or write the Agency to obtain a different permit application.
"Subdivision" means the division of land into two lots or sites for the purposes of sale, lease, license or gift.
The number of lots includes any lot being retained by the current landowner(s).
The "Parent Lot" is the lot that is to be divided.
"Lot #1" and "Lot #2" are the resulting subdivided lots.
"Subdivision into sites" means the proposed construction of an additional principal building (single family dwelling or mobile home) on a parent lot already containing such a building, even if the property is not being conveyed or subdivided into lots.
ATTACHMENT E - Proposed Deed Covenants, Restrictions and Easements Provide this Attachment only if you are proposing to include language in a deed that would create easements over the land to be conveyed or retained or would impose development restrictions on the property being conveyed.
This oftentimes addresses the use of common property such as roads, beaches, docks or water systems.
If a parcel is to be conveyed as a non-building lot, provide a draft deed with appropriate covenants against building and, if relevant, require a "merger" of lots.
This information is important because proposed deed restrictions and easements must be consistent with the Adirondack Park Agency Act and Adirondack Park Land Use and Development Plan.
The restrictions may also affect how the Agency applies the overall intensity guidelines and shoreline restrictions to the property being conveyed or to the property that the conveyed land may be "merged" with.
Section 9.
New Land Use and Development
In general terms, new land use and development is any use or development that is not a pre-existing use (existing as of August 1, 1973 and not abandoned).
The term is defined under Section 802(28) of the APA Act as include any construction or other activity which materially changes the use or appearance of land or a structure or the intensity of use of land or a structure.
Check the "Yes" box if you are proposing: 1.
any new land use or development or a material change in the existing use, appearance or intensity of use of land or a structure; or 2.
construction of any kind.
Note that unless the parcel or lot to be conveyed is deed-restricted as non-building, a suitable future single family dwelling construction area must be identified and shown on any vacant parcel or lot being conveyed, including those conveyed by gift.
If you checked the "Yes" box, check all the boxes that apply to any proposed construction on any lot to be retained.
If a building lot is to be conveyed, check those boxes that would most likely apply to the construction of a future single family dwelling on that lot.
If your land use or construction activity
is not described by one of the listed choices, write in the activity(ies) next to the box(es) marked "other."
Section 10.
Shoreline Protection If the project property has shoreline, answer all questions in this section.
If there is no shoreline, answer "No" to the first question and go to Section 11.
Wetlands.
"Shoreline" means that line at which land adjoins the navigable (by boat or canoe) waters of lakes, ponds, rivers and streams at the mean high water mark (MHWM ) (or the average of the annual high water mark).
There are shoreline restrictions in Section 806 of the Adirondack Park Agency Act and in Part 575 of the Agency's regulations.
There are also restrictions that may apply if your project site activities will occur within one-quarter mile of a designated Wild, Scenic or Recreational River.
In general terms, these restrictions impose minimum lot widths, minimum setbacks for principal buildings and accessory structures from the shoreline, limitations on the amount of vegetation that can be removed from shoreline areas, and setbacks for on-site wastewater treatment systems.
If your project site has shoreline and you propose construction of any kind within 200 feet of the shoreline, you may be asked to have the MHWM established in order to have a complete application.
At the applicant's request, Agency staff will determine the MHWM at the project site or you can have the determination made by a NYS-licensed surveyor.
If you are unsure of navigability, please contact Agency staff.
The minimum structure setbacks by each land use area are measured horizontally to the closest point of the shoreline to any structure greater than 100 square feet in area including attached decks.
There are exceptions for docks and boathouses only.
These restrictions are intended to protect the scenic, natural appearance of the shoreline by limiting the removal of trees and shrubs and by restricting the placement of structures and vegetation clearing so new development is not highly visible from the adjacent waterbody.
The restrictions also help to protect water quality and the existing shorelines from erosion and pollution.
Although some streams may not be navigable or may not flow all year-round, the absorption or leach component of any on-site wastewater treatment system must be set back a minimum of 100 feet.
This 100 foot setback is increased to 200 feet where soils are coarse sands with a percolation rate less than 3 minutes/inch.
If the project site is subject to flooding or occurs within a federally designated floodplain, you will be required to determine the floodplain elevation and meet floodproofing requirements for a complete application.
Section 11.
Wetlands Wetlands means a commonly referred located adjacent to which case there is ny land annually subject to periodic or continual inundation by water and to as a bog, swamp or marsh, and which is either one-acre or more in size or is a permanent body of water with which there is a free interchange of water, in no size limit.
Wetlands are protected because they perform many important functions, including helping to prevent flood damage and providing stormwater control by slowing stormwater runoff and temporarily storing water and stabilizing shorelines; providing habitat for wildlife, including rare and endangered species, by providing food sources and places to nest and rest; protecting water resources and watersheds through sediment control and treatment of pollution by natural processes; providing spawning and nursery grounds for many types of fish; providing many important areas for hunting, birdwatching, photographing, and other recreational opportunities; and providing opportunities for scientific research, visual variety and open space, and educational benefits.
If there h as w e should offices are no wetlands, answer "No" to the first question and go to Section 12.
If the project property tlands, answer all questions in this section.
If you do not know if you have wetlands, you check the official Agency wetlands maps at Agency headquarters in Ray Brook or at county before submitting your application.
If a project site has wetlands and the new land use or development is proposed in or within 200 feet of the them, the wetland boundaries must be located at the site and shown on the site plan for a complete application.
At the request of a landowner or an applicant who has signed a purchase contract or lease agreement, Agency staff will confirm the presence and determine the boundaries of any wetlands at the project site.
Agency staff can offer you suggestions on how your project might be modified to avoid or limit wetland impacts.
ATTACHMENT F - Wetlands Impact Analysis and Mitigation Plan If, Agency staff determine that the project's wetland impacts cannot be avoided or substantially minimized, then a mitigation plan that compensates for the impacts to the wetlands will be required for a complete application and will become part of ATTACHMENT F.
The plan will be reviewed in accordance with the Agency's "Compensatory Wetland Mitigation Guidelines" (available, upon request, from the Agency).
Provide this Attachment only if there are existing wetlands on or adjacent to the project site and the regulated activities will adversely impact the wetlands.
If your project will cause impacts to existing wetlands, describe in detail why the impacts are unavoidable and how your project design minimized wetland impacts to the maximum extent practicable.
Section 12.
On-site Individual Wastewater Treatment System If municipal or community sewers are not available or proposed for use, you must identify on the project site plan (on each lot, if subdividing) a specific location for an individual on-site wastewater treatment system, including a 100% replacement area, if your project will: a) expand an existing residence or replace an existing on-site individual wastewater treatment system; b) construct a single family dwelling or place a mobile home on an existing vacant lot; or c) create vacant building lots for conveyance.
12.a.
If an on-site individual wastewater treatment system will not be constructed as part of the project, check the "No" box under 12.a. and go to Section 14 Other Governmental Reviews.
If your project will expand or replace an existing on-site individual wastewater treatment system or construct a new one, check the "Yes" box and go to 12.b.
12.b.
Provide the number of bedrooms for each existing and proposed residence on the project site.
The number of bedrooms is used to determine the size of the wastewater treatment system using the New York State Department of Health standards along with the analysis of the soil and site.
If selling a vacant building lot, assume a four-bedroom dwelling will be constructed.
12.c.
Provide the appropriate answer based on whether the deep-hole test pit was dug on the project site at the location of the proposed wastewater treatment system.
Proper location and system design are necessary to protect ground and surface water quality and to better ensure long-term functioning of the system.
Agency staff, upon request, or a qualified soils scientist or engineer must assess the slope of the natural ground and the soils and determine the seasonal high groundwater level and depth to bedrock at the location of all proposed on-site wastewater treatment systems.
You must arrange for this to be done and submit the results as part of your application.
The components of the new systems must meet current NYS Department of Health requirements and Agency Guidelines, including a minimum horizontal setback of the absorption or leach field of 100 feet to any water body, wetland or well.
If requested, an Agency soil scientist will perform a soils analysis for you.
However, you may be required to provide for a back-hoe and operator to be available at the site at the time the Agency soil scientist is scheduled to visit the site.
Scheduling for the digging of test pits must be arranged with staff well in advance.
12.d.
Select the appropriate answer based on the deep-hole test pit results.
If the deep test pit did not reveal high seasonal groundwater, bedrock or impermeable soils within 48 inches of the existing grade in the proposed location of the proposed wastewater treatment systems, then an experienced contractor can prepare detailed plans and install a conventional wastewater treatment system with the bottom of absorption trenches 18 to 24 inches below existing ground level.
However, if the deep test pit did reveal high seasonal groundwater, bedrock or impermeable soils within 48 inches of the existing grade in the proposed location of the proposed system, then an engineer licensed in the State of New York must prepare detailed plans for the proposed shallow absorption trench or other acceptable wastewater treatment systems, oversee the installation, and certify installation to the Agency according to the approved plans.
An "alternative system" (other than conventional absorption trenches and beds) may also require NYS Department of Health review and approval.
A list of professional engineers who practice in the Adirondack Park is available on request.
If a proposed system cannot meet the minimum 100 foot horizontal setback from a waterbody or regulated wetland, a variance application must also be submitted with details prepared by a NYS licensed professional engineer, for a complete application.
ATTACHMENT G. - Contractor Prepared Wastewater Treatment System Plans If your project will expand, replace or construct a new conventional wastewater treatment system, provide as ATTACHMENT G detailed plans prepared by a contractor experienced in installing such systems.
ATTACHMENT H. - Licensed Engineer Prepared Wastewater Treatment System Plans If your project will involve installing a shallow absorption trench or "alternative" wastewater treatment system, provide as ATTACHMENT H detailed plans prepared by an engineer licensed in the State of New York.
Section 13.
Site Plan Map or Subdivision Plat Provide ATTACHMENT I. Site Plan or Subdivision Plat if you are subdividing the property or proposing construction activities on any lot or parcel that is proposed in this application.
If you are proposing a two-lot subdivision, the proposed site plan or subdivision plat must show existing and proposed development on both lots or sites.
Label existing and proposed structures, roads and driveways.
Use cross-hatching to highlight new structures and facilities identified in Sections 6-12.
Do not use colors as they do not photocopy.
On the site plan/subdivision plat show the dimensions of property boundary lines and proposed lot lines, locations and dimensions of all proposed buildings and accessory structures, and the dimensions of all setbacks from roads, waterbodies, wetlands and property lines.
The scaled Site Plan or Subdivision Plat is required for each application.
It can be the most useful tool in locating suitable building sites and in describing what an applicant proposes to do with the project property.
It shows the location of existing and proposed development in relationship to existing property lines, proposed lot lines and existing natural features on the property.
Showing the dimensions of all buildings, structures and setbacks is very important in determining compliance with minimum lot sizes and shoreline restrictions.
Applicants can prepare the map themselves, or use professional assistance, such as a surveyor, architect, landscape architect or engineer.
If an applicant prepares the site plan map, they should read Chapter 4 in this handbook, entitled "Tips on Drawing Lot Lines and Site Plans."
An applicant may be asked to have a surveyor licensed in the State of New York prepare the Site Plan Map/Subdivision Plat if the lot configuration and site constraints (e.g., shoreline, wetlands, steep slopes, poor soils) dictate the precise siting of the proposed dwelling, accessory structures or wastewater treatment system.
Such site plans will require site topography to be shown by two-foot contours in the areas of proposed development.
Section 14.
Other Governmental Reviews 14.a.
Indicate whether you have contacted the municipality concerning your proposed project prior to submitting this application.
ATTACHMENT J - Completed Local Government Notice Form.
Attach as ATTACHMENT J - a copy of the completed Local Government Notice Form.
Submit the Local Government Notice form (last page of this application) to the municipality in which your project is located and have it filled out and signed by an appropriate official (e.g., Zoning Administrator, Building Inspector, Planning Board Chairman).
It is preferable for completeness and accuracy, to have this form completed by the professional employed by the municipality, or the Planning Board Chairman.
Please read the form for instructions.
The local government should be given the same project plans that are provided to the Agency.
The Agency will not approve a project which has been denied a local permit or which is a prohibited use under local zoning requirements and other local laws or ordinances.
The Agency will also recognize community goals expressed in a formally adopted master plan.
The project should be designed to meet the regulatory requirements of other involved agencies.
ATTACHMENT K - Municipal Approval Documents Attach as ATTACHMENT K a copy of all municipal or county documents showing that the project has been or will be approved (e.g., permits, letters of approval, meeting minutes) if approval(s) is (are) required from the local government.
14.b.
Indicate in the chart whether any other state or federal agencies have been contacted concerning your project.
ATTACHMENT L - Copies of Other Agency Permits or Determinations Attach as ATTACHMENT L, copies of all permits, approvals or determinations received from any other state or federal agencies.
Be advised that application for and receipt of an Agency permit does not substitute for other required local, state and federal permits.
Do not assume that one agency will necessarily inform another agency about your project.
The following agencies may become involved in your project will involve certain activities (this is a partial list intended for illustration and information): The NYS Department of Health, (Regional or County offices) if proposing alternate systems to conventional wastewater treatment systems.
The NYS Department of Transportation, (County Resident Engineer) if proposing a new driveway entrance onto a state highway.
The NYS Department of Environmental Conservation (Region 5 or 6 offices), if working in or disturbing the bed or banks of streams, rivers, ponds or lakes or clearing, grading, or grubbing more than five acres of land or applying pesticides.
The NYS Office of Parks, Recreation and Historic Preservation, if buildings 50 years or older that will be affected by the project or the property has the potential to contain important archeological sites.
The U.S. Army Corps of Engineers (Troy or Buffalo), if affecting wetlands or other surface water bodies by grading, filling, excavating, draining or constructing retaining walls.
The Lake George Park Commission if constructing roads, dwellings, docks, or boathouses within the Lake George Park or if requiring a stormwater permit.
Section 15.
Authorized Contact Person Answer only if you decide to have someone else act on your behalf before the Agency.
All contact regarding your application will then be directed to your designated Authorized Representative.
It is not necessary to have an Authorized Representative; most project sponsors for minor projects do not.
Some people designate a surveyor, architect, real estate agent or lawyer.
Section 16.
Authorization and Signatures Signatures must be provided from each landowner named on the deed of record; signatures must also be provided from all the project sponsors listed in Section 1.
(if not the landowners); and the Authorized Contact Person, if designated in Section 15.
Review of the application will not begin until all required signatures are provided.
Chapter 4 TIPS ON DRAWING LOT LINES AND SITE PLANS ABOUT LOT LINES When subdividing land for building lots, locating and drawing the final lot lines should be done only after locating good access and building locations on each lot, including appropriate areas for wastewater treatment and water supply systems.
The final lot lines should accommodate the proposed development areas and meet minimum land use area requirements such as minimum lot size, shoreline restrictions, and highway setbacks.
The project review specialist can better understand and review your project if proposed lot lines and driveway, house, and wastewater treatment locations are marked with wooden stakes or flagging prior to the scheduled site visit.
TIPS ON MAKING A SITE PLAN MAP Use a copy of an existing survey map as a base map for your site plan if one is available or use a tax map at a large enough scale to clearly show the proposed development locations and details as specified in the application form.
Make the map as large as possible.
Recommended scales are 1" = 20', 1" = 50' or 1" = 100'.
If the project property is so large that a plan at these scales would be larger than 2 feet by 3 feet, provide two maps, one map showing the entire project property at a smaller scale (e.g., 1" = 400') and the other showing the development area(s) at a scale of 1" = 20' or 1" = 50' .
It is important that all the development features are drawn to scale to help demonstrate whether there is adequate room on the site for the proposed development, including meeting required setbacks from shorelines, wetlands and highways.
See the following Sample Subdivision Plat for a two-lot subdivision.
Lot 1 has an existing single family dwelling and Lot 2 will contain a new single family dwelling.
A site plan for development of one lot would be similar.
