Chapter 1 Introduction Wetlands Task Force Representatives Joe Middlebrooks Task Force Chair A New Technology Emerges Wastewater professionals have long recognized the cleansing abilities of wetland systems.
But until recently, there were limited data available about these systems.
Pioneers in this industry designed wetland systems based on ingenuity and limited performance data.
Today, due to their efforts, there are many operating constructed treatment wetlands both nationwide and in Colorado.
Ingenuity is no longer the key factor to design wetlands ­ publicly available data is.
In 1999, the Governor's Office of Energy Management and Conservation (OEMC) recognized the need to collect and disseminate this data and embarked on a program to evaluate and document constructed treatment wetland features and performance in Colorado.
The OEMC's timely implementation of this inventory will help all future builders of constructed treatment wetlands in Colorado and other parts of the country.
Gene Reetz Environmental Protection Agency
Tim Carey Army Corp of Engineers
Kent Holsinger State Natural Resources
Cary Pilon Jim Miller
Colorado Department of Public Health and Environment State Agriculture Department
Tom Hoyt Land Developer
Todd Alexander Land Developer
Susan Kirkpatrick Environmental Groups
In Search Of Excellence ­ A Comprehensive Approach The OEMC began this effort by selecting experts from various groups involved with wetlands and wetlands issues.
These individuals comprise the OEMC Wetlands Task Force.
The Task Force provided expertise and advice to guide the project and establish requirements for evaluating wetland data.
To implement the program, the OEMC requested proposals from qualified firms to locate, catalog and document the efficiency of Colorado's constructed treatment wetlands.
From that request, the Task Force and OEMC selected the engineering-biologist team of HDR Engineering, Inc. and ERO Resources.
Including both engineers and biologists in the inventory allowed a comprehensive review of the wetland treatment systems ­ from engineering details to habitat value.
The team collected data to assess design features, energy
Todd Harris Treatment Plant Supervisors
Maurice Albertson Academia
Clare Haas American Water Works Association
Dale Butler Water Environment Federation
Joan Thullen US Geological Service
Rick Roline US Bureau of Reclamation
Ralph Curtis Colorado Water Congress
Terri Skadeland Natural Resources Conservation Service
Page 1-1
Introduction savings, flora and fauna biodiversity, general operational problems, and to develop "lessons learned" from existing treatment wetlands in Colorado (discussed in Chapter 8 of this report).
From this inventory, the team created a database compatible with the North American Treatment Wetland Database (NADB).
Water ­ A Limited Resource "When the well's dry, we know the worth of water" ­ Benjamin Franklin Earth is often referred to as the water planet because more than 70% of the earth's surface is covered with water.
Since this resource is seemingly abundant it is easily taken for granted.
This apparent abundance is deceptive, as only 3% of the earth's water is fresh, and two-thirds of that is trapped in glaciers and icecaps.
So the issue that must be dealt with is not water supply, but water quality.
With a limited amount of fresh water and an increasing global population, wise management of water supplies is essential.
It is important for societies to recognize the value of protecting the quality of this limited and valuable resource.
The OEMC recognized this need and embarked upon this project.
A Vision For The Future A future that includes safe water supplies and functioning natural waterways and riparian habitats must also include the wise management of our wastewater.
Engineers and government agencies both have visions of using wetlands more often as a natural way not only to maintain the environment, but also to enhance water quality and reduce energy costs.
Developing an ideally functioning wetland that incorporates "best practices" from this inventory to guide other wetland designers is one of the OEMC's goals.
This project is the stepping-stone to achieve that goal.
Based on this inventory (Phase I), the OEMC plans to develop a demonstration project to incorporate the most effective features of all the wetlands evaluated (Phase II).
Phase II will require a partnership between the OEMC, an engineering consultant, and a community, or other group, wishing to build a wastewater treatment facility using wetlands, and potentially the Department of Energy (DOE), US Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) or other regulating agencies.
Ideally, the wetlands project will incorporate energy savings, efficiency, improved water quality for stream or river discharge, high-value wildlife habitat, and walking trails for wildlife viewing.
Phase II will consider general quality-of-life issues such as buffers between developments or communities to address "smart growth" issues and acquisition of open space.
The Request For Proposal (RFP) for Phase II will most likely be released in the late summer or early fall of 2001.
Wetlands ­ Why Are They So Important? Natural purification barriers: As natural water purification barriers, wetlands are typically a relatively low cost, low energy method to improve water quality.
Because of land development practices during the last few decades, many natural wetlands have been dewatered.
This reduction in wetland area has resulted in larger amounts of pollutants such as fecal coliform, total suspended solids, bacteria, viruses, algae and other organic and inorganic matter entering water bodies.
This results in increased turbidity, decreased oxygen, and unnatural variations in pH and temperature.
Recently, in an effort to counteract these results, a shift towards wetland area protection has occurred as the cleansing capabilities of wetlands have been recognized.
Natural cleansing process: The cleansing processes identified in natural wetlands can be mimicked in constructed treatment wetlands.
Constructed treatment wetlands are designed to maximize the natural abilities of wetlands to remove pollutants from a variety of wastewater sources.
This study focuses on the use of constructed wetlands for the treatment of municipal wastewater.
Page 1-2
Chapter 1 Constructed wetlands are a viable treatment alternative for many reasons.
Treatment wetlands remove solids, oxygen depleting pollutants, and lower bacterial and viral levels.
Unlike traditional treatment methods, wetlands offer many ancillary benefits.
These benefits, including wildlife habitat, and aesthetic and educational values, were evaluated, as was the wetland's ability to successfully meet its treatment goals.
What's In This Report? Chapter 1 ­ Introduction The Need for Wetlands Chapter 2 ­ Overview What is a Wetland? Chapter 3 ­ Applications Using Wetlands for Water Treatment Chapter 4 ­ Evaluation What Benefits Do Wetlands Provide? Chapter 5 ­ Data Management Making the Information Accessible Chapter 6 ­ Site Visits Real Life Examples Chapter 7 ­ Observations So What is a Typical Wetland? Chapter 8 ­ Conclusions "Lessons Learned"
Identifying Colorado's Treatment Wetlands Phase I of the Colorado Constructed Treatment Wetlands Inventory was a reconnaissance effort to locate wetlands in Colorado used to treat point source pollutants.
The project team performed a literature review, pursued leads provided by the OEMC and Task Force, and used local community knowledge to identify appropriate wetland sites.
From a preliminary list of constructed treatment wetlands, the Task Force developed a final list to include in this study.
The criteria used to determine whether a site would be included on the final list are as follows: Constructed wetland must be treating a point source.
Data must be available in order to assess the wetland's wastewater treatment efficiency.
Twenty sites met both of the above criteria.
Wetland site locations varied from locations such as Dove Creek to Avondale.
While examples of other types of wetlands are included in the study, most of them were not included in the more rigorous analysis.
Chapter 6 contains detailed analyses of the sites visited.
So...Are We Meeting Government Standards? The HDR/ERO team considered both engineering and biological parameters in their wetland evaluations.
The team made site visits to the selected wetlands and used a Site Data Sheet (SDS) to provide a consistent method for evaluating each site.
The evaluation process allowed for an independent review of both the engineering and biological aspects.
The inventory provided a `snapshot' of how the wetland was performing on the date of the site visit.
Water quality records and historical information were gathered during an interview with a wetland contact person; as well as from the Colorado Department of Public Health and Environment's (CDPHE) permit files.
What does this mean? It means information will now be in one location and accessible for comparison.
This will allow future wetland designers to determine which practices best meet their goals.
Chapter 8 discusses how our findings compared to CDPHE's regulations, as well as "lessons learned."
Page 1-3
Introduction
From Local to National ­ Making the Information Available In the early 1990's the US EPA sponsored the creation of a database containing design and performance information about constructed treatment wetlands.
This information was used to develop design guidelines and to chronicle the successes and failures of wetland systems.
Prior to the Colorado Constructed Treatment Wetland Inventory project, only one Colorado wetland was included in the database.
A primary goal of this study was to collect data on Colorado's treatment wetlands for entry into the National Database.
The team developed the SDS with this goal in mind and designed a database compatible with the NADB to store this information.
The information gathered through this inventory is available from the OEMC.
Future designers can use the data as a tool for comparative analysis and to help guide them in making design decisions for their wetland.
Contact Information For further information, please contact:
Office of Energy Management 
`Lessons Learned' From Those Involved With Existing Wetlands Wastewater treatment using constructed wetlands involves different processes than conventional treatment methods.
Operators, designers, and local officials must approach the implementation and operation of constructed wetlands with an understanding of the natural treatment processes involved.
Information collected from the existing Colorado treatment wetlands details the challenges of designing and operating these systems and chronicles the innovative solutions developed to meet them.
The ultimate goal of this project is to disseminate information regarding the use, design, operation, and performance of constructed treatment wetlands in Colorado.
This will assist future wetland designers and operators to learn from the past experience of others.
HDR Engineering, Inc.
Ms. Margaret Medellin Project Engineer 303 E. 17th Avenue, Suite 300 Denver, CO 80203 p. (303) 764-1520 f. (303) 860-7139 mmedelli@hdrinc.com www.hdrinc.com
ERO Resources Corp.
Who's Who In Treatment Wetlands In Colorado Over the This list between learning course of this project, the HDR/ERO team developed a contact list.
is provided at the end of Chapter 8 to facilitate communication those with knowledge about these systems and those interested in more.
Ms. Liz Payson Project Biologist 1842 Clarkson Street Denver, CO 80218 p. (303) 830-1188 f. (303) 830-1199 lpayson@eroresources.com
Final Report The Colorado Constructed Treatment Wetlands Inventory report documents experiences with Colorado's treatment wetlands.
A description of individual sites is discussed in Chapter 6 and general observations from the project are presented in Chapter 7.
The OEMC, Task Force and HDR/ERO team hope this document will serve as a resource for those interested in using constructed wetlands as an effective and low energy method of treating wastewater.
Page 1-4
Chapter 2
Treatment Wetlands Overview What Is A Wetland? Chapter Highlights Wetlands are environmentally sensitive areas that are adapted for variable hydrologic conditions.
Constructed treatment wetlands are used to treat wastewater by mimicking the processes seen in natural wetlands.
Constructed treatment wetlands are engineered systems that differ from natural systems.
Free water surface wetlands operate with a water depth of 3" to 18".
Subsurface flow wetlands are designed to maintain the entire depth of the water column within the soil media.
In a subsurface flow wetland the water level is not visible at the ground.
What is a wetland? Definitions vary from Oxford Dictionary's characterization of wetlands as "swamps and other damp areas of land" to Kadlec and Knights "Wetlands are land areas that are wet during part or all of the year because of their location in the landscape.1" For the purposes of this report, we define wetlands as environmentally sensitive areas that can be identified by the following attributes:
Soil Type
Wetland soils are inundated by water or are saturated for extended periods Litter layer is a deposit of and are characterized by a lack of partially decomposed organic oxygen.
Their soils typically contain matter.
a high proportion of organic matter as a result of annual vegetation production.
This combination of anaerobic conditions and a thick litter layer provide ideal conditions for chemical and microbial processes.
Anaerobic refers to the absence of oxygen.
Hydrologic Characteristics Wetlands are characterized by a hydrologic regime that provide periods of inundation and saturation.
Important aspects of wetland hydrology include the detention time in the wetland, the water depth, the flow velocity through the wetland and the number of days per year in which the wetland is inundated.
Plant Species Wetlands are home to a diverse group of plants, including emergent, floating and submerged species.
Wetland plants are adapted to survive in saturated conditions.
While most plants absorb oxygen through their roots, wetland plants can also absorb oxygen through their stems and leaves and transport it to their roots through specialized root cells.
1
Robert H. Kadlec 
Page 2-1
Wetlands Overview Typical Microorganisms Wetlands provide ideal conditions for a wide variety of microorganisms.
These organisms are the `workhorses' in the wetland treatment processes.
The construction of wetlands to treat wastewater is based on the chemical, biological, and physical processes that occur in natural wetlands.
Because the soil or substrate in a wetland is commonly saturated, chemicals that enter the wetland in an oxidized state undergo transformations when exposed to the reduced conditions of the saturated soils.
Biological activity in the biofilm that attaches to wetland soil and plants accounts for much of the dissemination and transformation of pollutants.
Physical entrapment and sedimentation of wastewater solids are also key processes to remove pollutants.
As wastewater treatment professionals recognized these processes in natural wetlands, they began to construct treatment wetlands to accomplish the same purposes.
Biofilm is a slime layer where microorganisms live.
Sedimentation is a physical process by which solids settle to the bottom of a liquid.
Comparison of Wetlands Natural Wetland Accumulated organic matter Natural water source Biodiversity Microorganisms determined by existing environment
Comparison of Natural and Treatment Wetlands Although constructed treatment wetlands mimic many of the conditions seen in the natural wetland, there are significant differences.
The primary goal of a treatment wetland is to improve the quality of the water flowing through it to a level that will meet discharge permit requirements.
Since it is usually desirable to accomplish these requirements with minimal cost, energy and maintenance input, modifications to the natural system are necessary.
Significant differences between constructed wetlands and natural wetlands are discussed below.
Constructed Wetland No or limited organic layer Piped water source Less biodiversity Microorganisms determined by type of wastewater
Soil Type Some natural wetlands have soils that have formed as the result of many years (often 1000's of years) of accumulated organic matter.
These rich soils are home to a wide variety of microorganisms.
Soils used in constructed wetlands often lack organic matter and are not well developed.
Some constructed wetlands are designed with specific soil properties to maintain a certain flow rate, or to prevent percolation to the groundwater.
Hydrologic Characteristics Treatment wetlands are generally fed by a piped water source.
Since these wetlands are often constructed in upland areas outside of drainages or natural depressions, they do not usually intercept natural surface water drainage during storm or flood events.
Because of this their function in floodwater and sediment retention is different from a natural wetland.
In addition, unlike natural wetlands, treatment wetlands are often lined with clay or plastic.
This prevents groundwater discharge and recharge into the wetland.
Plant Species Constructed wetlands often support a less diverse plant community than natural wetlands.
Constructed wetlands are typically seeded or planted.
Since all the plants are usually started at the same time, it is easier for the dominant species to overtake the wetland area before the less dominant species can Page 2-2
Chapter 2 become established.
Since the hydrology in a constructed wetland is generally not as variable as what is experienced in a natural system, conditions in the constructed wetland will always favor a certain plant species.
Typical Microorganisms The type of wastewater being treated determines the microorganisms that will flourish in the constructed wetland.
Typically, the wastewater already contains a community of microorganisms before it is introduced into the wetland.
Constructed wetlands are designed to provide an ideal habitat for microbial communities to breakdown key pollutants.
Temperature and oxygen levels in wetlands play important roles in microbial processes.
Constructed wetlands may be designed so that certain temperatures and dissolved oxygen parameters are maintained.
Common Design Methods Historical Data Attached growth models Areal 
Design Methods The first step in designing a wetland system is to determine the required wetland size needed to reach treatment goals.
Since available land is frequently a limiting factor, the area required by wetland systems often establishes the viability of using this option.
Currently, there is not a universally accepted design process for sizing wetlands.
The following paragraphs describe the most common methods used to size a constructed treatment wetland.
Historical Data Empirical data collected from pilot scale and fully operational treatment wetlands are used to develop relationships between treatment goals and size requirements.
Data stored in the NADB has been used to a limited degree to predict wetland performance.
Relationships derived from empirical data may be useful if the designer has reliable data from a wetland with similar operating and climatic characteristics.
Attached Growth Models This approach makes the assumption that first-order plug flow models used to design traditional wastewater treatment systems can be used to describe wetland treatment processes.
This approach also assumes that the reaction of wastewater components can be described by first order reaction kinetics.
The general relationship for first-order plug flow models is:
Ct = Co exp Where:
- kt
Ct = effluent pollutant concentration at t = t t = mean hydraulic detention time k = apparent first-order rate constant Co = initial pollutant concentration (t = 0).
The apparent first-order rate constant can be adjusted by the following formula to correspond with a desired temperature: Page 2-3
Wetlands Overview k = k 20 (T - 20 )
Where: k = apparent first-order reaction rate constant at T degrees (°C) K20 = apparent first order reaction rate constant at 20°C = empirical temperature coefficient, and
T = desired temperature (°C).
Several derivations of the plug-flow model have been developed to incorporate different approaches for defining the reaction coefficient and mean hydraulic detention time.
Areal and Volumetric Loading Relationships are developed between the volume of water or mass of pollutant load introduced to the system to the surface area of the wetland.
Areal loading rates can provide an expected effluent concentration for a particular constituent based on performance data from other similar systems.
A limitation of this method is the invalid assumption that the influent is applied uniformly over the land area.
Typically, wastewater is applied at the head of the wetland cell and allowed to flow across and/or through the wetland structure to the collection pipe at the end of the cell.
Additional simplifications in this design method do not account for the water depth or temperature in the wetland.
Design Considerations Wetland size requirements are determined by using one of the design methods discussed above.
Generally, the treatment level needed to satisfy discharge permit requirements will be the driving factor in determining the limiting pollutant for which the wetland should be designed.
Some pollutants typically monitored are discussed below.
"Wherever possible, emphasis should be placed on a "low impact" engineering approach.
This not only avoids unnecessary expense but can enhance the natural processes involved in the use of wetlands.
The design concept should be to have the system fit naturally into the landscape following the topography and minimizing straight dikes and 90° corners.
If wetland habitat is a value, then islands with nooks and crannies should be liberally placed in the wetland surface."
Biological Oxygen Demand (BOD) BOD is a measure of the amount of oxygen that a wastewater stream will consume during biological decomposition processes.
The amount of oxygen that a wastewater sample will consume in 5 days (BOD5) is the most commonly used BOD measurement.
BOD creating substances can occur in either settleable or soluble forms.
The maximum amount of BOD that can be present in discharge from a treatment system is established to prevent oxygen depletion in receiving water bodies.
Total Suspended Solids (TSS) TSS includes both organic and inorganic particles that settle out of the water column under quiescent conditions.
Releasing excess amounts of TSS into a receiving water body creates turbid conditions that can impede respiration and feeding functions of aquatic creatures, as well as cause the formation of "sludge banks."
(Gearheart et al., 1992)
Page 2-4
Chapter 2 Nitrogen Nitrogen can exist in a variety of forms.
Organic nitrogen is typically associated with wastewater solids or algae.
Much of this nitrogen will undergo decomposition or mineralization within the system.
Inorganic nitrogen, in the form of ammonia, nitrate, nitrite, or nitrogen gas is a result of biological nitrification and denitrification reactions.
Although nitrogen removal is not a typical parameter included in a discharge permit, wetland design can provide sufficient oxygen, carbon and retention time to remove organic and inorganic nitrogen.
Introducing excess nitrogen to a water body can lead to eutrophic conditions.
Some forms of nitrogen can be toxic to aquatic life.
In order to effectively remove nitrogen through nitrification and dentrification, open water zones should be provided in the constructed wetland.
Providing a series of vegetated and open water zones provides for the anaerobic and aerobic zones needed for nitrification of ammonia to nitrate, and dentrification of nitrate to nitrogen gas2.
Eutrophic refers to water rich in nutrients and high in biological activity.
Phosphorous Phosphorus is an essential element in the growth of algae and in excessive amounts can lead to noxious algal blooms.
The primary mechanisms for removal of phosphorus in wetland systems are chemical precipitation and adsorption by the soil matrix.
The degree of phosphorus removal in the wetland is dependent upon the amount of contact that the wastewater has with the soil matrix.
Due to this limitation, free water surface wetlands will have less potential for phosphorus removal than subsurface flow systems.
Both of these types of systems are described later in this chapter.
Once the wetland has been sized to remove the regulated pollutant, the designer must determine wetland characteristics.
Some issues to consider are discussed below.
Hydrology describes the average behavior of the wastewater as it flows through the wetlands.
Hydraulics refers to the physical mechanisms used to convey the water through the wetland.
Hydrology Controlling the average behavior of wastewater as it flows through a wetland is key to its long-term success.
Flow through a wetland more closely resembles plug-flow than completely mixed flow.
Short-circuiting and dead pools need to be minimized in order more closely resemble plug-flow conditions.
Hydraulic residence times are crucial design elements that assume uniform flow behavior.
Most treatment wetlands are designed to prevent stormwater runoff from entering the wetland, unless the intent is to treat stormwater runoff.
This is achieved by locating the wetland in a highpoint and/or with the use of berms to route stormwater runoff away from the wetland.
Flow characteristics through the wetland include:
Hydraulic residence time refers to the amount of time wastewater is in a wetland system.
If the wastewater flows through the wetland too fast, then it may not be adequately treated.
Constructed Wetland Treatment of Municipal Wastewaters, USEPA Office of Research and Development, Cincinnati, Ohio, EPA /625/R-99/010, September 2000.
Page 2-5
2
Wetlands Overview Velocity ­ this is controlled by selecting a bed slope that provides a
Hydrologic Issues Velocity Detention time Depth of flow Travel path Water balance
sufficient hydraulic gradient through the wetland to achieve the desired velocity.
Detention Time ­ the amount of time that it takes a unit of volume to
travel from the inlet to the outlet of the wetland is determined by the size, depth, and travel path through the wetland.
Depth of Flow ­ a design depth must be chosen to provide adequate storage and appropriate conditions for the wetland plants chosen.
Travel Path ­ providing an appropriate length to width ratio will prevent
Hydraulic Issues Conveyance system Inlet mechanism Depth control Isolation devices Collection devices
short-circuiting through the system.
Water Balance ­ the designer must determine the sources and sinks that will occur in the wetland.
Groundwater influences are generally minimized by the use of liners.
It is important to determine the contribution that precipitation and evapotranspiration will have on wetland hydrology.
Hydraulics The wetland hydrology will determine many of the controls of the wetland hydraulics.
Hydraulics refers to the physical mechanisms used to convey the water through the wetland.
Important components of the hydraulic system include: Conveyance System ­ typically a pipe will be used to transport the
Shape A
wastewater from the primary treatment to the wetland.
Inlet Mechanism ­ wastewater is introduced to the wetland cells by using slotted pipes at the head of the wetland cells, teed down the length of the cells, or a variety of other methods.
Depth Control ­ various mechanisms are used to control water depth in
the wetland.
Swivel Tees or overflow weirs are commonly used.
Isolation Devices ­ it is important to be able to provide flexibility for the
Shape B
flow path in order to allow wetland cells to be taken offline for maintenance.
Splitter boxes are typically used to provide the ability to reroute the flow through the wetland.
Collection Device ­ after the wastewater has flowed through the wetland it is collected for final discharge from the system.
Typical collection mechanisms include drainage channels and buried slotted pipes.
Shape Variations Typically engineered wetland systems, like Shape B, are rectangular and unnatural in shape.
Natural shapes with curves and varied edges, like Shape A, allow for more biodiversity than their rectangular counterparts.
The shape of the treatment cell does not impact its effectiveness, although it may impact construction costs.
Shape The designer must develop a wetland shape that provides the surface area requirements and fits into the site topography.
Often, existing lagoons are retrofitted to accommodate a wetland system.
Providing appropriate length to width (aspect) ratios may also dictate the shape of the wetland.
Aspect ratios as high as 10:1 are often recommended in order to prevent short-circuiting of the wastewater as it flows through the system.
Page 2-6
Chapter 2 Providing islands and irregular boundaries can enhance the habitat value of a wetland.
However, because the construction of a wetland system is generally bid, the needed improvements must be well defined in order to enable the contractor to develop take off quantities.
Typically, this forces a more rectangular wetland shape.
Soil The wetland soil will provide the media for plant and microbial growth.
Depending on the type of wetland designed, the designer may need to specify a particular mix of soil and gravel.
The designer may specify that the soil include additives to encourage the growth of wetland plants.
A geotechnical study should be performed to determine the suitability of the native soil to support a wetland system.
Plants Wetlands can be planted, seeded, plugged or left to establish themselves.
Designers must specify the type and introduction method that will be used in the wetland.
Ancillar y Benefits The designer can incorporate additional features into the wetland system that do not detract from the primary goal of wastewater treatment.
Some of these benefits include aesthetic appeal, educational value, recreational outlets and habitat value.
Interpretive centers can be incorporated into the wetland design to provide educational opportunities on such topics as energy conservation, wastewater treatment, wetland ecology, and pollution prevention.
If the wetland designer wishes to incorporate these aspects into the wetland design, planning must include a safe means of public access.
"Wetlands for water quality are being constructed throughout North America at an accelerating rate.
However, many wetland designs do not incorporate ancillary benefits to the extent possible.
With thoughtful design, constructed wetlands can provide benefits beyond effective water treatment, such as wildlife enhancement and recreational opportunities.
In fact, with the decline of the total area of natural wetlands, constructed treatment wetlands are a viable and cost-efficient way to compensate for the loss of productive wetland habitat."
(Kadlec and Knight 1996)
Maintenance Wetlands will take several years to establish a mature ecosystem.
In the design process it is important to determine what methods will be used to harvest vegetation once the litter layer becomes excessive.
Potential methods include burning and physical harvesting of wetland biomass.
Other maintenance issues include (1) clearing of clogged piping, (2) controlling mosquito and fly populations, and (3) managing nuisance wildlife (i.e. muskrats).
Free Water Surface Flow and Subsurface Flow Wetlands Two general types of wetlands are typically constructed for wastewater treatment: free water surface flow (FWS) and subsurface flow (SF) wetlands.
In a FWS wetland, water is generally introduced above the ground surface, and flows through the wetlands at depths averaging less than 6 inches, ranging up to 12 inches (Figure 1).
FWS wetlands may contain Plan and profile of a typical free water surface wetland.
Page 2-7
Wetlands Overview islands that are at or above the typical water surface, and small, deeper areas, up to 8 feet.
However, these deeper areas will not support wetland vegetation.
FWS wetlands are often divided into cells either by earthen berms, concrete, or wood to help direct flow and insure that maximum contact between water and wetland plants.
Wetland plants can be established by seeding or transplanting.
If a significant source of wetland seed exists nearby, and if the topsoil used in the treatment wetland contains enough propagules, it may be unnecessary to seed or plant the wetlands.
Maintenance of a FWS wetland may include periodic burning of the vegetation in the treatment wetland, monitoring and adjusting the water surface elevation, keeping the inflow and outflow structures clear of debris, and sediment removal when necessary.
In a SF wetland, water is introduced into a gravel medium through a perforated pipe or other underground dispersal system.
SF wetlands may contain up to 4 feet of gravel, and the water surface elevation is maintained just below the top surface of the gravel.
Generally wetland plants must be planted into a SF wetland because the gravel substrate is often not conducive to seed germination and establishment.
Maintenance of a SF wetland may include periodic burning of the vegetation in the treatment wetland, monitoring and adjusting the water surface elevation, keeping the inflow, outflow, and dispersion pipes clear of debris, and sediment removal when necessary.
SF wetlands are often difficult to maintain because the underground pipes may be subject to clogging and the gravel surrounding the pipes may become clogged with sediment.
Plan and profile of a subsurface flow wetland.
Page 2-8
Chapter 3
Treatment Wetland Applications Municipal Wastewater Treatment Chapter Highlights Societies generate concentrated wastewater that must be treated before it is released back into the environment.
Constructed wetlands provide wastewater treatment with minimal technical, energy, and chemical inputs.
Point source and non point source wastewater can be treated in a constructed wetland system.
Civilizations have dealt with wastewater for thousands of years.
Normal uses of water for hygiene, consumption, and manufacturing generate a pollutant load on the resulting wastewater.
In order to prevent contamination of drinking water supplies and the surrounding environment, wastewater must be isolated until pollutant removal is accomplished.
Wastewater treatment has developed in the last century from outhouses and septic systems to piped collection systems that deliver wastewater to centralized treatment facilities.
As populations have become denser, wastewater treatment has become a vital, and often expensive, part of a community life style.
These centralized collection facilities use a myriad of treatment processes before the reclaimed water is released back into the natural system.
Treatment facilities are designed to fit into the communities that they service.
For instance, dense metropolitan areas, in which real estate is at a premium, require facilities that can treat large amounts of wastewater in compact areas.
In addition, wastewater from metropolitan areas typically originates from both industrial and domestic sources and may require advanced methods to meet treatment goals.
However, in rural areas, land is more available and wastewater is from domestic sources, with minimal industrial inputs.
Smaller communities are often constrained by their limited capital and technical resources.
In these areas, land intensive treatment options are often desirable.
Constructed wetlands, as a component of a treatment process, provide a low energy, lowtech method of removing pollutants.
Constructed wetlands can be used as a treatment component in municipal wastewater treatment facilities.
Generally, wetlands are used as a `finishing' component in the treatment process.
Some of the benefits of constructed treatment wetlands are discussed in this chapter.
Page 3-1
Wetland Applications Minimal Energy Consumption Elevation differences in the wetland can be provided to allow wastewater to flow by gravity through the wetland system.
Energy consumption in the treatment system is generally limited to the amount of energy consumed by the primary Fecal coliforms are bacteria treatment method.
that live in the intestinal The wastewater treatment reactions in a wetland depend on physical, chemical, and microbial processes that occur naturally in the system.
Some Chlorine is a low cost use of chemicals may be necessary in order to chemical that has been reduce fecal coliform levels in the effluent prior to proven to provide reliable the release of the treated water into a receiving disinfection.
It destroys almost all water borne water body.
Chlorine is a popular form of pathogens, including fecal disinfection used in both natural and conventional coliforms. treatment systems.
The use of UV or ultraviolet light in a wetland system provides reliable disinfection without the use of chemicals.
In some wetland systems long detention times and exposure to sunlight provide sufficient disinfection, and as a result, additional means of disinfection are unnecessary.
tract of mammals.
The presence of these bacteria in wastewater is an indicator of mammalian waste products.
Benefits of Constructed Treatment Wetlands Low energy consumption Minimal chemical usage Simple hydraulic systems ­ easy to operate Aesthetically pleasing Educational value Valuable habitat
Minimal Use of Chemicals
Low Tech Wetlands are designed to have simple hydraulic and mechanical systems.
Since the treatment processes are naturally carried out, operators do not have to monitor the treatment process.
The primary tasks of the operator are to keep the hydraulic system running, manage wildlife and the occasional harvesting or burning of excess vegetation.
Ancillar y Benefits Wetlands can be an aesthetic addition to a community.
As such they provide open space and associated recreational activities (i.e. hiking, bird watching, etc.).
They can also provide valuable habitat for birds, small mammals, and other creatures.
type of radiation that acts as a physical (not chemical) disinfectant.
UV radiation penetrates the cell walls of bacteria and other water pathogens, and impairs their ability to replicate and in some cases causes the cell to die.
This disinfection method is only effective if the UV radiation can reach the wastewater.
Typically, UV lights are placed on a rack and then submersed in wastewater.
As the wastewater flows through the UV lights, it is disinfected.
A leach field is a subsurface system used for final treatment and disposal of septic effluent.
Leach fields are composed of a series of narrow, shallow trenches in which perforated pipes are installed and surrounded by gravel.
The trenches serve several purposes that include: Maintaining the leach field's structure Providing partial treatment of wastewater Distributing wastewater beneath the soil surface Page 3-2
UV or ultraviolet light is a
On-site Residential Treatment Approximately 25 percent of the U.S. population lives in rural areas and relies on decentralized, or on-site, wastewater treatment systems.
Isolated communities in the Rocky Mountains face the challenges of wastewater treatment with the added complications of cold weather and rocky soils that are not well suited for traditional leach fields.
On-site residential treatment is necessary in many remote areas that are unable to connect to centralized sewer systems.
In many western slope communities, laying the network of pipelines necessary for a centralized wastewater treatment system is not feasible because of mountainous topography and the need to blast through rock.
Chapter 3 Another problem associated with lengthy collection systems is the potential for contamination of the watershed due to leaky pipes and fittings.
Acid Mine Drainage Treatment Wetlands Wetlands have been used to treat runoff from hard rock and coal mines.
This runoff is known as Acid Mine Drainage (AMD).
The characteristics of AMD depend on the mine type.
Generally these sites have high iron, sulfur, and heavy metal contents.
When areas are mined, rock that was buried deep in the ground is broken apart and exposed to oxygen.
In rock types that are mined for metals or coal, high amounts of sulfur and iron are generally present.
When the iron and sulfur are exposed to oxygen, they become oxidized and sulfuric acid is formed.
This acid is dangerous because of its low pH.
Water with a low pH has a greater ability to dissolve heavy metals.
Metals that were at one time chemically bonded within the rock change valence states and are dissolved by water flowing through the mine.
This leads to higher metal concentrations in runoff.
The presence of these metals can be very dangerous to humans, wildlife, livestock, and vegetation.
Chemical reactions occur in wetlands that affect metals in a variety of ways.
In a natural wetland, oxidation-reduction (redox) reactions are important to metal speciation.
Factors that influence these reactions are saturation, water flow, soil chemistry, and vegetation.
Oxidizing conditions may exist near a wetland surface.
In this region, metals may be oxidized, forming precipitates, or may adsorb on to soil particles.
Oxidation reactions occur near the wetland surface and where hydrophytic plant's roots affect the soil.
Below this, wetlands can isolate metals Adsorption is a process from oxidizing where molecules of gas or conditions, keeping liquid "cling" to the surface metals in a reduced state.
Soils are reduced of a solid.
There is no physical or chemical change to either where conditions are permanently saturated and substance.
where oxygen is used up at a greater rate than it is replaced.
It has been shown that oxygen flows Absorption is a process through aqueous solutions 10,000 times more where one substance, usually slowly than through porous soil media.
a gas or liquid, is drawn into Therefore, when soils are saturated, oxygen and fills another.
This is diffusion is severely restricted and metals are not accompanied by a physical dissolved in the water.
and/or chemical change of An important aspect of oxidation-reduction in dynamic systems, such as mine acids or other the substance.
Oxidation-reduction reactions or redox reactions refer to two reactions.
The first part of the reaction, called oxidation refers to the loss of an electron by one of the reactants.
The second part, reduction, refers to the gain of an electron by one of the reactants.
Oxidation and reduction always occur together.
The substance that is oxidized is the reducing agent, while the substance that is reduced is the oxidizing agent.
pH is a measure of the acidity of a substance.
The pH scale ranges from 1 to 14.
A pH of 1 means a substance is very acidic, while a pH of 14 means it is alkaline (basic).
Water has a pH of approximately 7 and is considered neutral.
Benefits of Acid Mine Drainage Treatment Wetlands Isolates metals Neutralizes pH of runoff water before entering
A valence reflects the combining power of an atom.
This is measured by the number of hydrogen atoms with which it can displace or combine.
Metal speciation refers to the variety of metals of one kind that can exist in different valence states.
A hydrophytic plant can also be called a "water-loving" plant.
These types of plants have the ability to grow in soil that is saturated by water for extended periods.
Page 3-3
Wetland Applications sources of AMD is pulses in water levels and flows associated with spring runoff or other flood events.
The apparent effect of these events is to damage structures in created wetlands.
There are several studies in Colorado that have examined the treatment of AMD by passive systems, such as bioreactors: Silverton, the Eagle Mine Superfund Site in Minturn (Colorado School of Mines, 1992), and Marshall, Colorado (de Forest, 1985).
Few studies have been conducted in natural wetlands in Colorado, and only one study was found that was conducted in a constructed wetland (Idaho Springs).
One study on a natural wetland near the Pennsylvania Mine in Peru Creek drainage, near Montezuma, Colorado, involved routing of AMD through an existing wetland (Huskins, 1987).
The results of this study showed that the wetland removed iron from the AMD, but because of the low pH, ranging from 3.5 to 4.0 in different depths in the wetland, the ability of iron to co-precipitate other metals was limited.
A second study in St. Kevin's Gulch, near Leadville, showed that AMD passing through a wetland showed that iron was removed from the water passing through the wetland, but that zinc was not (Walton-Day, 1996).
is typically from a variety of sources, while point source pollution is from a singular source, such as a pipe or body of water.
Non-point source pollution
Sediment detention basins are usually large, shallow earthen basins used to separate out solids from wastewater.
Stormwater Wetlands Constructed wetlands are commonly used to detain and treat stormwater runoff.
Stormwater runoff, also known as non-point source pollution, may contain a variety of contaminants, chemicals, and nutrients.
Stormwater treatment wetlands may treat runoff from residential areas, roads, commercial areas, and parking lots.
Typical constituents of stormwater runoff may include BOD, suspended solids, nitrogen, nitrate, and nitrite, phosphorous, copper, lead, zinc, chromium, cadmium, iron, mercury, nickel, phenols, cyanides, soaps, pesticides, herbicides, fertilizers and oil and grease.
Treatment wetlands must be designed not only to process all of these, but also to serve as floodwater retention facilities.
In the Denver Metropolitan area, the Urban Drainage and Flood Control District (UDFCD) and others recommend a combination of sediment detention basins and wetlands as an efficient means to treat stormwater.
In this scenario, sediment detention areas (such as those discussed in Chapter 4) are placed upgradient of the treatment wetlands, and can either be immediately adjacent to or well away from the wetlands.
These sediment basins decrease the sediment load in the wetlands so that the treatment wetlands function more effectively to remove nutrients and chemicals.
Natural wetlands can be used as stormwater treatment areas, but it is important to ensure that the implementation of this form of stormwater treatment complies with all federal and state laws.
The U.S. Army Corps of Engineers and the EPA have expressed concerns about using natural wetlands for stormwater treatment.
Compliance with Regulations The Colorado Department of Health 
All wastewater treatment facilities must be in compliance with their regulations or a "notice of non-compliance" is issued by the CDPHE.
If a facility is out of compliance for a longer period of time, the CDPHE will issue a "cease and desist" order.
At this point, the facility owner may lose their discharge permit and legal action can be taken against them.
Page 3-4
Chapter 3
What Is Included In This Study This study focused on constructed wetlands that treat municipal wastewater.
Constructed treatment wetlands were identified by Task Force members and consultants through personal knowledge, researching contacts and a literature review.
Municipal treatment wetlands have the most data, since discharge permits require the submission of monthly water quality tests.
The project team pulled discharge permits from the Colorado Department of Public Health Sites Inventoried The map to the left shows locations of constructed treatment wetlands that were inventoried.
Further details on each site can be found in Chapter 6.
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
15.
16.
17.
18.
19.
20.
Rocky Mountain Shambhala Center Highlands Presbyterian Camp Platteville Valmont Power Plant Brighton Bennett Calhan La Veta Avondale Manzanola Crowley County Correctional Facility Crowley Las Animas Dove Creek Ouray Ridgeway State Park Delta Horizon Nursing Home Island Acres Silt Park Silt
Colorado Map ­ Sites Inventoried
and Environment (CDPHE) files in order to get background information and water quality data for each site.
A representative sample of stormwater and other miscellaneous constructed wetlands were also visited.
However, since water quality data was not available for these sites, an extensive analysis was not undertaken.
Page 3-5
Chapter 4
Evaluation Criteria Chapter Highlights Wetlands were evaluated from both engineering and biological perspectives.
The engineering analysis took into account hydraulic design and energy consumption.
The bottom line for treatment wetlands is `do they consistently meet discharge permit requirements?' The Montana Standardization was used by project biologists to compare the value of the constructed wetlands to resources found in natural wetlands.
Ancillary benefits at a wetland system may include educational, aesthetic and recreational components.
Evaluation of a Wetland The Task Force members' varied backgrounds and the project team's technical expertise provided many perspectives on wetlands.
The project team and the Task Force members selected standard criteria in order to provide a consistent framework for evaluating each wetland system.
These criteria considered significant components of the wetland system.
The project team included both engineers and biologists in order to provide discipline-independent evaluations of the `quality' of the wetland system.
From an engineering perspective, a highly effective wetland system is one that can consistently meet its discharge requirements with minimal operational, maintenance, and energy requirements.
Biologists evaluated each wetland's value from an ecological perspective.
From a biological viewpoint, higher quality wetlands provide habitat value and biological diversity, similar to natural systems.
Engineering Analysis Team engineers catalogued the engineering related design components.
These components include:
Hydrology The hydrology in a constructed wetland system is determined by design rather than by climatic and groundwater influences.
The general types of constructed wetlands are free water surface and subsurface flow wetlands.
In a free water surface wetland, the water level is maintained above the ground level.
In a subsurface wetland the water level is maintained below the surface of the ground.
(See Chapter 2 for further details).
Hydraulics The hydraulics will determine how wastewater is introduced into and conveyed through the wetland system.
These system components include inlet piping systems, mechanisms to
Page 4-1
Evaluation Criteria control the water depth in the wetland cells, and systems to collect and discharge the treated effluent at the end of the wetland cell.
Soil Soils provide two main functions in a wetland system: to provide a consistent hydraulic conductivity and detention time for design flows, and to maintain and encourage plant growth.
Soil may be native or a commercial mix containing soil amendments.
The specified soil mix may consist of a specific particle size and type.
Inorganic media may be used in place of organic soil to prevent the introduction of noxious weeds.
A noxious weed is a species of plant considered undesirable in a specific ecosystem.
These plants tend to dominate an area and can cause liner punctures, plugging of flow, excessive shading, excessive water and nutrient consumption, and can minimize biological diversity in wetland systems.
Water Quality Water quality requirements are the first concern when selecting a treatment method.
Pollutants in the wastewater may limit the type of treatment that a community can implement.
The focus of this study was small-flow municipal treatment facilities with fairly typical domestic and commercial waste.
These communities did not have special conditions that would warrant a highly technical removal process.
The ultimate efficacy of the wetland is judged by its ability to meet permit requirements.
Included in the Colorado Department of Public Health and Environment (CDPHE) permit files are the monthly Discharge Monitoring Reports (DMR's) that facilities must submit to ensure that they are meeting permit requirements.
This water quality data provides a historical perspective of how the system is functioning.
Since data are generally not available for water going into the wetland system, the water quality data are a measure of the effectiveness of the entire treatment system.
These records were used to: Evaluate the long term performance of the system, Determine how the system effectiveness was altered by adding a wetland, when sufficient data were available from both before and after wetland implementation, Determine if the wetland system was consistently meeting discharge effluent requirements.
Energy Analysis A primary focus of this inventory was to determine the energy savings experienced by using a constructed treatment wetland instead of conventional treatment methods.
This discussion presents typical energy requirements for a selection of treatment methods.
A wide number of treatment methods will be able to meet the requirements to cleanse the effluent from theses typical systems.
Financing often determines the selection of the most appropriate treatment method.
Financing includes such things as operation, maintenance, capital costs, and energy expenditures.
With rising energy costs, this component may become a predominant factor in selecting a treatment method.
Page 4-2
Chapter 4 Every treatment process uses the same amount of energy to physically remove, chemically breakdown, and biologically decompose pollutants per unit quantity.
The significant difference between conventional treatment processes and natural treatment processes is the energy source.
Conventional treatment systems use electricity and fuel to mechanically remove pollutants, speed-up biological processes, and act as catalysts in chemical processes.
Natural systems rely on energy from the sun, gravity, and naturally occurring carbon sources to provide the energy necessary for physical, biological and chemical removal processes to take place.
A study undertaken by Middlebrooks, et al.1, compared electrical and fuel energy requirements of conventional and land treatment alternatives.
The following table shows typical energy requirements of six common treatment systems for a small treatment facility (0.5 mgd capacity).
Energy Requirements: 0.5 mgd System Capacity Treatment Type Trickling filter Rotating biological contact facility (RBC) Activated sludge with digestion Activated sludge with sludge incineration Activated sludge with advanced treatment
How Much Energy Do We Normally Use? We all use energy and rely on it for a large part of our lives.
But do we know how much we use? A typical house uses approximately 8,760 KW/year.
For a small community of less than 6500 people, you would need approximately 12 times that amount to fuel a trickling filter treatment system, and 117 times that much to operate an advanced treatment activated sludge facility.
As future reserves of energy are depleted, we need to look for alternative, low-cost methods to clean our water.
Wetlands offer a viable, lowcost, low-energy alternative to traditional methods.
Kilowatt Hours per Year 106,500 111,000 222,400 248,500 1,029,400
A wetland system generally has four components: preliminary treatment (bar racks), primary treatment (generally lagoon systems or septic tanks), the wetland, and finally disinfection.
Some typical energy expenditures might include: Lift stations Grinders Aerators in the lagoon Automatic sampling and flow measurement devices Disinfection system (UV system, chlorine meters, etc.).
Since, the wetland cells themselves do not typically require external energy inputs, the energy efficiency of a system using wetlands will be greatly affected by the other treatment components.
Middlebrooks, E.J., Middlebrooks, C.H., Reynolds, J.H., Watters, G.Z., Reed, S.C., and George, D.B. Wastewater Stabilization Lagoon Design, Performance and Upgrading.
Macmillan Publishing Co., Inc., New York, NY. 1982.
Page 4-3
1
Evaluation Criteria
Design Each site was evaluated for design goals and methodology.
Since the wetlands in this study are used for treatment, the primary design goal was treatment of the wastewater to meet permit effluent requirements.
The area needed to reach these effluent requirements determines the size of the wetland.
The shape of the wetland is not as critical to the treatment functionality.
The majority of wetlands inventoried were rectangular.
Although rectangular wetlands are perceived to be easier to design and build, wetlands with irregular borders provide additional benefits without detracting from the treatment capabilities of the wetland itself.
The hydrology of a wetland system is the single most important design issue when creating a wetland.
Free water surface wetlands are designed to allow the water to pond at the surface of the wetland cells to a depth ranging from six inches to several feet.
In subsurface wetlands, the water level flows through the wetland media several inches below the surface of the wetland.
The level of saturation in the wetland is vital for maintaining plant health.
Allowing conditions in the wetland to become too dry or the water level to become too high will seriously impact the wetland plants.
During site visits, the water depth and ability to change the water level was recorded.
The hydraulics of the system include the methods of conveying water into, through, and out of the wetland system.
For each site the conveyance methods and operational experiences were recorded.
"Energy consumption is a major factor in the operation of wastewater treatment facilities.
Many of the plans for water pollution management in the United States were developed before the cost of energy and the limitations of energy resources became serious concerns for the nation.
As wastewater treatment facilities are built or updated to incorporate current treatment technology and to meet regulatory performance standards, energy must be a major consideration in designing and planning facilities."
Reed, Sherwood C., Crites, Ronald W., and Middlebrooks, E.Joe.
Natural Systems for Inc., New York, NY. 1995.
Biological Perspective Wetlands function in treating wastewater through biological and chemical processes.
Water cleansing depends on reduction/oxidation, or redox chemical reactions, in which metabolism by soil microorganisms and vegetation play a role.
A healthy vegetative and microbial community is vital to the functioning of treatment wetlands.
The biological health of a treatment wetland also plays an important role in its capacity to provide wildlife habitat and vegetative and landscape diversity.
To gain a biological perspective of treatment wetlands included in the study, researchers selected several key parameters, including vegetative cover, the number of plant communities in each cell, the amount of open water or bare soil, the vegetative structural diversity, wildlife habitat, and the presence of noxious weeds.
These are all parameters that make a treatment system more valuable from a biological perspective and in turn, an aesthetic and socioeconomic perspective.
Montana Standardization For each treatment wetland, project biologists evaluated wetland functions using the Montana Wetland Field Evaluation Form and Instructions (Montana Department of Transportation 1996).
The "Montana Method" is an evaluation method that combines the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service classification system (Cowardin et al. 1979) with a hydrogeomorphic (HGM) approach (Brinson
Waste Management and Treatment.
McGraw-Hill, Inc.,
Page 4-4
Chapter 4 1993).
The Montana Method provides a landscape context to the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service classification.
It is a rapid functional assessment process designed primarily to address wetland resources.
The Montana Method, along with other standard methods of assessing wetland function and values, is designed to assess natural wetlands.
Because treatment wetlands differ from natural wetlands, some of the function and value parameters were not included in the study, such as flood attenuation and storage, groundwater recharge and discharge, sediment/shoreline stabilization, recreation/education potential, and dynamic surface water storage.
Also, project biologists did not complete Section 15A of the field evaluation form--Habitat for Federally-Listed, Proposed, or Candidate Threatened or Endangered Plants or Animals and Section 15B--Habitat for Plants or Animals Rated S1, S2, or S3 by the Natural Heritage Program.
No federally listed, state listed, or Forest Service listed plant species are likely to occur in the treatment wetlands.
For each wetland, a function and value summary was prepared.
The Montana Method provides a rating of low, moderate, high, or not applicable based on observations and responses to questions.
Functional units were calculated without the use of area calculations.
Additional site-specific information (vegetation, soils, and hydrology) was collected as part of the wetland assessment process.
The following is a brief description of the functions and values assessed (Montana Department of Transportation 1996).
Wildlife Habitat General wildlife habitat potential of the assessment area based on perceived use by aquatic, semi-aquatic, and non-aquatic wildlife groups and habitat diversity as determined by the variety of wetland types.
Fish/Aquatic Habitat Potential for the presence of fish in the assessment area is based on the known or suspected presence of native or introduced fish and the depth and duration of surface water at the site.
Sediment/Nutrient/Toxicant Retention and Removal The ability of the assessment area to retain sediment and retain and remove nutrients and toxicants was based on the site's proximity to sediment/nutrient/toxicant sources; transport potential of these constituents to the assessment area via surface water; potential for the site to detain and retain the constituents; and potential of the site to filter and/or process (uptake) the constituents.
Production Export/Food Chain Support The potential of the assessment area to produce and export food/nutrients for living organisms was evaluated.
Production export typically refers to the flushing of relatively large amounts of organic material from the wetland to downstream habitats or adjacent deeper waters (Adamus, et al., 1991).
"Our hunch is that, at least in surface flow wetlands, habitat quality and water treatment function are closely related, in that many of the same things that enhance habitat quality also tend to improve water treatment function."
Sartoris, James J. and Thullen, Joan S., "Developing a habitat-driven approach to CWWT design."
Proceedings from Engineering Approaches to Ecosystem Restoration ASCE Conference, March 2227, 1998, Denver, Colorado.
Page 4-5
Evaluation Criteria Uniqueness Includes the general uniqueness of the assessment area relative to the abundance of similar sites occurring in the same major watershed basin, the replacement potential and habitat diversity of the assessment area, and the degree of human disturbance in the assessment area.
Human Use and Aesthetics The primary goal of treatment wetlands is to treat wastewater.
Wetland treatment systems have unique properties that differ from those of most conventional treatment methods.
These unique properties provide ancillary benefits that can be enjoyed by the local community.
Constructed treatment wetland sites offer educational experiences to schoolchildren, groups and individuals.
These sites are ideal settings for viewing wildlife, discussing wastewater treatment processes, and educating the public on the importance of wetlands in the water cycle.
Constructed wetlands are also an attractive addition to the community.
In contrast to conventional treatment systems, constructed wetlands provide aesthetic benefits and do not detract from the scenic beauty of many remote areas and often add to beauty of overused and overbuilt areas.
The Colorado inventory identified constructed treatment wetlands that were along trails, used as a water feature at a park entrance, and part of scenic vistas.
Each site was inventoried to record ways that the local community profited from these ancillary benefits.
Operation and Maintenance Wetland systems are often touted as a low maintenance solution to wastewater treatment.
However, like most any treatment train an operator is necessary to ensure that the system remains functional.
In this inventory, the operator for each system was interviewed to determine the level of effort necessary to successfully operate each system.
Maintenance issues included clearing pipes to prevent clogging, seasonal burning or harvesting of the wetland plants, repair of berms, and general problem solving.
Wetland system operators must have proper licensing, take water quality samples, and submit reports to the CDPHE to ensure compliance with discharge permits.
A treatment train is a series of processes that make up a treatment system.
System components are selected to achieve a desired level of treatment.
Overall Component of the Community The system was evaluated for its overall function as a component of the community.
The following questions were asked at each inventoried wetland: Does the wetland treatment system detract from scenic vistas? Is the system publicly supported? Are recreational opportunities, such as running trails, provided? Are educational groups hosted? Is the wetland facility a source of pride for the community? Page 4-6
Chapter 5
Data Management Before any data were collected, the Task Force members and project team assembled a standardized method for data collection and storage.
The data management system included standardized methods to analyze the evaluation criteria, a Site Data Sheet to consistently record data and the development of a database for storing the final data.
Chapter Highlights A standardized methodology was adopted to insure consistent data collection and storage.
Data collected were stored in a database that is compatible with the North American Constructed Wetland Database.
Site Data Sheets were designed with guidance from the Task Force members.
These Site Data Sheets were used during site visits to provide a consistent means of evaluating each wetland.
Database In the early 1990's the USEPA funded the development of the North American Constructed Wetlands Database (NADB).
The NADB contains the most comprehensive inventory of treatment wetland performance and design data currently available.
This inventory contains information for both natural and constructed wetlands used to treat wastewater in the United States and Canada.
Version 1 of the NADB contained information on 179 sites.
Version 2 of the NADB was updated to a total of 257 sites.
Currently, the database is being updated by Humboldt State University and will be provided in a webbased interface.
The NADB is divided into the following twelve database files:
Sites Fields are provided to record general site information, such as EPA region, state, and community.
A checklist is included to indicate the inclusion or exclusion of parameters that are recorded in following database files.
Systems This section contains an overall description of the wetland site, including such items and contributing population, number of cells, area, costs and waste source.
Cells The wetland system is subdivided into cells.
This file records information for each cell, such as area, length and width, vegetation type, slope, island, deep zones and water depth.
Page 5-1
Data Management Permits This field allows the entry of permit limitations.
Entries can be made for 36 parameters, including permitted flow, BOD, COD, TSS TDS, temperature, nitrogen, phosphorous, total coliforms, and pH.
People Information is recorded for contact people, with address, phone and fax information.
The contact persons role in the wetland is also included.
Literature Citations are recorded for any publications that have been written about the site.
Operations This database file contains the operational data for each site.
Available performance data for influent and effluent water quality are recorded here.
A screen capture of this form is shown to the right.
Vegetation Data can be entered for each cell of the wetland system to indicate plant groups and subgroups.
Space is also available to enter decomposition rates, basal area, chlorophyll a, diversity and density.
The graphic to the right is a screen capture of the database form used to enter system vegetation records.
Wildlife Information can be entered for amphibians, benthos, mammals and avifauna.
Topics available include birth and death rates, egg clutch size, breeding pair density, and population net growth.
Metals / Organics The NADB contains metals and organics data collected from 26 sites.
Samples were taken from the surface water, sediments, and tissue.
Biomonitoring This database file contains data used to determine the effects of treatment wetlands on "whole-effluent" toxicity.
Whole-effluent toxicity is determined by conducting tests on organisms to determine acute and chronic toxicity.
Human Use Data on the human uses of treatment wetlands is recorded
Page 5-2
Chapter 5 in this field.
Parameters recorded in this field include money spent, type of activity, and number of human uses per year.
The NADB provides a structure to record all available treatment wetland data.
The categories available in this database are extensive.
The majority of wetlands will have data available for only a portion of the developed fields.
A primary goal of the Colorado Constructed Treatment Wetland Inventory was the inclusion data on Colorado treatment wetlands into the NADB.
To this end, data collected in this study were entered into a database that is compatible with the NADB.
Site Data Sheets The project team designed site Data Sheets (SDS), with guidance from the Task Force members.
Each section in the SDS was designed to coordinate with tables in the NADB.
Site visits were structured around the collection of data on the SDS.
The SDS served as a checklist to insure a consistent evaluation of each wetland.
Field notes were recorded on the SDS for downloading into the database.
Page 5-3
Data Management
Page 5-4
Chapter 6
Site Visits General Approach Site Locations The Project Team visited 20 constructed wetlands permitted to treat municipal wastewater.
A site data sheet was completed for each of these sites.
Biologists and Engineers documented treatment and habitat values for each site.
The Project Team also visited 8 miscellaneous wetlands used for stormwater treatment, educational purposes, and on-site residential wastewater treatment.
A commentary is provided for these sites.
Sites identified by the Task Force members and project team to fit project criteria were visited during the summer and early fall of 2000.
Project inventory consisted of collecting available data and observing site conditions on the date visited.
Each wetland visited was evaluated with the same criteria.
Site Data Sheets (SDS's), as discussed in Chapter 5, served as checklists to ensure each subject was covered, as well as a data log to record field notes.
A team of at least one engineer and one biologist evaluated each site.
Engineering Analysis Team engineers catalogued the engineering related design components.
Operators and design engineers were interviewed to gather site specific data.
Biological Perspective Project biologist used the Montana Method, as discussed in Chapter 4, to evaluate the wetland.
This method develops a score for each wetland based on its value to the natural ecosystem.
Overall Site Comments The primary function of each treatment wetland was to provide sufficient removal of pollutants from the wastewater to meet discharge permit requirements.
The bottom line for each site was `did it meet its discharge permit requirements?' From an engineering perspective, the wetland was determined to be successful if it was able to consistently meet permit limitations.
Biologists determined the level to which the wetland functioned as an environmental element by using the Montana Method to rank each site.
A table is provided for each site with scores allocated for each assessment category.
An overall score was compiled for each site.
Page 6-1
Site Visits
Site Visits A write-up is provided for each site visited.
A description of the facility and details of the engineering and biological evaluations are discussed.
Page 6-2
Avondale
Avondale Facility Statistics Nearest Town: 10-acre facultative lagoon system, prior to wetland cells
Avondale Pueblo Middle Arkansas Green Arroyo 1996 1,000 4560 0.110 0.080 0.87
County: River Basin: Receiving Water Body: Year Online: Population: Elevation (feet):
Portion of wetland cell with some plant die-off
Design Flow (mgd): Average Flow (mgd): Size (acres):
Wetland cell
Facility Description The Avondale Wastewater treatment facility is a minor municipal lagoon system.
The facility consists of a continuous influent flow measuring device and recorder, a lagoon system, three wetland cells, a chlorine contact chamber, and a continuous effluent flow measuring device and recorder.
The permitted design capacity of the Avondale Wastewater Facility is 0.1146 million gallons per day for hydraulic flow (30-day average) and 211lbs.
BOD5 per day for organic loading (30-day average).
Lagoons The Avondale lagoon system consists of 2 unaerated cells.
Some of the system features are detailed in the table below.
Avondale ­ Page 1
Avondale
Lagoon Information Cell No.: Surface Area (sq. ft.) Avg.
Depth (ft) Avg.
Volume (Million gallons) Detention time (days) Aerator size (hp) 90 NA 90 NA 1 217,800 5 7.5 2 217,800 5 7.5
Background Information On April 30, 1993 the Water Quality Control Division issued a Notice of Violation and Cease and Desist Order (NOVCDO) to the District as a result of non-compliance with the permit for the Wastewater Treatment Facility.
On February 1, 1995, the NOVCDO was amended requiring the District to complete construction of a facility upgrade and planting of the wetland portion of the facility.
The deadline established for completion of construction and planting was November 30, 1995.
In late November 1995, the District notified CDPHE that the upgrade was completed except for the wetland planting which would be delayed until spring, 1996.
This system has continued to have problems meeting permit limitation, even after the wetland implementation.
At the time of the site visit, this facility was not discharging.
Energy Analysis The Avondale system is an unaerated facultative lagoon system.
Energy consumption at this site is negligible.
Wetland Design Design Methods The FWS wetlands were sized using first order plug flow kinetics for BOD removal.
The average loading for each wetland cell was calculated to be 11.2 acre per mgd, with a detention time of 4.1 days.
The summer loading rate was calculated to be 28.3 acre per mgd, with a detention time of 3.4 days.
Objectives The FWS wetland cells were added to polish the effluent from the lagoon system.
Compliance issues were a result of algae carryover from the lagoon system.
Avondale ­ Page 2
Avondale Size The individual area for the three wetland cells is approximately 12,750 ft2 for a total area of 38,250 ft2.
Shape As the schematic to the right shows, Avondale constructed wetland cells are flat and rectangular, with an area of approximately 0.3 acres each.
Hydraulics Wetland cells are lined with 3" of bentonite clay to prevent groundwater influences.
The inlet mechanism into the wetland cells consists of slotted pipes buried in a gravel bed with particle sizes ranging from 3" to 6".
Plugging of the outlet was noted to be a problem.
At the time of the site visit the outlet was not functioning.
This system does not have a mechanism for varying water elevation in the wetland.
At the time of the site visit the wetland system was not discharging.
The operator was able to bypass the wetland system if the lagoon effluent met discharge requirements.
Otherwise, the wetland system operated as an evaporative cell.
Treatment Goals Permitted Discharge Limitations Oil and Grease: CBOD5: BOD5 Removal: TSS: PH, su (min ­ max) Chlorine Residual: Fecal Coliform Bacteria: 10 mg/l (Daily Max) 25 mg/l (30-day avg) 85% 105 mg/l (30-day avg) 6.5 ­ 9.0 (Daily Max) 0.5 mg/l (Daily Max) 6,000 organisms per 100 ml (Daily Max)
Water Quality Data Water quality data were obtained from CDPHE permit files.
The data indicate that the wetlands have not been able to consistently meet permit.
TSS Data Some general observations can be made by reviewing the plotted 30-day average TSS data.
The TSS graph plots the percent removal on the left axis and TSS in mg/l in the effluent on the right axis.
In the months before the wetland was implemented, there was no discharge from the treatment facility.
Since no discharge
Avondale ­ Page 3
Avondale was occurring, data for this period were not reported.
Trends in the TSS data indicate that TSS in the effluent has consistently been below permit limitations.
The most current data indicate that TSS in the effluent has been increasing, while percent removal in the system has been decreasing.
Avondale TSS Performance Wetlands Completed May 1996 100.0% 300
90.0% 250 80.0%
70.0% Percent Removal
200 TSS in Effluent, mg/L
60.0%
TSS % Removal TSS in Effluent
150
50.0%
40.0%
100
30.0% 50 20.0%
10.0%
0
The discharge permit limitation for TSS in the effluent is 105 mg/l for the 30-day average.
Monthly reports submitted to the CDPHE record an average daily TSS in the influent, since the wetlands have been operating, of 165 mg/l.
The average TSS in the effluent is recorded to be 40 mg/l.
This removal clearly meets the discharge requirements of 105 mg/l.
0 n-0 Ja 9 v -9 No 9 p-9 Se 9 l -9 Ju 9 y -9 Ma 9 r-9 Ma 9 n-9 Ja 8 v -9 No 8 p-9 Se 8 l -9 Ju 8 y -9 Ma 8 r-9 Ma 8 n-9 Ja 7 v -9 No 7 p-9 Se 7 l -9 Ju 7 y -9 Ma 7 r-9 Ma 7 n-9 Ja 6 v -9 No 6 p-9 Se 6 l -9 Ju 6 y -9 Ma 6 r-9 Ma 6 n-9 Ja 5 v -9 No 5 p-9 Se 5 l -9 Ju 5 y -9 Ma
Avondale ­ Page 4
Avondale BOD Data Avondale BOD Performance 100.0%
Wetlands Completed May 1996
60
90.0% 50 80.0%
70.0% Percent Removal
40 BOD in Effluent, mg/L
60.0% 30 50.0%
40.0%
20
30.0%
BOD % Removal BOD in Effluent
10
20.0%
10.0%
0
The BOD data is plotted similarly to the TSS data, with mg/l in the effluent on the right axis, and percent removal on the left axis.
The data previous to the wetland implementation is scant, as discharge was not occurring during this period.
The permit for this system changed from reporting BOD5 to reporting CBOD5.
Tests indicate that there is little difference between the two at this system.
The data from this system indicates that CBOD values have exceeded permit limitations.
The average CBOD in the influent, since wetland implementation, has been 185 mg/l, with an average effluent amount of 27 mg/l.
This average value is slightly higher than the permitted value of 25 mg/l.
The percent removal in the system recorded an average value, during this same period, of 83 percent.
This removal is slightly lower than the permitted removal of 85 percent.
pH and Fecal Coliform Data for these two categories have been plotted on the same graph.
Data reflect the quality of the effluent, no influent measurements are taken for these parameters.
The pH values plotted are an average of the minimum and maximum 30-day values that are reported in the monthly reports.
Previous to the wetland implementation, data indicate that average pH values in the effluent were close to the maximum daily allowable of 9.
Since the wetland implementation, pH values have consistently stayed within the allowable range of 6.5 to 9.
0 n-0 Ja 9 v-9 No 9 p-9 Se 9 l-9 Ju 9 y-9 Ma 9 r-9 Ma 9 n-9 Ja 8 v-9 No 8 p-9 Se 8 l-9 Ju 8 y-9 Ma 8 r-9 Ma 8 n-9 Ja 7 v-9 No 7 p-9 Se 7 l-9 Ju 7 y-9 Ma 7 r-9 Ma 7 n-9 Ja 6 v-9 No 6 p-9 Se 6 l-9 Ju 6 y-9 Ma 6 r-9 Ma 6 n-9 Ja 5 v-9 No 5 p-9 Se 5 l-9 Ju 5 y-9 Ma
Avondale ­ Page 5
Avondale Fecal Coliform in the effluent is consistently well below the permit limitations of 6,000 organisms per 100ml.
Avondale pH and FC 3000 9.5
2500
9
8.5 2000 Fecal Coliform 8 1500 7.5 1000 pH CN_FC_EFF PH_OUT
7
500
6.5
0 Sep-94 Apr-95 Oct-95 May-96 Dec-96 Jun-97 Jan-98 Jul-98 Feb-99 Aug-99 Mar-00
6 Oct-00
General Ecological Setting The Avondale wetland is located on the north side of the Town of Avondale, on a terrace above the Arkansas River.
Cell Vegetation Three cells with similar vegetation communities are present at the Avondale site.
Cell 1 is composed of 80 percent water, 10 percent litter, and 10 percent vegetation.
The vegetation community is dominated by cattail (Typha latifolia), duckweed (Lemna minor), and algae, with common reedgrass present but not dominant.
Tamarisk (Tamarix chinensis) and Russian olive (Eleagnus angustifolia) are present on the edges of the cell.
Cell 2 is 75 percent open water, 5 percent litter, and 20 percent vegetation.
The plant community in cell 2 is composed of cattail, duckweed, and barnyard grass (Echinochloa crus-galli).
Cell 3 is 50 percent open water and 50 percent vegetation.
The vegetation community is dominated by cattail, duckweed, common reedgrass (Phragmites australis), barnyard grass, and algae.
Planting/Seeding The wetland was planted with cattail, giant burreed, water lily, dwarf bamboo, duckweed, and yellow water iris.
Most planted/seeded species have not survived.
The water lily, bamboo, and water iris are not specifically adapted to this area, and probably could not compete with species such as cattail.
Avondale ­ Page 6
Avondale Weeds Tamarisk and Russian olive are present on the edges of cell 1.
Tamarisk is a facultative phreatophyte, i.e., it can draw water from underground sources but once established it can survive without access to ground water.
It consumes large quantities of water, possibly more than woody native plant species that occupy similar habitats.
Tamarisk is a maintenance concern and commonly is controlled in riparian areas and wetlands because of its potential to displace native vegetation and its lower value as wildlife habitat.
Russian olive is an introduced ornamental shade tree than can invade waterways and becomes a serious weed problem (Whitson 1996).
It provides little value as wildlife habitat.
Wildlife The Avondale wetland provides habitat for muskrat and snapping turtle.
Muskrats have been problematic, causing vegetation damage and clogging outflows.
This site contains some structural diversity such as open water mixed with cattail stands; however, some of the open water may be a result of a recent die­off.
Also, it should be noted that large areas of open water that lack vegetative cover have lower habitat value.
Wetland Biodiversity Functional Assessment Sediment/nutrient/toxicant removal rated high.
General wildlife habitat and production export/food chain support rated moderate.
Habitat diversity and uniqueness of the constructed wetland rated low.
This wetland received 40 percent of the total possible functional points.
Wetland Biodiversity Functional Assessment.
Function and Value Variables General Wildlife Habitat General Fish/Aquatic Habitat Production Export/Food Chain Support Habitat Diversity Uniqueness Total Points Wetland Category (I, II, III, or IV) Functional Points (0.1 to 1) 0.4 (mod.) 0.0 0.6 (mod.) 0.2 (low) 0.2 (low) 2.4 (48%) III Possible Points 1 1 1 1 1 5
Human Use The wastewater wetland is part of a restricted public access area, and has never been used for educational purposes.
At the time of the site visit, the aesthetic value of this wetland was low because of recent vegetation die offs.
However it has potential to have moderate aesthetic value with viable vegetation.
Avondale ­ Page 7
Avondale
Maintenance Issues Wetlands would benefit from either lowering the water level or raising the soil surface.
The overall system performance could be improved by incorporating a mechanism to allow the water level in the wetland to be lowered.
Overall Site Comments The wetlands at this site have not functioned as intended.
It is possible that the shallow lagoons are not achieving the treatment anticipated and are therefore overloading the wetland system.
Avondale ­ Page 8
Bennett
Bennett Facility Statistics Nearest Town: County: River Basin: Receiving Water Body: Year Operational: Population: Wetland cells
Aerated lagoons
Bennett Adams Middle South Platte Unnamed drainage ­ tributary to Lost Creek Pilot scale studies 2200 5490 0.42 0.08 2
Elevation (feet): Design Flow (mgd): Average Flow (mgd): Size (acres):
Wetland trench ­ not yet planted
Facility Description The Bennett system is minor municipal aerated lagoon system.
The facility consists of two aerated lagoons, one polishing pond, and a chlorine contact basin.
The permitted design capacity of the Bennett system is 0.42 million gallons per day for hydraulic flow (30day average).
The Town is conducting a reuse pilot study using the facility effluent in constructed wetlands.
These studies include the use of solar powered motors and pumps, and aerators.
An ion generator is being used to kill both bacteria and algae.
Independent testing and subsequent trials indicate that ion generator disinfection method will meet CDPHE requirements.
Bennett plans to reuse its effluent by supporting a retail nursery, irrigation for parks and a ball field, and the incorporation of hot houses for commercial crops.
Bennett ­ Page 1
Bennett
Background Information On July 29, 1993 the Town of Bennett was issued a Notice of Violation and Cease and Desist Order for exceeding permitted BOD5 effluent limits.
The plant was originally designed to operate as a three-pond system.
This proved to be too expensive to operate and the plant was cut back to one pond.
Pond 1 was curtained off to provide a primary pond, with floating aerators, a secondary pond with floating aerators, and a covered polishing pond.
Design based on population growth that did not occur.
The main problem has been abnormally heavy algae growth.
The town is conducting a reuse pilot study using constructed wetlands.
At this time, the wetlands are not a part of the treatment process.
The facility consists of a three-cell lagoon system: cell 1 is operated as a complete mix lagoon, cell 2 is operated as a partial mix lagoon, and cell3 functions as a polishing pond, and a chlorine contact basin.
Energy Analysis: The site uses 4 ­ 7.5 hp aerators running full-time.
This results in an annual energy consumption of 196,000 kw/year.
The Town is currently experimenting with low energy processes to reduce the energy consumption.
These processes include solar-powered aerators, and ion-generators to assist with disinfection.
Construction Cost The Town of Bennett was able to retrofit existing ponds with minimal construction.
One of the original lagoons was converted to a wetland area.
Earthwork was provided to divide the lagoon into 4 connected cells.
It was estimated that the cost to implement the wetland was around $150,000.
Design Design Methods The Bennett wetlands were designed to fit into the existing site.
An abandoned lagoon was retrofit to incorporate the subsurface portion of the wetland.
A ditch along the perimeter of the site serves as a subsurface wetland.
Objectives The Bennett wastewater treatment plant is has been updated in recent years to consistently meet effluent permit requirements.
The implementation of the wetland cells have the primary goal of further cleansing the water, providing wetland plants for reuse and experimental area for testing low energy treatment methods.
Size An existing lagoon has been retrofit to include a constructed wetland system.
The lagoon is approximately 1.8 acres.
A cattail and gravel trench has been constructed to transport the effluent from the wetland system to the chlorine contact basin.
This trench is approximately 20 feet wide and approximately 700 feet long.
Bennett ­ Page 2
Bennett Shape Berms have been constructed to divide the lagoon into five cells that are connected by a serpentine flow path.
The cattail and gravel trench that runs along the perimeter of the FWS wetland cells is designed as a subsurface component of this system.
Hydraulics The wetland system has been designed to include operating flexibility.
Splitter boxes are provided to allow the bypass of the wetland system.
The first portion of the wetland receives flow by gravity from the lagoon system.
The inlet pipe from the splitter box discharges directly into the wetland.
After winding through the serpentine wetland system, flow collects at a holding cell along the western side of the wetland.
A pump is used to lift the water to the gravel and cattail trench.
The water flows by gravity in this trench along the perimeter of the wetland cells.
At the end of the trench, the flow can be directed into a greenhouse or directly into the chlorine contact chamber.
Water Quality Data At the time of this study, the Bennett system was not a component of the permitted treatment facility.
No monthly discharge testing records are available for this wetland system.
General Ecological Setting The four Bennett constructed wetland cells are flat and rectangular.
Three of the cells have an area of approximately 0.10 acre each, and cell 4 is approximately 0.20 acre.
The wetland currently is not discharging.
The Bennett treatment wetland is located in an upland agricultural area on the north side of the Town of Bennett.
Cell Vegetation Each cell at the Bennett site has a slightly different vegetation composition, and a different ratio of vegetation to water.
Cell 1 is composed of 98 percent water and 2 percent vegetation.
Two vegetation communities are present in cell 1.
Vegetation community 1, which comprises 60 percent of cell vegetation, is dominated by cattail (Typha latifolia) and softstem bulrush (Scirpus tabernamontanae).
The remaining 40 percent is composed of barnyard grass (Echinochloa crus-galli), curly dock (Rumex crispus) and pinkweed (Polygonum pensylvanica).
Cell 2 is 3 percent open water and 97 percent vegetated.
There is a single plant community, which is dominated by duckweed (Lemna minor), cattail, and softstem bulrush.
Cell 3 is similar to cell 2 and has the same vegetation-to-water ratio.
Vegetation community 1, which comprises 65 percent of cell vegetation, is dominated by cattail and softstem bulrush.
The remaining 35 percent is composed of pinkweed, barnyard grass, and curly dock.
Cell 4, which is twice the size of cells 1, 2, and 3, is 97 percent vegetation and 3 percent water.
It has a single vegetation community, which is dominated by duckweed, cattail, and softstem bulrush.
Bennett ­ Page 3
Bennett Planting/Seeding In the Spring of 1999 seedlings were planted.
No surface mulch was added.
Duckweed and Daphnia were introduced to the system 3 to 4 years ago.
Weeds No noxious weeds were found on the site.
Maintenance Issues A portion of the Bennett system will serve as a nursery for wetland plants.
This area will be harvested as needed.
Wildlife The Bennett wetland provides habitat for red winged black birds and waterfowl.
Red winged black birds were observed during the site visit.
The wetland has some structural diversity because it contains both shallow water and areas of emergent vegetation.
However, its value is limited because only a small portion of the wetland is vegetated; open water comprises most of the wetland cells.
Wetland Biodiversity Functional Assessment Sediment/nutrient/toxicant removal rated high.
General wildlife habitat and production export/food chain support rated moderate.
Habitat diversity and uniqueness of the constructed wetland rated moderate to low.
This wetland received 43 percent of the total possible functional points, and was classified as a category III wetland.
Wetland Biodiversity Functional Assessment.
Function and Value Variables General Wildlife Habitat General Fish/Aquatic Habitat Production Export/Food Chain Support Habitat Diversity Uniqueness Total Points Wetland Category (I, II, III, or IV) Functional Points (0.1 to 1) 0.5 (mod.) 0.0 0.7 (mod.) 0.2 (low) 0.2 (low) 2.6 (52%) III Possible Points 1 1 1 1 1 5
Human Use The wastewater wetland is part of a restricted public access area.
This wetland has low to moderate aesthetic value because it is dominated mainly by open water.
This facility has been included in a `smart growth' study being conducted by the OEMC due to the alternative energy methods being.
Bennett ­ Page 4
Bennett
Overall Site Comments At the time of the site visit, the wetland was still being constructed.
The use of a both surface and subsurface flow wetland components is a unique treatment design.
Bennett ­ Page 5
Hi-Land Acres W
Hi-Land Acres Facility Statistics Aerated lagoon #1
Nearest Town: County: River Basin: Receiving Water Body: Year Operational: Population:
Brighton Adams Upper South Platte Todd Creek 1998 300 5144 0.055 0.022 0.21
Aerated lagoon #2
Elevation (feet): Design Flow (mgd): Average Flow (mgd): Size (acres):
Subsurface Flow Wetland Cell
Facility Description The Hi-Land Acres Water and Sanitation District wastewater treatment facility is a mi system.
The facility consists of two completely mixed aerated lagoons and one settling subsurface flow treatment wetland and gas chlorination.
The influent flow is measured flume with a continuous recorder and totalizer.
The effluent flow is measured by a 90° a continuous recorder and totalizer. nor municipal lagoon pond followed by a by a 6-inch Parshall v-notched weir with
The two aerated cells are equipped with four aspirating aerators, that apply approximately 27 percent more energy than is recommended in the 1983 USEPA design manual for complete mix aerated lagoon systems.
The goal of using high energy mechanical mixers coupled with long residence times is to achieve complete nitrification.
Hi-Land Acres Water 
Hi-Land Acres W
Suspended solids, particularly algae, will settle out in the settling pond.
The wetland cell will then intercept most of the remaining suspended solids before discharge to the chlorine facility and ultimately final discharge to the receiving water body.
Lagoons The Hi-Land Acres lagoon system consists of 2 completely mixed aerated cells followed by 1 settling cell.
Some features of the lagoon system are detailed in the table below.
Lagoon Information Cell No.: Surface Area (sq. ft.) Avg.
Depth (ft) Avg.
Volume (Million gallons) Detention time (days) Aerator size (hp) 6.6 30 6.6 30 4.0 NA 1 9,840 12 0.40 2 9,840 12 0.40 3 9,753 8 0.23
Background Information The Hi-Land Acres District has operated a wastewater treatment facility since 1964.
Numerous violations of the permit effluent parameters during the period from 1987 to 1992 have been recorded.
In the fall of 1995 the system was in "Significant Noncompliance" due to exceeding effluent limitations for BOD5 and TSS.
In addition, the facility has had a history of numerous pH violations.
The District undertook several system modifications to improve the effluent quality.
In November of 1998, the aerated lagoon was divided into two smaller cells to reduce the hydraulic retention time.
Pontoon supported aspirating mechanical aerators replaced the failing synthetic membrane diffusers.
In addition new outlet control structures were added to allow flexibility in the operating water level in each lagoon cell.
The subsurface wetland system was added to polish the lagoon effluent prior to chlorine disinfection and final discharge to Todd Creek.
Energy Analysis The Hi-Land Acres system utilizes 4-7.5 hp motors in its aerated lagoon system.
The aerators are operated full-time with 39 hp per million gallons of mixing power.
This results electrical consumption of 640 kW per day.
Construction, Maintenance and Operational Cost The approximate construction costs for this system were $250,000.
The wetland was installed in an abandoned lagoon, so earthwork was minimized.
Annual maintenance and operational costs are approximately $20,000.
Hi-Land Acres Water 
Hi-Land Acres W
A hydraulic residence time of 36 hours at design flows was used to size the wetland system.
Size The wetland area is approximately 9,148 ft2.
The depth of the media in the wetland cell is 4.5 feet with a porosity of 28%.
This provides a water volume in the cell of approximately 1,525 cubic yards.
Shape The subsurface flow wetland was installed by retrofitting an abandoned lagoon.
The overall shape of the wetland is roughly square, with a length to width ratio of 1:1.
Hydraulics The wetland consists of shallow earthen basin filled with ¾ - inch gravel placed to a depth of 3.5 feet.
Lagoon effluent is distributed through the wetland area by a perforated pipe buried in the gravel media.
The wetland effluent discharges through a perforated pipe buried in the gravel media into an outlet control structure.
Aluminum stop logs in the outlet control structure form a weir to control the water surface elevation in the wetland.
Stop logs can be inserted or removed to vary the water surface elevation and hydraulic retention time in the wetland.
Effectiveness The lagoon/wetland system has shown promising results.
Tests taken show that the wetland removes 53 percent of the BOD and 58 percent of the TSS remaining in the lagoon system effluent.
Treatment Goals Permitted Discharge Limitations Oil and Grease: BOD5: BOD5 Removal: TSS: PH, su (min ­ max) Chlorine Residual: Fecal Coliform Bacteria: 10 mg/l (Daily Max) 30 mg/l (30-day ave) 85% 75 mg/l (30-day ave) 6.5 ­ 9.0 (Daily Max) 0.02 mg/l (Daily Max) 1,500 organisms per 100 ml (Daily Max)
Hi-Land Acres Water 
Hi-Land Acres W
Water Quality Data Water quality data was obtained from CDPHE permit files.
The data indicate that within a year of implementing the wetlands, permit limitations have been consistently met.
TSS Data Some general observations can be made by reviewing the plotted 30-day average TSS data.
The TSS graph plots the percent removal on the left axis and TSS in mg/l in the effluent on the right axis.
In the months before the wetland was implemented, there was no discharge from the treatment facility.
Since no discharge was occurring, data for this period were not reported.
Trends in the TSS data indicate that TSS in the effluent has consistently been below permit limitations.
The discharge permit limitation for TSS in the effluent is for the 30-day average.
Monthly reports submitted to the CDPHE, since the wetlands have been operating, record an average daily TSS in the influent of 172 mg/l.
The average TSS in the effluent during this same time period is recorded to be 11mg/l.
The removal clearly meets the discharge requirements of 105mg/l.
Hi-Land Acres Water 
Hi-Land Acres W
90.0% 50
80.0%
60.0%
TSS % Remov al TSS in Effluent (mg/L) 30
50.0%
40.0%
20
30.0% 10
20.0%
10.0% 8 y -9 Ma 8 l-9 Ju 9 y -9 Ma 9 l-9 Ju 8 n -9 Ja 8 r -9 Ma 8 p-9 Se 8 v -9 No 9 n -9 Ja 9 r -9 Ma 9 p-9 Se 9 v -9 No 0 n -0 Ja
0
BOD Data The BOD data is plotted similarly to the TSS data, with mg/l in the effluent on the right axis, and percent removal on the left axis.
Since the wetland implementation, BOD in the effluent and percent removal have visibly improved.
The average BOD in the influent has been 194 mg/l, since wetland implementation has been, with an average effluent amount of 6 mg/l.
Hi-Land Acres BOD Performance Wetlands Completed in 1999 30 1.2
25
T S S i n E f f l ue nt, mg /L
70.0% Pe r c e n t R e m o v a l
40
1
20 Percent Removal
0.8 BOD in Effluent, mg/L
15
0.6
10 BOD in Effluent BOD % Removal
0.4
5
0.2
0 Sep-97 Jan-98 Apr-98 Jul-98 Nov-98 Feb-99 May-99 Aug-99 Dec-99
0 Mar-00
Hi-Land Acres Water 
Hi-Land Acres W
Data reflect the quality of the effluent, no influent measurements are taken for these parameters.
The pH values plotted are an average of the minimum and maximum 30-day values that are reported in the monthly reports.
Previous to the wetland implementation, data indicate that average pH values in the effluent were close to the maximum daily allowable of 9.
Since the wetland implementation, pH values have consistently stayed within the allowable range of 6.5 to 9.
Fecal Coliform in the effluent is consistently well below the permit limitations of 6000 organisms per 100ml.
Hi-Land Acres pH and FC in Effluent 1800 9
8.8 1500 8.6
8.4 1200 Fecal Coliform 8.2 CN_FC_EFF PH_OUT
900
8
7.8 600 7.6
7.4 300 7.2
0 Sep-97 Jan-98 Apr-98 Jul-98 Nov-98 Feb-99 May-99 Aug-99 Dec-99
7 Mar-00
General Ecological Setting Highland Acres is sited along Todd Creek, a tributary to the South Platte River in Adams County.
The wastewater treatment lagoons and subsurface wetland are in an upland area where rolling hills are dominated by shortgrass prairie and other introduced grass and weed species.
Todd Creek is about 300 yards downslope of the treatment facility, and it supports a narrow riparian corridor with scattered plains cottonwood trees and other shrubs.
Hi-Land Acres Water 
Hi-Land Acres W
Cell Vegetation The Highland Acres wetland consists of one square cell, approximately ¼ acre, with two plant communities.
Plant community 1, which represents 90 percent of the total cell area, is dominated by prickly lettuce (Lactuca seriola) and ragweed (Amaranthus retroflexis).
Plant community 2, which represents 10 percent of the total cell area, is dominated by cattail (Typha latifolia) and lady's thumb (Polygonum persicaria)
Planting/Seeding No wetland planting or seeding was performed at the site.
Plant establishment relied on plant colonization from adjoining areas.
Weeds A small stand of Canada thistle (Cirsium arvense) is located in the wetland area.
Canada thistle, a State Noxious Weed, is particularly invasive in areas of recent disturbance, and spreads quickly.
It prevents the establishment of or displaces native species and has low value as wildlife habitat.
Maintenance Issues Deepening the lagoons and covering the sedimentation lagoon with a floating cover to prevent algae growth could improve wetland effectiveness.
Wildlife Vegetative diversity and subsequent wildlife habitat value are low.
Much of the subsurface wetland has not been colonized by vegetation or has been colonized by weeds only.
Gravel may limit the establishment of vegetation valuable to wildlife, as.
From a landscape perspective, the treatment wetland does not provide unique functions and value for wildlife, although the lagoons provide small areas of open water, which is uncommon in the area.
Wetland Biodiversity Functional Assessment The general wildlife habitat, habitat diversity, and uniqueness of the Highland Acres constructed wetland rated low.
Sediment/nutrient toxicant removal was rated moderate.
Total functional points were 15 percent of the total possible, and the wetland was rated in category IV, the lowest value rating.
Wetland Biodiversity Functional Assessment.
Function and Value Variables General Wildlife Habitat General Fish/Aquatic Habitat Production Export/Food Chain Support Habitat Diversity Uniqueness Total Points Functional Points (0.1 to 1) 0.1 (low) NA 0.1 (low) 0.1 (low) 0.1 (low) 0.9 (18%) Possible Points 1 1 1 1 1 5
Hi-Land Acres Water 
Hi-Land Acres W
Wetland Biodiversity Functional Assessment.
Function and Value Variables Wetland Category (I, II, III, or IV) Functional Points (0.1 to 1) IV Possible Points
Human Use The wastewater wetland is part of a restricted public access area, and has never been used for educational purposes.
This wetland has low aesthetic value because areas of bare gravel and weedy species dominate it.
The Hi-Land Acres wetland system was the subject of a paper presented at the October 2000 Water Environment Federation Annual Conference1.
Overall Site Comments While this site functions quite effectively in its intended wastewater treatment function, a large portion of the site has not developed wetland vegetation.
The sewage lagoons at the site provide open water habitat for wildlife, but the treatment wetland provides only limited habitat.
1
Lutz, Michael P., Perasso, Paul M., Yamamoto, Tom, and Watson, Roger.
"Nitrification and Denitrification in Aerated Lagoons Coupled with Artificial Wetlands", presented at WEFTEC 2000.
Hi-Land Acres Water 
Calhan
Aerated Lagoons
Calhan Facility Statistics Nearest Town: County: River Basin: Receiving Water Body: Calhan El Paso Lower Arkansas Tributary to Big Sandy Creek 1996 850 6541 0.080 0.065 0.31
Ponding water in wetland
Year On-line: Population: Elevation (feet): Design Flow (mgd): Average Flow (mgd): Size (acres):
Plant diversity in wetland
Receiving water body
Facility Description The Calhan wastewater treatment facility is a minor municipal aerated lagoon system.
This system consists of two complete-mix, mechanically aerated lagoons, one facultative lagoon, and an artificial wetland.
Subsurface wetlands were included in this wastewater treatment facility to remove suspended solids from Calhan ­ Page 1
Calhan lagoon effluent and to prevent algal blooms in the flood control reservoirs that receive effluent from this facility.
Lagoons Some features of the Calhan lagoon system are detailed in the table below.
Lagoon Information Cell No.: Surface Area (sq. ft.) Avg.
Depth (ft) Avg.
Volume (Million gallons) Detention time (days) Aerator size (hp) 6.7 14 6.7 14 6.7 NA 1 11,800 12 0.536 2 11,800 12 0.536 3 11,800 12 0.536
Background Information The Calhan wastewater treatment facility is a new system.
Constructed treatment wetlands were included as a component of the aerated lagoon system in order to provide final polishing before discharge from the site.
The wetland cells were designed to be subsurface flow systems.
At the time of the site visit, the water was flowing at about 3" above the gravel surface.
Energy Analysis: Energy consumption at this site is minimal.
The aerated lagoons operate 2-7.5 hp aerators.
Wetland Design Design Methods The wetland size was based on regression analysis of 14 full scale systems.
In addition, design data from the Las Animas study1 were used as a guide.
Based on this empirical data, a gravel size of ¾" and a void space in the soil media of 28% were used.
In addition, it was determined from this data, that a hydraulic retention time of 2.1 days would be sufficient to meet design requirements.
Objectives This system was designed to reduce TSS in the lagoon effluent.
Effluent from the lagoon was determined to range from 30 to 60 mg/l, with a peak effluent TSS of 250 mg/l in summer months, due to algal carryover.
The wetland cells were designed to have 36-inch deep beds in consideration of freezing temperatures.
1
"Subsurface Flow Wetlands ­ A Performance Evaluation", Water Environment Research, Vol.67, No.2.
Calhan ­ Page 2
Calhan Size The subsurface wetland system consists of two cells with a surface area of 0.31 acres each.
The depth of the soil media is 3feet.
1500 cubic yards of ¾ -inch rock provide a void space of 28%.
Shape The wetlands are roughly triangular, with the inlet wider than the outlet width.
Hydraulics Slotted pipe is used to convey water from the lagoons to the wetland cells.
A 2'x4' water level control is used at this site.
No lining was used since the natural soils are clayey.
It is noted that the system has settled about 8" to 1' into the clay.
This system was designed as a subsurface flow system, but due to settling of the system and possibly plugging, the system operates as a free water surface wetland.
Calhan ­ Page 3
Calhan
Treatment Goals Permitted Discharge Limitations Oil and Grease: CBOD5: BOD5 Removal: TSS: PH, su (min ­ max) Chlorine Residual: Fecal Coliform Bacteria: 10 mg/l (Daily Max) 30 mg/l (30-day ave) 85% 75 mg/l (30-day ave) 6.5 ­ 9.0 (Daily Max) 0.5 mg/l (Daily Max) 2,000 organisms per 100 ml (Daily Max)
Water Quality Data Water quality data were obtained from CDPHE permit files.
Since the wetland implementation in 1997, the Calhan Wastewater Treatment Facility has consistently met its discharge permit requirements.
TSS Data The TSS graph plots the percent removal on the left axis and TSS in mg/l in the effluent on the right axis.
Some general observations can be made by reviewing the plotted 30-day average TSS data.
Since the wetland system has come online, the average monthly TSS in the influent to the facility has been 241 mg/l Calhan TSS Performance Wetlands Completed July 1997 100.0% 30
90.0% 25 80.0%
70.0% Percent Removal
20 TSS in Effluent, mg/L
60.0%
TSS % Removal 50.0%
TSS in Effluent
15
40.0%
10
30.0% 5 20.0%
10.0%
0
0 n- 0 Ja
9 l-9 Ju
6 l-9 Ju
9 v-9 No
6 y-9 Ma
6 v-9 No
7 r-9 Ma
9 y-9 Ma
9 p-9 Se
7 n- 9 Ja
7 y-9 Ma
8 v-9 No
6 p-9 Se
6 r-9 Ma
9 n- 9 Ja
7 l-9 Ju
6 n- 9 Ja
9 r-9 Ma
7 v-9 No
8 r-9 Ma
7 p-9 Se
8 n- 9 Ja
8 y-9 Ma
8 p-9 Se
8 l-9 Ju
Calhan ­ Page 4
Calhan and the average monthly TSS in the effluent has been 6 mg/l.
Peaks in the system correlate with the annual Watermelon Festival, which brings large crowds to the area.
BOD Data The BOD data is plotted similarly to the TSS data, with mg/l in the effluent on the right axis, and percent removal on the left axis.
The average monthly BOD in the influent has been 245 mg/l and the average BOD in the effluent has been 11 mg/l.
Calhan BOD Performance Wetlands Completed Prior to July 1997 100% 80
70 90% 60 BOD in Effluent, mg/L
Percent Removal
80% BOD % Removal BOD in Effluent 70%
50
40
30
20 60% 10
50% 7 l- 9 Ju 7 y-9 Ma 7 p -9 Se 8 l- 9 Ju 8 y-9 Ma 9 r -9 Ma 9 l- 9 Ju 9 y-9 Ma 7 r -9 Ma 6 r -9 Ma 8 p -9 Se 9 p -9 Se 7 v-9 No 8 r -9 Ma 9 n-9 Ja 8 v-9 No 6 l- 9 Ju 6 y-9 Ma 8 n-9 Ja 6 p -9 Se 7 n-9 Ja 6 n-9 Ja 9 v-9 No 6 v-9 No 0 n-0 Ja
0
pH and Fecal Coliform Data for these two categories has been plotted on the same graph.
Data reflect the quality of the effluent; no influent measurements are taken for these parameters.
The pH values plotted are an average of the minimum and maximum 30-day values that are reported in the monthly reports.
Since the wetland implementation, pH values have consistently stayed within the allowable range of 6.5 to 9.
Previous to the wetland implementation, the fecal coliform values fluctuated considerably.
Since the wetland implementation, the fecal coliform values have consistently met permit requirements.
Calhan ­ Page 5
Calhan
Calhan pH and FC in Effluent 2500 CN_FC_EFF PH_OUT 2000 8.5 9
8 Fecal Coliform 1500 7.5 1000 7
500
6.5
0 Apr-95 Oct-95 May-96 Dec-96 Jun-97 Jan-98 Jul-98 Feb-99 Aug-99 Mar-00
6 Oct-00
General Ecological Setting The Calhan constructed wetland cell is flat and rectangular.
It has an area of approximately 0.7 acre.
The wetland discharges to an unnamed tributary to Big Sandy Creek.
The wetland is located northeast of the town of Calhan in a rangeland area.
Cell Vegetation The Calhan wetland is comprised of a single wetland cell with two plant communities.
The cell is composed of 30 percent water, 20 percent rock, and 50 percent vegetation.
Plant community 1, which is 60 percent of the vegetated wetland area, is dominated by cattail (Typha latifolia), duckweed (Lemna minor), and barnyard grass (Echinochloa crus-galli), with a few foxtail barley (Hordeum jubatum.
Plant community 2, which comprises 40 percent of the vegetated area, is dominated by pinkweed (Polygonum pensylvanica), curly dock (Rumex crispus), and Canada thistle (Cirsium arvense), with plains cottonwood (Populus deltoides), crack willow (Salix fragilis), and prickly lettuce (Lactuca seriola) present but not dominant.
Planting/Seeding Cattails were planted at the site.
Weeds Canada thistle is present in plant community 2.
A State Noxious Weed, Canada thistle is particularly invasive in areas of recent disturbance, and spreads quickly.
It prevents the establishment of, or displaces, native species and has low value as wildlife habitat.
Calhan ­ Page 6
Calhan
Wildlife The Calhan wetland provides habitat for muskrat, deer, pronghorn, songbirds, waterfowl, and mudpuppies.
Teal, red winged black birds, and killdeer were observed during the site visit.
This wetland has fairly high structural diversity, because it contains areas of open water, two plant communities, and areas of open gravel.
The diversity is maintained in part because the water surface elevation is not consistent.
No muskrats have invaded the wetland area, although muskrats have been observed in the adjacent receiving pond.
A fence is provided to prevent intrusion by antelope and cows from the adjacent ranch.
Wetland Biodiversity Functional Assessment Sediment/nutrient/toxicant removal rated high.
General wildlife habitat and production export/food chain support rated moderate.
Habitat diversity and uniqueness of the constructed wetland rated moderate to low.
This wetland received 43 percent of the possible functional points.
It rated as a category III wetland.
Wetland Biodiversity Functional Assessment.
Function and Value Variables General Wildlife Habitat General Fish/Aquatic Habitat Production Export/Food Chain Support Habitat Diversity Uniqueness Total Points Wetland Category (I, II, III, or IV) Functional Points (0.1 to 1) 0.5 (mod.) 0.0 0.7 (mod.) 0.2 (low) 0.2 (low) 2.6 (52%) III Possible Points 1 1 1 1 1 5
Human Use The wastewater wetland is part of a restricted public access area.
The purposes during field trips by local 4th graders.
This wetland has high maintained and because of its situation on the landscape.
The outflow draw, supporting riparian vegetation, then into a stock pond, both the valuable habitat.
site has been used for educational aesthetic value because it is well from the wetland flows through a draw and the stock pond provide
Maintenance Issues The site will be harvested for the first time this year.
The primary maintenance issue noted is the weed control.
Calhan ­ Page 7
Calhan
Overall Site Comments This wetland is functioning well, and provides a mosaic of vegetation types, open water, and bare areas.
The draw and stockpond into which water from this wetland flows add greatly to the biological and aesthetic value of this treatment wetland.
Even though this system does not operate as designed, it does consistently meet its permit requirements.
Calhan ­ Page 8
Crowley
Aerators on lagoon
Crowley Facility Statistics Nearest Town: County: River Basin: Receiving Water Body: Crowley Crowley Lower Arkansas Crowley Drain Canal 1996 1200 4354 0.170 0.126 3.04
Influent pipe to wetland
Year Online: Population: Elevation (feet): Design Flow (mgd): Average Flow (mgd): Size (acres):
Wetland cell along barrier
Receiving stream
Facility Description The Town of Crowley wastewater facility is a minor municipal lagoon system.
85 percent of the wastewater flow is attributed to the nearby prison and 15 percent is attributed to the Town of Crowley.
The facility consists of three aerated lagoons, a polishing pond, two constructed wetland cells, and a chlorine contact
Crowley ­ Page 1
Crowley chamber.
The influent flow is measured by two ultrasonic meters with a totalizer.
The effluent flow is measured by a 45° v-notch weir.
This facility services a nearby correctional facility.
Lagoons The Crowley lagoons are configured as follows: Lagoon Information Cell No.: Surface Area (sq. ft.) Avg.
Depth (ft) Avg.
Volume (Million gallons) Detention time (days) Aerator size (hp) 9.2 36 7.7 10 3.9 5 4.3 NA 1 43,950 5.5 1.57 2 38,050 5.5 1.313 3 20,580 5.3 0.658 4 23,270 5.1 0.723
Background Information This surface flow wetland system was constructed in 1994.
The incorporation of the constructed wetland treatment component was undertaken to polish lagoon systems effluent to remove particulate matter, primarily algae, and the organic load associated with the discharge of this particulate matter.
Energy Analysis The aerators on the lagoons consume the majority of the energy at this site.
The site has a total of 6 ­ 5hp aerators and 8 ­ 3hp aerators.
Wetland Design Design Methods A review of literature indicates that the two most significant design parameters with regard to TSS control are hydraulic residence time and aspect ratio.
The design of the wetland was based on a hrt of 6 days under summer operating conditions and a minimum aspect ratio of 10:1.
BOD removal predicted by first order, plug flow, reaction kinetics model developed by Reed, Middlebrooks and Crites.
A hydraulic loading rate of 1.228 gpd/ft2 was selected.
A common range for secondary and tertiary treatment is 15 to 25 acres / mgd.
The wetland area provided is 3.042 acres, or a winter loading of 18.8 acres/mgd and a summer loading of 20.2 acres /mgd.
Objectives
Crowley ­ Page 2
Crowley The wetland component was designed to remove BOD from the lagoon effluent as a result of algal carryover.
Size The cells have a total surface area of 132,500 square feet.
Shape The wetland cells are rectangular, with a serpentine flow pattern.
Hydraulics Perforated irrigation pipe is used to introduce the wastewater into the wetland system.
The flow path through the cells is serpentine in order to provide the maximum hydraulic residence time in the system and to minimize short-circuiting.
The barrier walls between the wetland cells are constructed of timber.
This material poses a problem during burn-off of the wetland cells.
Construction, Maintenance and Operational Cost The approximate construction costs for this system were $350,000.
Treatment Goals Permitted Discharge Limitations Oil and Grease: BOD5: BOD5 Removal: TSS: PH, su (min ­ max) Chlorine Residual: Fecal Coliform Bacteria: 10 mg/l (Daily Max) 30 mg/l (30-day ave) 85% 75 mg/l (30-day ave) 6.5 ­ 9.0 (Daily Max) 0.5 mg/l (Daily Max) 2,000 organisms per 100 ml (Daily Max)
Water Quality Data Water quality data was obtained from CDPHE permit files
TSS Data
Crowley ­ Page 3
Crowley The TSS graph plots the percent removal on the left axis and TSS in mg/l in the effluent on the right axis.
Trends in the TSS data indicate that TSS in the effluent has consistently been below permit limitations.
Town of Crowley TSS Performance Wetlands Completed March 1994
100.0% 90.0% 80.0% 70.0% Percent Removal 60.0% 50.0% 40.0% 30.0% 20.0% 10.0% TSS % Removal TSS in Effluent
180 160 140 TSS in Effluent, mg/L 120 100 80 60 40 20 0 0 b-0 Fe 9 c-9 De 9 t-9 Oc 9 g-9 Au 9 n-9 Ju 9 r-9 Ap 9 b-9 Fe 8 c-9 De 8 t-9 Oc 8 g-9 Au 8 n-9 Ju 8 r-9 Ap 8 b-9 Fe 7 c-9 De 7 t-9 Oc 7 g-9 Au 7 n-9 Ju 7 r-9 Ap 7 b-9 Fe 6 c-9 De 6 t-9 Oc 6 g-9 Au 6 n-9 Ju 6 r-9 Ap 6 b-9 Fe 5 c-9 De 5 t-9 Oc 5 g-9 Au 5 n-9 Ju 5 r-9 Ap 5 b-9 Fe 4 c-9 De 4 t-9 Oc 4 g-9 Au 4 n-9 Ju 4 r-9 Ap 4 b-9 Fe 3 c-9 De 3 t-9 Oc 3 g-9 Au 3 n-9 Ju 3 r-9 Ap
The average daily TSS in the influent, since the wetlands have been operating, has been 489 mg/l.
The average TSS in the effluent is recorded to be 29 mg/l.
This removal clearly meets the discharge requirements of 75 mg/l.
BOD Data
Crowley ­ Page 4
Crowley The BOD data is plotted similarly to the TSS data, with mg/l in the effluent on the right axis, and percent removal on the left axis.
Average monthly influent BOD has been 220 mg/l, the average monthly effluent from the system has been 22 mg/l.
This clearly meets discharge requirements of 30 mg/l.
Town of Crowley BOD Performance Wetland Operational March 1994 100%
60 BOD % Removal BOD in Effluent
50
90% Percent Removal
40 BOD in Effluent, mg/L
30
80%
20
10
70%
0 0 b-0 Fe 99 cDe 99 tOc 99 gAu 9 n-9 Ju 99 rAp 9 b-9 Fe 98 cDe 98 tOc 98 gAu 8 n-9 Ju 98 rAp 8 b-9 Fe 97 cDe 97 tOc 97 gAu 7 n-9 Ju 97 rAp 7 b-9 Fe 96 cDe 96 tOc 96 gAu 6 n-9 Ju 96 rAp 6 b-9 Fe 95 cDe 95 tOc 95 gAu 5 n-9 Ju 95 rAp 5 b-9 Fe 94 cDe 94 tOc 94 gAu 4 n-9 Ju 94 rAp 4 b-9 Fe 93 cDe 93 tOc 93 gAu 3 n-9 Ju 93 rAp
pH and Fecal Coliform Data for these two categories has beenCrowley pH same graph.
Dataluent the quality of the effluent, no Town of plotted on the and FC in Eff reflect influent measurements are taken for these parameters.
The pH values plotted are an average of the minimum 9000 and maximum 30-day values that are reported in the monthly reports.
Previous to the wetland 9.5 CN_ close implementation, data indicate that average pH values in the effluent wereFC_EFF to, and sometimes PH_OUT 8000 exceeding, the maximum daily allowable of 9.
Since the wetland implementation, pH values have 9 consistently stayed within the allowable range of 6.5 to 9.
7000
Fecal Coliform
The average fecal coliforms being discharged from the system since the wetland implementation have been 8.5 60 g 717 m00/l.
Spikes in the fecal coliform concentrations have led to permit violations.
It was determined that these high values were due to a lack of dissolved oxygen (DO) in the wetlands.
This low DO in the 8 5000 wastewater resulted in problems with supplying sufficient chlorine to achieve adequate disinfection of the effluent.
4000 7.5 3000 7 2000 6.5
1000
0 Sep-91 Jan-93 Jun-94 Oct-95 Mar-97 Jul-98 Dec-99
Crowley ­ Page 5 6 Apr-01
Crowley
General Ecological Setting The Crowley treatment wetland is located along a ditch that empties into the Arkansas River.
The cells are flat, rectangular, and are 99 percent vegetated and 1 percent open water.
This wetland is located in an agricultural area southeast of the Town of Crowley.
Cell Vegetation The Crowley site consists of two identical cells, which total 0.46 acres.
The two cells support identical plant communities dominated by cattail (98 percent--Typha latifolia) and duckweed (3 percent--Lemna minor).
The soil surface is inundated from 0 to 1 foot.
Planting/Seeding Cattails were transplanted from a nearby ditch.
Weeds No noxious weeds were found on the project site.
Wildlife The Crowley constructed wetland provides habitat for muskrat, songbirds, and waterfowl.
Several bird species, including swallows, killdeer, curlew, mallard, red wing blackbird, and avocet, were observed during the site visit.
The vegetation in this wetland is not structurally diverse, and probably is of limited value to wildlife.
Red winged black birds probably nest in the wetland, but the wetland does not provide unique, diverse habitat for wildlife.
Wetland Biodiversity Functional Assessment Sediment/nutrient/toxicant removal rated high.
General wildlife habitat and production export/food chain support rated moderate.
Habitat diversity and uniqueness of the constructed wetland rated moderate to low.
This wetland received 42 percent of the total possible functional points and was rated functionally as a category III wetland.
Wetland Biodiversity Functional Assessment.
Function and Value Variables General Wildlife Habitat General Fish/Aquatic Habitat Production Export/Food Chain Support Habitat Diversity Uniqueness Total Points Functional Points (0.1 to 1) 0.4 (mod.) 0.0 0.7 (mod.) 0.2 (low) 0.2 (low) 2.5 (50%) Possible Points 1 1 1 1 1 5
Crowley ­ Page 6
Crowley
Wetland Biodiversity Functional Assessment.
Function and Value Variables Wetland Category (I, II, III, or IV) Functional Points (0.1 to 1) III Possible Points
Human Use The wastewater wetland is part of a restricted public access area, and has never been used for educational purposes.
This wetland has moderate aesthetic value.
It is dominated by a uniform stand of cattail.
Maintenance Issues The walls dividing cells in this wetland are wood.
When cell vegetation is periodically burned, the wood walls catch on fire, which must be suppressed.
If concrete walls were constructed to divide the wetland cells, this concern would be remedied.
This site was noted to have a sulfuric odor.
This is due to a high influent wastewater sulfate content, apparently due to the quality of the domestic water supply.
In the presence of low dissolved oxygen conditions (such as those noted in the wetlands), sulfur reducing bacteria convert sulfate to sulfide, which results in hydrogen sulfide.
In addition to an odor problem, the presence of hydrogen sulfide can exert a chlorine demand that may cause problems with providing sufficient disinfection.
Pipes in the wetland require frequent `roto-rooting' to clear-out an unidentified fibrous plant growth.
Overall Site Comments This site functions quite effectively in its intended wastewater treatment function, and has healthy vegetation cover.
No major maintenance issues were noted.
Crowley ­ Page 7
Crowley Correctional Facility
Lagoon
Crowley County Correctional Facility Statistics Nearest Town: County: River Basin: Receiving Water Body: Olney Springs Crowley Lower Arkansas Arkansas River 1998 600 inmates 4354 0.150 0.110 3.3
Mechanical fine screen (ROTOMAT) headworks facility
Year Online: Population: Elevation (feet): Design Flow (mgd): Average Flow (mgd): Size (acres):
Wetland cell
Effluent from wetland cells
Facility Description This facility is a minor municipal lagoon system.
The facility consists of a mechanical fine screen (ROTOMAT) headworks facility, two aerated lagoons, a polishing pond, two constructed wetlands, and a
Crowley Correctional Facility ­ Page 1
Crowley Correctional Facility chlorine contact chamber.
The influent flow is measured by a continuous recorder and totalizer.
The effluent flow is measured by a continuous recorder and totalizer.
Lagoons The Crowley Correctional Facility lagoon system consists of 2 aerated cells, and one polishing pond.
Some of the lagoon system features are detailed in the table below.
Lagoon Information Cell No.: Surface Area (sq. ft.) Avg.
Depth (ft) Avg.
Volume (Million gallons) Detention time (days) Aerator size (hp) 12.6 60 12.6 15 2.7 NA 1 36,875 10 1.9 2 36,875 10 1.9 3 10,625 10 0.4
Background Information The wetland system is an original component of this wastewater treatment facility.
It was modeled after the successful lagoon-wetland system used at the nearby Town of Crowley.
Energy Analysis Utility bills for this system run approximately $1000 per month.
Energy at this site is used primarily on the lagoon aerators and the rotomat.
Wetland Design Design Methods This system was modeled after the Town of Crowley wetland system.
Sizing requirements were determined by using CDPHE standards of 10-50 acres per mgd of influent.
The surface loading for this system is 22 acres / mgd
Objectives The wetlands are intended to polish the lagoon effluent.
The removal of TSS is the primary design goal.
Size The wetland system is comprised of four surface flow cells.
Each wetland cell is 600'long by 60' wide.
Shape The rectangular wetland cells have aspect ratios of 10:1.
The flow path is serpentine to minimize shortcircuiting and maximize the aspect ratio.
Crowley Correctional Facility ­ Page 2
Crowley Correctional Facility Hydraulics This system is a surface flow wetland.
Water in wetlands is running at a depth of about 3".
The flow follows a serpentine pattern.
The hydraulic residence time in the system is 7.2 days, with a volume of 1.08 million gallons.
A buried 30 mil PVC liner eliminates groundwater influences.
Crowley Correctional Facility ­ Page 3
Crowley Correctional Facility
Treatment Goals Permitted Discharge Limitations Oil and Grease: BOD5: BOD5 Removal: TSS: PH, su (min ­ max) Chlorine Residual: Fecal Coliform Bacteria: 10 mg/l (Daily Max) 30 mg/l (30-day ave) 85% 75 mg/l (30-day ave) 6.0 ­ 9.0 (Daily Max) 0.5 mg/l (Daily Max) 6,000 organisms per 100 ml (Daily Max)
Water Quality Data The Discharge Monitoring Report (DMR) forms documented numerous exceedances of the hydraulic and organic capacities.
In part, this was a result of the mass loading not being calculated correctly.
Reported TSS influent values are higher than what is normally seen at this type of facility.
This may be due to sampling procedures.
TSS Data Some general observations can be made by reviewing the plotted 30-day average TSS data.
The TSS graph plots the percent removal on the left axis and TSS in mg/l in the effluent on the right axis.
In the months before the wetland was implemented, there was no discharge from the treatment facility.
Since no discharge was occurring, data for this period were not reported.
Trends in the TSS data indicate that TSS in the effluent has consistently been below permit limitations.
Average influent TSS is 333 mg/l and average effluent is 15 mg/l.
Crowley Correctional Facility TSS Performance Wetlands Operational December 1998 100.0% 90.0% 80.0% 70.0% Percent Removal 60.0% 50.0% 40.0% 30.0% 20.0% 10.0% 0 n-0 Ja 9 v-9 No 9 l-9 Ju 9 p-9 Se 9 y-9 Ma 9 r-9 Ma 9 n-9 Ja
45 40 35 TSS in Effluent, mg/L 30 25 20 15 10 5 0
TSS % Removal TSS in Effluent
Crowley Correctional Facility ­ Page 4
Crowley Correctional Facility BOD Data The BOD data is plotted similarly to the TSS data, with mg/l in the effluent on the right axis, and percent removal on the left axis.
The average monthly BOD in the influent is 278 mg/l and the average monthly effluent is 13 mg/l.
Crowley Correctional Facility BOD Performance Wetlands Operational December 1998 0.98 30
0.97 25 0.96
0.95 Percent Removal
20 BOD in Effluent, mg/L
0.94 15 0.93 BOD % Removal BOD in Effluent
0.92
10
0.91 5 0.9
0.89 Nov-98 Dec-98 Feb-99 Mar-99 May-99 Jul-99 Aug-99 Oct-99 Dec-99 Jan-00
0 Mar-00
pH and Fecal Coliform Data for these two categories have been plotted on the same graph.
Data reflect the quality of the effluent; no influent measurements are taken for these parameters.
The pH values plotted are an average of the minimum and maximum 30-day values that are reported in the monthly reports.
The average monthly pH value is 8.42 , consistently stayed within the allowable range of 6.5 to 9.
The average monthly fecal coliforms in the effluent are 1075.
This meets the discharge permit requirements.
Crowley Correctional Facility ­ Page 5
Crowley Correctional Facility
Crowley Correctional Facility pH and FC in Effluent 3500 9
3000
8.5
2500 8 Fecal Coliform CN_FC_EFF PH_OUT 7.5 1500
2000
7 1000
500
6.5
0 Nov-98 Dec-98 Feb-99 Mar-99 May-99 Jul-99 Aug-99 Oct-99 Dec-99 Jan-00
6 Mar-00
General Ecological Setting The Crowley County Correctional Facility constructed wetlands consist of two flat, rectangular basins, approximately 2.75 acres each, which discharge into the Arkansas River.
The wetlands are approximately 96 percent vegetated and 4 percent water.
This wetland is located on the prison grounds in a former agricultural field.
The site is located a considerable distance from any creek or other wetland.
Cell Vegetation The two wetland cells support identical wetland vegetation.
Cattail (Typha latifolia and Typha angustifolia) dominate, and reed canarygrass (Phalaris arundinacea), duckweed (Lemna minor), and creeping spikerush (Eleocharis palustris) compose the remaining 10 percent of the wetland vegetation.
Planting/Seeding Small cattail plugs were planted in the wetland cells on approximate 3 to 4 foot spacing in the spring of 1998.
Weeds No noxious weeds were found on the project site.
Wildlife The wetlands provide habitat for a variety of song and shore birds.
Killdeer and swallow were observed during the site visit, and red winged blackbirds potentially use the site.
The site contains some vegetative
Crowley Correctional Facility ­ Page 6
Crowley Correctional Facility structural diversity, which is mainly a result of small pockets of shallow water among cattail stands.
This habitat is unique on the landscape because there are no other wetlands or ponds in the vicinity.
The treatment wetlands provide habitat for waterfowl, songbirds, and probably muskrats.
Wetland Biodiversity Functional Assessment General wildlife habitat and uniqueness rated moderate for this wetland.
Sediment/toxicant/nutrient removal was rated high.
All other functions of the wetland rated low.
The wetland received 33 percent of the possible functional points, and falls into Category IV, the lowest functional category.
Wetland Biodiversity Functional Assessment.
Function and Value Variables General Wildlife Habitat General Fish/Aquatic Habitat Production Export/Food Chain Support Habitat Diversity Uniqueness Total Points Wetland Category (I, II, III, or IV) Functional Points (0.1 to 1) 0.4 (mod.) 0.0 0.3 (low) 0.1 (low) 0.2 (low) 2.0 (40%) IV Possible Points 1 1 1 1 1 5
Human Use The wastewater wetland is part of a restricted public access area, but it is used as part of a program to train inmates in the operations of wastewater facilities.
Opportunities such as this could prove to be quite valuable to the prison system and to inmates following their release.
Maintenance Issues The only maintenance issue noted is the need to thoroughly remove non-organic waste from the prison wastewater before it enters the lagoon and wetland system.
The wetland system is burned every winter.
Overall Site Comments This wetland is functioning as intended in the treatment of wastewater.
It also supports a healthy stand of vegetation.
Crowley Correctional Facility ­ Page 7
Delta
Delta Correctional Facility Statistics Overview of Wastewater Treatment Facility
Nearest Town: County: River Basin: Receiving Water Body: Year Constructed: Population:
Delta Delta Lower Gunnison Roubideau Creek 1997 492 inmates, 100 staff 4977 0.067 0.038 1.38
Aerated Lagoon
Elevation (feet): Design Flow (mgd): Average Flow (mgd): Size (acres):
Influent to wetland cells
Facility Description The Delta Correctional Center is a minor municipal lagoon system.
The facility consists of two aerated lagoons, a polishing pond, a surface flow constructed wetland, and a chlorine contact chamber.
The influent is measured by calibrated run time meters on the influent pumps.
The effluent flow is measured by a 45° vnotch weir.
Lagoons The Delta lagoon systems consist of 3 aerated cells operated in series.
The aerators are operated 24 hours a day, 7 days a week.
Effluent from pond three can be taken from two different elevations.
The lagoon system is detailed in the table below.
Delta ­ Page 1
Delta
Lagoon Information Cell No.: Surface Area (sq. ft.) Avg.
Depth (ft) Avg.
Volume (Million gallons) Detention time (days) Aerator size (hp) 8.8 16 9.7 6 5.8 2 1 13,470 9.51 0.597 2 14,640 9.55 0.653 3 9,753 9.29 0.392
Background Information The existing lagoon system was not able to meet discharge permit requirements for TSS and BOD removal.
Addition of a wetland system for polishing of the lagoon effluent was attractive for several reasons.
Wetlands do not require a highly trained operator Climate at this site is favorable for a wetland system A baseball field adjacent to the lagoons provided adequate space to install a wetland.
Energy Analysis The treatment facility uses a lift station with a 5hp motor to provide the head requirements needed for flow through the system.
The lagoons utilize aerators and mixers.
A total of 4 Tornado mixers and 4 Aeromix systems are used in the lagoons.
Wetland Design Design Methods Technical literature was utilized to determine key design parameters for reducing TSS.
The hydraulic residence time and the aspect ratio were determined to be the most critical design issues.
The wetland was designed to provide a minimum hydraulic residence time of 5 days and an average aspect ratio greater than 10 to 1.
Objectives The treatment wetland was designed primarily to address TSS permit compliance issues.
Size The wetland system consists of one treatment cell with an area of 60,000 ft2.
The wetland cell has a substrate thickness of 12 inches and an operating water depth of 24 inches.
Delta ­ Page 2
Delta Shape The wetland cell is rectangular with an aspect ratio of 10 to 1.
The flow path is serpentine in order to maximize the aspect ratio and minimize short-circuiting.
Hydraulics The inlet to the wetland cell is an 8" aluminum gated pipe.
An HDPE liner eliminates groundwater influences.
Adjustable irrigation pipes are used to adjust the water level in the pond.
The water flows by gravity through the wetland system.
Treatment Goals Permitted Discharge Limitations Oil and Grease: BOD5: BOD5 Removal: TSS: PH, su (min ­ max) Chlorine Residual: Fecal Coliform Bacteria: 10 mg/l (Daily Max) 30 mg/l (30-day ave) 85% 75 mg/l (30-day ave) 6.0 ­ 9.0 (Daily Max) 0.5 mg/l (Daily Max) 6,000 organisms per 100 ml (Daily Max)
Water Quality Data TSS Data The TSS graph plots the percent removal on the left axis and TSS in mg/l in the effluent on the right axis.
The average monthly TSS in the influent, since the wetland implementation, has been 94 mg/l and the average monthly effluent has been 39 mg/l.
This meets the permit discharge requirement of 75 mg/l.
Delta ­ Page 3
Delta Delta TSS Performance Wetlands Completed 1997 100.0% 90.0% 80.0% 70.0% Percent Removal 60.0% 80 50.0% 40.0% 30.0% 20.0% 10.0% 6 l-9 Ju 6 y-9 Ma 6 r-9 Ma 6 n-9 Ja 7 l-9 Ju 7 y-9 Ma 7 r-9 Ma 7 n-9 Ja 6 v-9 No 6 p-9 Se 8 l-9 Ju 8 y-9 Ma 8 r-9 Ma 8 n-9 Ja 7 v-9 No 7 p-9 Se 9 l-9 Ju 9 y-9 Ma 9 r-9 Ma 9 n-9 Ja 8 v-9 No 8 p-9 Se 0 n-0 Ja 9 v-9 No 9 p-9 Se
160 140 120 100 TSS in Effluent, mg/L
TSS % Removal TSS in Effluent
60 40 20 0
BOD Data The BOD data is plotted similarly to the TSS data, with mg/l in the effluent on the right axis, and percent removal on the left axis.
The average monthly influent amount has been 277 mg/l and the average monthly effluent amount has been 15 mg/l.
Delta BOD Performance Wetlands Completed 1997
100.0% 90.0% 80.0% 70.0% Percent Removal 60.0% BOD % Removal BOD in Effluent
50 45 40 35 30 25
50.0% 20 40.0% 30.0% 20.0% 10.0% 6 n-9 Ja 6 l- 9 Ju 6 y- 9 Ma 6 r-9 Ma 7 n-9 Ja 6 v-9 No 6 p-9 Se 7 l- 9 Ju 7 y- 9 Ma 7 r-9 Ma 8 n-9 Ja 7 v-9 No 7 p-9 Se 8 l- 9 Ju 8 y- 9 Ma 8 r-9 Ma 9 n-9 Ja 8 v-9 No 8 p-9 Se 9 l- 9 Ju 9 y- 9 Ma 9 r-9 Ma 0 n-0 Ja 9 v-9 No 9 p-9 Se
15 10 5 0
Delta ­ Page 4
BOD in Effluent, mg/L
Delta
pH and Fecal Coliform Data for these two categories have been plotted on the same graph.
Data reflect the quality of the effluent; no influent measurements are taken for these parameters.
The pH values plotted are an average of the minimum and maximum 30-day values that are reported in the monthly reports.
Since the wetland implementation, pH values have consistently stayed within the allowable range of 6.5 to 9.
Delta pH and FC in Effluent 6000 5500 5000 4500 8.5 4000 3500 3000 2500 2000 7 1500 1000 500 0 Apr-95 Oct-95 May-96 Dec-96 Jun-97 Jan-98 Jul-98 Feb-99 Aug-99 Mar-00 6 Oct-00 7.5 CN_FC_EFF PH_OUT 9 9.5
Fecal Coliform
8
6.5
General Ecological Setting Rocky outcrops surrounding the area are generally woodlands dominated by species of juniper that often occur with sagebrush.
Other areas of the landscape are dominated by saltbush.
These are usually relatively pure saltbush stands, often sparsely vegetated with bare soil constituting most of the land surface.
Delta ­ Page 5
Delta
Cell Vegetation Vegetation cover in the single cell is 95 percent cattail (Typha latifolia) and 5 percent Baltic rush (Juncus balticus).
Foxtail barley (Hordeum jubatum) and tamrisk (Tamarix chinensis) were also observed during the site visit.
Planting/Seeding In December 1997, 20,000 cattails were planted.
In Spring 1999 the wetland was replanted by breaking the seed heads of cattails.
Weeds A few single stems of tamarisk, a noxious weed, were noted during the site visit.
Tamarisk consumes large quantities of water, possibly more than woody native plant species that occupy similar habitats.
Maintenance Issues Removal of tamarisk and follow-up monitoring should prevent establishment of the species.
Wildlife The wetland provides habitat for songbirds and small mammals.
The general wildlife habitat and diversity are relatively low.
Total functional points were 1.3.
Wetland Biodiversity Functional Assessment Wetland Biodiversity Functional Assessment.
Function and Value Variables General Wildlife Habitat General Fish/Aquatic Habitat Production Export/Food Chain Support Habitat Diversity Uniqueness Total Points Wetland Category (I, II, III, or IV) Functional Points (0.1 to 1) 0.5 (mod.) 0.0 0.4 (mod.) 0.2 (low) 0.2 (low) 1.3 (26%) III Possible Points 1 1 1 1 1 5
Human Use The constructed wetland is part of the larger treatment facility used as an overall training environment for operators.
This wetland serves and important educational purpose because it is used to train inmates in the management of wastewater treatment facilities.
This wetland has moderate aesthetic value.
Delta ­ Page 6
Delta
Overall Site Comments The Delta correctional Facility treatment wetland operates as intended.
This facility supports healthy plants and consistently meets discharge permit requirements.
Delta ­ Page 7
Dove Creek
Dove Creek Facility Statistics Water level control
Nearest Town: County: River Basin: Receiving Water Body: Year Online Buried inlet pipe with stub-outs for maintenance
Dove Creek Dolores La Plata River Dove Creek 1999 743 6844 0.115 0.035 1
Population: Elevation (feet): Design Flow (mgd): Average Flow (mgd): Size (acres):
Cattails establishing themselves
View of parallel wetland cells
Dove Creek ­ Page 1
Dove Creek
Facility Description The Dove Creek Wastewater Treatment Facility is a minor municipal lagoon system.
This facility consists of two aerated lagoons, one settling pond, followed by a surface flow constructed wetland.
Disinfection consists of a gas chlorination system followed by a tablet-style dechlorination unit.
Lagoons The Dove Creek lagoon system consists of 2 aerated cells, followed by a settling pond.
The shallow lagoon system was retrofit with a methane fermentation pit covered by a 45-mil polypropylene liner, in cell 1.
Lagoon system features are outlined in the table below.
Lagoon Information Cell No.: Surface Area (sq. ft.) Avg.
Depth (ft) Avg.
Volume (Million gallons) Detention time (days) Aerator size (hp) 13 36 30 10 34 5 2.2 NA Fermentation Pit 5,878 18 0.747 47,000 8 1.83 40,000 8 2.06 4,500 11 0.15 1 2 3
Background Information The Dove Creek system experienced numerous violations for BOD and TSS removal since plant start-up .
In October of 1995 the town received a Notice of Violation and Cease and Desist Order, and continued to operate under this notice with significant noncompliance for several years.
A study was completed in December 1997 in order to determine remedial alternatives for improved wastewater treatment.
The study looked at each option for treatment and cost factors.
Options considered included intermittent sand filters, land application of wastewater, utilizing a managed duckweed pond, providing a "pretreatment" anaerobic stabilization zone, increase depths of existing lagoons, and installing constructed wetlands.
Dove Creek looked at the Town of Ouray wetlands.
Also mentioned is the pilot scale study at Las Animas between 1991 and 1993 to evaluate the effectiveness of constructed wetlands for algae removal.
Energy Analysis The majority of the energy consumption at this facility is in the operation of the aerators.
A typical energy bill per moth is $1,600.
Construction Cost The approximate construction costs for this system were $363,000.
Dove Creek ­ Page 2
Dove Creek
Wetland Design Size The wetland system consists of 4 surface-flow cells and 1 sub-surface flow cell covering approximately 1 acre of ground.
Shape As shown in the schematic, the wetland cells are generally rectangular, with some curves added in order to fit the site location.
Hydraulics Design features include: 45-mil polypropylene liners on all cells; distribution boxes to allow bypass of any one cell for maintenance; infinitely-adjustable flow control devices for each wetland cell; recirculation pump and lines that will allow recirculation to the wetlands headworks and/or to the treatment plant headworks.
Dove Creek ­ Page 3
Dove Creek
Treatment Goals Permitted Discharge Limitations Oil and Grease: BOD5: BOD5 Removal: TSS: PH, su (min ­ max) Chlorine Residual: Fecal Coliform Bacteria: 10 mg/l (Daily Max) 30 mg/l (30-day ave) 85% 75 mg/l (30-day ave) 6.5 ­ 9.0 (Daily Max) 0.5 mg/l (Daily Max) 2,000 organisms per 100 ml (Daily Max)
Water Quality Data TSS Data Some general observations can be made by reviewing the plotted 30-day average TSS data.
The TSS graph plots the percent removal on the left axis and TSS in mg/l in the effluent on the right axis.
The average monthly TSS in the influent, since the wetland implementation, has been 342 mg/l and the average monthly effluent has been 66 mg/l.
This meets the permit discharge requirement of 105 mg/l.
BOD Data Dove Creek TSS Performance Wetlands Constructed After March 1999 100.0% 90.0% 80.0% 70.0% Percent Removal 60.0% 500 50.0% 40.0% 30.0% 20.0% 10.0% 0 n- 0 Ja 9 v -9 No 9 p-9 Se 9 l-9 Ju 9 y-9 Ma 9 r-9 Ma 9 n- 9 Ja 8 v -9 No 8 p-9 Se 6 l-9 Ju 6 y-9 Ma 6 r-9 Ma 6 n- 9 Ja 8 l-9 Ju 8 y-9 Ma 8 r-9 Ma 8 n- 9 Ja 7 v -9 No 7 p-9 Se 7 l-9 Ju 7 y-9 Ma 7 r-9 Ma 7 n- 9 Ja 6 v -9 No 6 p-9 Se
1000 900 800 700 600 TSS in Effluent, mg/L
TSS % Removal TSS in Effluent
400 300 200 100 0
Dove Creek ­ Page 4
Dove Creek The BOD data is plotted similarly to the TSS data, with mg/l in the effluent on the right axis, and percent removal on the left axis.
The average monthly influent amount has been 294 mg/l and the average monthly effluent amount has been 52 mg/l.
Dove Creek BOD Performance Wetlands Completed After March 1999 100.0% 90.0% 100 80.0% BOD in Effluent, mg/L 70.0% Percent Removal 60.0% 50.0% 40.0% 30.0% 20 20.0% 10.0% 8 l-9 Ju 8 y-9 Ma 8 r -9 Ma 7 l-9 Ju 7 y-9 Ma 7 r -9 Ma 9 n-9 Ja 8 v -9 No 8 p -9 Se 9 l-9 Ju 9 y-9 Ma 9 r -9 Ma 0 n-0 Ja 9 v -9 No 9 p -9 Se 8 n-9 Ja 7 v -9 No 7 p -9 Se 7 n-9 Ja 6 v -9 No 6 p -9 Se 6 l-9 Ju 6 y-9 Ma 6 r -9 Ma 12000 11000 CN_FC_EFF 10000 9000 8000 Fecal Coliform 7000 6000 5000 4000 3000 2000 1000 0 Apr-95 Oct-95 May-96 Dec-96 Jun-97 Jan-98 Jul-98 Feb-99 Aug-99 Mar-00 6 Oct-00 6.5 7 7.5 8 PH_OUT 8.5
120
80 BOD % Removal BOD in Effluent 60
40
0 6 n-9 Ja
pH and Fecal Coliform Data for these two categories have been plotted on the same graph.
Data reflect the quality of the effluent; no influent measurements are taken for these parameters.
The pH values plotted are an average of the Dove Creek pH and FC in Effluent 9
Dove Creek ­ Page 5
Dove Creek minimum and maximum 30-day values that are reported in the monthly reports.
Since the wetland implementation, pH values have consistently stayed within the allowable range of 6.5 to 9.
General Ecological Setting A mixture of piñon pine and juniper dominate forested areas surrounding the Dove Creek wetland.
This type of forest rarely forms a closed canopy.
The general area is also surrounded by agricultural lands that include non-irrigated cropland, dryland improved pastures, fallow lands, rural development, ranch and farm facilities and shelter belts.
Cell Vegetation Each of the five cells are about 75 percent vegetation, 15 percent bare soil, and 10 percent open water.
The only plant species present is cattail (Typha latifolia)
Planting/Seeding Cells were originally planted in fall 1999 with 9000 cattails from Minnesota at a cost of $0.33 per plant.
In summer 2000, 2700 cattails were replanted.
Topsoil from the site was used for the plantings.
Weeds No noxious weeds were noted during the site visit.
Wildlife Areas adjacent to the wetland were highly disturbed during construction and vegetation has yet to reestablish.
The wetland itself has low structural diversity and the cattails are not fully established.
Maturation of the vegetation along with the attribute of open water may provide future wildlife habitat of higher value.
At present, the general habitat and habitat diversity are low to moderate.
Total functional points were 52% of the total possible, and this wetland rated as a category III wetland.
Wetland Biodiversity Functional Assessment Wetland Biodiversity Functional Assessment.
Function and Value Variables General Wildlife Habitat General Fish/Aquatic Habitat Production Export/Food Chain Support Habitat Diversity Uniqueness Total Points Wetland Category (I, II, III, or IV) Functional Points (0.1 to 1) 0.5 (mod.) 0.0 0.7 (mod.) 0.2 (low) 0.2 (low) 2.6 (52%) III Possible Points 1 1 1 1 1 5
Dove Creek ­ Page 6
Dove Creek
Human Use This site is in a restricted human use area, and has never been used for educational purposes.
This wetland has moderate aesthetic value.
It has a healthy vegetation cover.
Maintenance Issues No maintenance issues were noted during the site visit.
Site Summar y This site has good vegetation cover and is functioning as intended.
There are no major maintenance or weed problems at the site.
Dove Creek ­ Page 7
Highlands Presbyterian Camp
Highlands Presbyterian Camp Facility Statistics Nearest Town: County: Team members standing on top of wetland
Highland Camp Boulder North Saint Vrain None (leach field) 1996 240 (summer) 8300 0.0005 .0005 0.014
River Basin: Receiving Water Body: Year Online: Population: Elevation (feet):
Close-up of vegetation in the wetland cell
Design Flow (mgd): Average Flow (mgd): Size (acres):
Facility Description The Highland Park constructed wetland is a pilot scale system consisting of a septic tank, an upflow anaerobic filter, a vertical flow aerobic filter, a subsurface constructed wetland, and an automatic dosing siphon tank that discharges to a subsurface disposal field.
Background Information The original treatment system at this site was a septic tank built in 1958.
A planned expansion of the Highlands Presbyterian Camp conference center created the need for an updated system.
The camp decided to implement a pilot scale subsurface flow constructed wetland system.
With the assistance of the Colorado State University and the USEPA Region VIII, a pilot scale system was built in July 1996.
At the time of the site visit, this system was no longer operating as intended.
The camp was not satisfied with the wetland performance and was considering an alternative form of wastewater treatment.
Energy Analysis This system was designed to be a passive treatment method and therefore consumes no energy
Highland Presbyterian Camp ­ Page 1
Highlands Presbyterian Camp
Wetland Design Design Methods Empirical data was used to size the wetland to accommodate a hydraulic loading of 0.83 gpd/ft2 with an aspect ratio of 3:2, a hydraulic residence time of 7 days and a BOD5 loading rate of 63 lb BOD/acre/day.
Objectives The wetland was designed to provide nitrification, denitrification, and removal of TSS.
Size The subsurface wetland consists of one cell with a surface area of 600 ft2.
The cell is approximately 2.5 ft deep, with a water depth maintained within the range of 1.5 to 2 ft.
Shape The wetland cell roughly resembled an hourglass shape.
Since the wetland site blends in with the surrounding vegetation, it does not have easily defined borders.
Hydraulics The inlet system consists of two infiltrator units positioned perpendicular to the direction of flow, with perforations to allow for even distribution of flow across the entire cross section of the cell.
The outlet mechanism is a 24" wide flat perforated pipe positioned vertically in the wetland cell.
The intent is to collect water from the entire wetland cross section.
The soil matrix is composed of 2.5 feet of ¾" andesite gravel with a shallow layer of pea gravel on the surface.
The water depth was designed to be maintained within the range of 1.5 to 2 ft.
A flexible RV type sewer hose that serves as an overflow outlet can adjust the water level in the wetland.
The wetland was fully lined with a composite bentonite and geotextile liner to prevent interaction with groundwater.
Water Quality Data This site operates under a groundwater discharge permit and therefore does not submit monthly discharge monitoring reports.
Data have been collected at this site for research purposes.
Presented below are data documented in a Master's Thesis titled "First Year Performance Evaluation of a Cold Climate Constructed Wetland for Wastewater Treatment" submitted by Mary DeMartini Andre to the Colorado State University Civil Engineering Department, Fall 1999.
Highland Presbyterian Camp ­ Page 2
Highlands Presbyterian Camp TOC Date 10/22/1996
NH3/NH4 % Removal 30 5 24 -8 15 22 36 28 33 18 -10 16 34 -21 -8 78 16 15 16 28 35 24 26 -38
Wetland inlet 144 108 103 88.1 102 112 148 181 226 199
Wetland Outlet 101 103 78.2 95.2 86.6 87.5 94.1 130 152 163 236 151 120 172 25 30.4 113 117 112 102 108 78 72 91
Date 10/22/1996 11/5/1996 11/19/1996 12/3/1996 1/14/1997 1/22/1997 1/28/1997 2/11/1997 2/18/1997 2/25/1997 3/11/1997 3/25/1997 4/8/1997 4/22/1997 5/6/1997 5/20/1997 6/3/1997 6/17/1997 7/1/1997 7/15/1997 7/30/1997 8/12/1997 8/26/1997 9/9/1997
Wetland inlet 58 61.9 52.2 45.7 36.3 34.4 32.3 37.8 38.4 37.1 46.3 33.6 30.6 18.7 1.06 19.5 29.4 47.5 25.6 61.4 63 41.4 39.6 40.9
Wetland Outlet 52.1 53.6 52.5 56.3 53.3 46.4 48.3 43 42.2 39.8 48.4 36.7 29.8 29.2 4.37 5.94 21.4 35.4 28.3 40.7 42.5 50.5 47.8 51
% Removal 10 13 -1 -23 -47 -35 -50 -14 -10 -7 -5 -9 3 -56 -312 70 27 25 -11 34 33 -22 -21 -25
11/5/1996 11/19/1996 12/3/1996 1/14/1997 1/22/1997 1/28/1997 2/11/1997 2/18/1997 2/25/1997 3/11/1997 3/25/1997 4/8/1997 4/22/1997 5/6/1997 5/20/1997 6/3/1997 6/17/1997 7/1/1997 7/15/1997 7/30/1997 8/12/1997 8/26/1997 9/9/1997
AVERAGE
214 179 182 142 23.2 141 134 138 133 142 167 102 97.5 66.1
136
109
0.20
AVERAGE
39
40
-0.20
TSS Date 10/ 11/ 11/ 12/ 1/1 1/2 1/2 2/1 2/1 2/2 3/1 3/2 4/8 4/2 5/6 5/2 6/3 6/1 7/1 7/1 7/3 8/1 8/2 9/9 22/1 5/19 19/1 3/19 4/19 2/19 8/19 1/19 8/19 5/19 1/19 5/19 /199 2/19 /199 0/19 /199 7/19 /199 5/19 0/19 2/19 6/19 /199 996 96 996 96 97 97 97 97 97 97 97 97 7 97 7 97 7 97 7 97 97 97 97 7
BOD % Removal 60 77 65 76 87 79 48 38 15 13 -1120 78 23 19 0 71 85 92 95 77 56 50 63 -475
Wetland inlet 45 22 20 17 31 19 25 84 40 40 5 36 30 31 6 28 27 49 200 34 32 22 16 8
Wetland Outlet 18 5 7 4 4 4 13 52 34 35 61 8 23 25 6 8 4 4 11 8 14 11 6 46
Date 10/ 11/ 11/ 12/ 1/1 1/2 1/2 2/1 2/1 2/2 3/1 3/2 4/8 4/2 5/6 5/2 6/3 6/1 7/1 7/1 7/3 8/1 8/2 9/9 22/1 5/19 19/1 3/19 4/19 2/19 8/19 1/19 8/19 5/19 1/19 5/19 /199 2/19 /199 0/19 /199 7/19 /199 5/19 0/19 2/19 6/19 /199 996 96 996 96 97 97 97 97 97 97 97 97 7 97 7 97 7 97 7 97 97 97 97 7
Wetland inlet 293 179 156 130 189 224 330 411 395 366 400 362 316 326 25.4 256 242 155 /280 260 291 168 172 141
Wetland Outlet 214 185 95.4 114 143 133 170 243 282 275 438 312 203 410 30 27.2 204 239 247 164 170 107 110 187
% Removal 27 -3 39 12 24 41 48 41 29 25 -10 14 36 -26 -18 89 16 -54 12 37 42 36 36 -33
AVERAGE
36
17
-0.1
AVERAGE
253
196
0.20
Highland Presbyterian Camp ­ Page 3
Highlands Presbyterian Camp NO2/NO3 Date 10/ 11/ 11/ 12/ 1/1 1/2 1/2 2/1 2/1 2/2 3/1 3/2 4/8 4/2 5/6 5/2 6/3 6/1 7/1 7/1 7/3 8/1 8/2 9/9 22/1 5/19 19/1 3/19 4/19 2/19 8/19 1/19 8/19 5/19 1/19 5/19 /199 2/19 /199 0/19 /199 7/19 /199 5/19 0/19 2/19 6/19 /199 996 96 996 96 97 97 97 97 97 97 97 97 7 97 7 97 7 97 7 97 97 97 97 7
NO2/NO3 % Removal 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
Wetland inlet 
Wetland Outlet 
Date 10/ 11/ 11/ 12/ 1/1 1/2 1/2 2/1 2/1 2/2 3/1 3/2 4/8 4/2 5/6 5/2 6/3 6/1 7/1 7/1 7/3 8/1 8/2 9/9 22/1 5/19 19/1 3/19 4/19 2/19 8/19 1/19 8/19 5/19 1/19 5/19 /199 2/19 /199 0/19 /199 7/19 /199 5/19 0/19 2/19 6/19 /199 996 96 996 96 97 97 97 97 97 97 97 97 7 97 7 97 7 97 7 97 97 97 97 7
Wetland inlet 
Wetland Outlet 
% Removal 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
AVERAGE
<
<
0
AVERAGE
<
<
0
TP Date 10/ 11/ 11/ 12/ 1/1 1/2 1/2 2/1 2/1 2/2 3/1 3/2 4/8 4/2 5/6 5/2 6/3 6/1 7/1 7/1 7/3 8/1 8/2 9/9 22/1 5/19 19/1 3/19 4/19 2/19 8/19 1/19 8/19 5/19 1/19 5/19 /199 2/19 /199 0/19 /199 7/19 /199 5/19 0/19 2/19 6/19 /199 996 96 996 96 97 97 97 97 97 97 97 97 7 97 7 97 7 97 7 97 97 97 97 7
Fecal Coliform % Removal -4 -6 -19 -101 -38 1 31 30 28 21 -2 10 21 -10 -81 87 25 9 13 3 14 3 21 -22
Wetland inlet 8.01 7.17 5.23 2.94 3.13 3.21 4.35 4.48 5.23 4.8 6.71 6.07 6.09 3.23 0.26 3.78 5.73 6.48 5.31 5.52 7.18 5.54 5.22 5.06
Wetland Outlet 8.31 7.61 6.24 5.92 4.33 3.18 2.98 3.15 3.77 3.79 6.85 5.44 4.81 3.56 0.47 0.5 4.28 5.87 4.62 5.36 6.2 5.35 4.11 6.15
Date 10/ 11/ 11/ 12/ 1/1 1/2 1/2 2/1 2/1 2/2 3/1 3/2 4/8 4/2 5/6 5/2 6/3 6/1 7/1 7/1 7/3 8/1 8/2 9/9 22/1 5/19 19/1 3/19 4/19 2/19 8/19 1/19 8/19 5/19 1/19 5/19 /199 2/19 /199 0/19 /199 7/19 /199 5/19 0/19 2/19 6/19 /199 996 96 996 96 97 97 97 97 97 97 97 97 7 97 7 97 7 97 7 97 97 97 97 7
Wetland inlet 680,000 11,000 70,000 6700 420,000 112,000 66,000 43,200 93,500 11,000 10,000 180,000 5000 1,100,000 500,000 50,000 220,000 440,000
Wetland Outlet 180,000 1700 350 3600 5500 81,000 260,000 13,500 24,000 1500 280,000 2000 140 40,000 100,000 10,000 10,000 8000
% Removal 74 85 100 46 99 28 -294 69 74 86 -2700 99 97 96 80 80 95 98
AVERAGE
5
5
0
AVERAGE
223,244
5
-0.9
Highland Presbyterian Camp ­ Page 4
Highlands Presbyterian Camp
General Ecological Setting The ponderosa pine ecosystem is the dominant forest of the foothills region near Highland Camp, where it inhabits the warm, dry areas of the lower portion of the mountains (5600 to 9000 feet elevation).
Stands of ponderosa pine gradually thin as elevation increases, while the frequency of Douglas fir increases in the montane region.
Ponderosa pine continues to populate the south-facing slopes of the montane zone forming mixed stands with Douglas fir relative to slope exposure.
Cell Vegetation Vegetation consists of one plant community.
About 80 percent of the cover consists of reed canary grass (Phalaris arundinacea).
Sub-dominant species include curly dock (Rumex crispus), prickly lettuce (Lactuca seriola), and Canada thistle (Cirsium arvense).
Planting/Seeding The subsurface cell was originally planted in fall 1996 with transplants from nearby riparian areas.
Species planted included willow (Salix spp.), sedges (Carex spp.), and rushes (Juncus spp.).
The willows died and were replanted in summer 1997.
Weeds Canada thistle comprises 10 percent of the plant cover within the cell.
Canada thistle is one of the most widespread and economically damaging noxious weeds in Colorado.
Infestations are found in cultivated fields, riparian areas, pastures, rangeland, forests, lawns and gardens, roadsides, and in waste areas.
Without control measures, Canada thistle will become the dominant cover species in the Highland Camp wetland.
Wildlife The small size (600 square feet) and the absence of open water severely limit the use of the wetland by any wildlife species.
At the landscape level, the constructed wetland does not add to or enhance existing wildlife habitat.
Species that may use the wetland include deer mice, pocket gophers, and other rodents.
Both the vegetative structural diversity and the wildlife habitat value of the wetland are low.
It was noted that this site experienced liner damage due to pocket gophers.
Wetland Biodiversity Functional Assessment The general wildlife habitat, habitat diversity, and uniqueness of the Highland Camp constructed wetland all rated low.
Total functional points were 18% of the total possible for this wetland, and it was rated as a category IV wetland.
Highland Presbyterian Camp ­ Page 5
Highlands Presbyterian Camp
Wetland Biodiversity Functional Assessment.
Function and Value Variables General Wildlife Habitat General Fish/Aquatic Habitat Production Export/Food Chain Support Habitat Diversity Uniqueness Total Points Wetland Category (I, II, III, or IV) Functional Points (0.1 to 1) 0.1 (low) NA 0.1 (low) 0.1 (low) 0.1 (low) 0.9 (18%) IV Possible Points 1 1 1 1 1 5
Human Use This wetland has low aesthetic value because it is dominated by areas of bare gravel and weedy species.
This site provided researchers an opportunity to investigate the use of constructed wetlands in high elevation settings.
Several graduate students conducted research at this site, and at least one received a master's degree for a thesis discussing this research.
Maintenance Issues Canada thistle should be hand-pulled to prevent further spread.
Overall Site Comments This site no longer functions as intended for wastewater treatment, and a large portion of the site now contains weedy species.
The treatment wetland provides only limited habitat and the weeds may spread and impact surrounding habitat The primary reason for problems in the system appeared to be hydraulic overloading.
In addition, it was noted that the plants had a hard time getting established in the coarse media.
Another issue was the intrusion of pocket gophers that damaged the liner and could have contributed to the difficulties in maintaining a water level in the wetland that would promote plant growth.
Highland Presbyterian Camp ­ Page 6
Horizon Nursing Home
Horizon Facility Statistics Nearest Town: Aerated lagoon
Eckert Delta Saint Vrain Surface Creek 1988 220 5400 0.015 0.010 1
County: River Basin: Receiving Water Body: Year Online: Population:
View of wetland cells
Elevation (feet): Design Flow (mgd): Average Flow (mgd): Size (acres):
Inlet pipe to wetland cells
Facility Description The wastewater treatment facility consists of two aerated lagoons, a settling pond, a surface flow wetland followed by a meadow area.
Chlorine disinfection can be provided as needed prior to discharge from the facility.
Background Information The Horizon Nursing Home treatment wetland is the oldest recorded treatment wetland in Colorado.
The decision to incorporate a wetland system into this treatment facility was based on costs and aesthetics.
Dr. Hammer, a wetland scientist, designed this system.
At the time that the Horizon wetland was designed, there were only 11 other treatment wetlands in the United States.
Horizon Nursing Home ­ Page 1
Horizon Nursing Home
Energy Analysis Energy consumption in this system is primarily due to aerators in the lagoons.
A 3hp aerator in the primary lagoon and a 1.5 hp aerator in the settling pond are operated 24 hours and day, 7 days a week.
Wetland Design Design Methods This system was designed over 12 years ago during the early years of treatment wetland use.
At the time that the Horizon wetland was constructed, only 11 other treatment wetlands were being used in the United States.
First-order decay functions were assumed for BOD and TSS removal.
Temperature dependent reaction coefficients were used.
Objectives In addition to typical domestic waste, the wastewater effluent from this institutional facility contains greases (the kitchen does not have a grease trap), pharmaceuticals, and cleaning products.
High BOD and TSS amounts in the lagoon effluent were resulting in values that exceeded permit limitations.
Size The wetland system consists of two parallel wetland cells, that are 100' by 50' each.
The effluent from the wetland cells flows into a 100' by 60' meadow area.
Shape The Horizon wetland cells are rectangular, with a direct flow path.
Hydraulics The inflow mechanism to the wetland is a standard gated pvc irrigation pipe.
An HDPE liner runs the full length of the wetland cells to prevent interaction with groundwater.
The liner was keyed in at the edges with sandbags to prevent exposure to the sun.
The collection pipe is a gated irrigation pipe surrounded by coarse gravel.
The water level typically operates at 18" in the wetland and can be adjusted with weir plates.
Horizon Nursing Home ­ Page 2
Horizon Nursing Home
Treatment Goals Permitted Discharge Limitations Oil and Grease: CBOD5: BOD5 Removal: TSS: PH, su (min ­ max) Chlorine Residual: Fecal Coliform Bacteria: 10 mg/l (Daily Max) 25 mg/l (30-day ave) 85% 105 mg/l (30-day ave) 6.5 ­ 9.0 (Daily Max) 0.5 mg/l (Daily Max) 6,000 organisms per 100 ml (Daily Max)
Water Quality Data This system has been in operating in compliance of its discharge permit for over 12 years.
TSS Data The TSS graph plots the percent removal on the left axis and TSS in mg/l in the effluent on the right axis.
The average monthly TSS in the influent, since the wetland implementation, has been 195 mg/l and the average
Horizon Nursing Home ­ Page 3
Horizon Nursing Home
Horizon Nursing Home T SS Performance
TSS % Remov al TSS in Ef f luent
100% 90% 80% 70% Percent Removal 60% 50% 40% 30% 20% 10% 0%
150 140 130 120 110 TSS in Effluent, mg/L 100 90 80 70 60 50 40 30 20 10 0 01 M-- 1 J -0 0 0 N-00 S-00 J 00 M-00 M-- 0 J -0 9 9 N-99 S-99 J 99 M-99 M-- 9 J -9 8 9 N-98 S-98 J 98 M-98 M-- 8 J 97 9 N-97 S-97 J- 9 7 M-97 M-- 7 J 96 9 N-96 S-96 J- 9 6 M-96 M-- 6 J 95 9 N-95 S-95 J- 9 5 M-95 M-- 5 J -9 4 9 N-94 S-94 J 94 M-94 M-- 4 J -9 3 9 N-93 S-93 J 93 M-93 M-- 3 J -9 2 9 N-92 S-92 J 92 M-92 M-- 2 J -9 1 9 N-91 S-91 J 91 M-91 M-- 1 J -9 0 9 N-90 S 90 J-
monthly effluent has been 8 mg/l.
BOD Data The BOD data is plotted similarly to the TSS data, with mg/l in the effluent on the right axis, and percent removal on the left axis.
The average monthly influent amount has been 213 mg/l and the average monthly effluent amount has been 12 mg/l.
Horizon Nursing Home ­ Page 4
Horizon Nursing Home
BOD % Removal BOD in Effluent
Horizon Nursing Home BOD Performance
100% 90% 80% 70% 60% 50% 40%
50 45 40 BOD in Effluent, mg/L 35
Percent Removal
30 25 20 15 10
30% 20%
5 0 01 M- 1 J--0 0 0 N-00 S0 J-000 M-00 M- 0 J--0 9 9 N-99 S9 J-999 M-99 M99 J--98 N-98 S 98 J- 98 M-98 M- 8 J--9 7 9 N-97 S7 J-997 M-97 M97 J- 96 N-96 S-96 J- 96 M-96 M- 6 J--9 5 9 N-95 S5 J-995 M-95 M95 J- 94 N-94 S-94 J--94 M 94 M- 4 J--9 3 9 N-93 S3 J-993 M-93 M- 3 J--9 2 9 N-92 S2 J-992 M-92 M92 J--91 N-91 S1 J-991 M-91 M91 J- 90 N-90 S-90 J-
pH and Fecal Coliform Data for these two categories have been plotted on the same graph.
Data reflect the quality of the effluent; no influent measurements are taken for these parameters.
The pH values plotted are an average of the minimum and maximum 30-day values that are reported in the monthly reports.
Since the wetland implementation, pH values have consistently stayed within the allowable range of 6.5 to 9.
The average fecal coliform value reported in the effluent since 1990 has been 1325.
Horizon Nursing Home ­ Page 5
Horizon Nursing Home
Horizon Nursing Home pH and TSS in Effluent
CN_FC_EFF PH_OUT
20000 19000 18000 17000 16000 15000 14000 13000 12000 11000 10000 9000 8000 7000 6000 5000 4000 3000 2000 1000 0 Dec-88
9
8.5
Fecal Coliform
8
7.5
May-90
Sep-91
Jan-93
Jun-94
Oct-95 Date
Mar-97
Jul-98
Dec-99
Apr-01
7 Sep-02
General Ecological Setting The landscape surrounding Eckert is generally irrigated agriculture including most row crops, irrigated pastureland and hay fields and associated farm or ranch facilities.
Natural areas are shrubland with basin big sagebrush often dominating the shrub cover.
This cover often occurs mixed with grasses.
Cell Vegetation The two wetland cells support identical wetland vegetation.
Cattail (Typha latifolia) dominates about 80 percent of the cells.
Reed canarygrass (Phalaris arundinacea), duckweed (Lemna minor), lady's thumb (Polygonum persicaria), prickly lettuce (Lactuca seriola) compose the remaining 20 percent of the wetland vegetation.
Planting/Seeding Cattails from nearby ditch cleaning were planted in the spring.
Overburden, also from the ditch cleaning, was used as an organic amendment to help with plant establishment.
Weeds No noxious weeds were identified during the site visit.
Horizon Nursing Home ­ Page 6
Horizon Nursing Home
Wildlife The constructed wetland is located adjacent to a residential area and subsequent human activity.
The general wildlife habitat and habitat diversity are low to moderate.
Fauna likely to use the wetland include songbirds, deer mice, muskrat, raccoon, and deer.
Total functional points were 44% of the total possible, and it rated as a category III wetland.
Muskrats have been an issue at this site.
The operator trapped 20 muskrats from the site in one year.
In order to prevent damage to the wetland berms, a metal exclosure was placed around the wetland cells in the spring of 1999.
This appears to be working.
Wetland Biodiversity Functional Assessment Wetland Biodiversity Functional Assessment.
Function and Value Variables General Wildlife Habitat General Fish/Aquatic Habitat Production Export/Food Chain Support Habitat Diversity Uniqueness Total Points Wetland Category (I, II, III, or IV) Functional Points (0.1 to 1) 0.5 (mod.) 0.0 0.3 (low) 0.2 (low) 0.2 (low) 2.2 (44%) III Possible Points 1 1 1 1 1 5
Human Use In summer 2000, the Youth in Natural Resources with the Colorado Department of Natural Resources toured the facility as part of a study of wastewater systems.
This wetland has moderate aesthetic value.
Maintenance Issues Water levels of the wetland are raised each winter to inhibit freezing.
Each spring the cell vegetation is burned to remove litter and stimulate plant growth.
Odor problems due to sludge in the wetland have been experienced at this site.
After 12 years of operation, the sludge layer in the wetland was about 1'.
This layer was removed during the spring of 2000.
Overall Site Comments This wetland functions as intended and has good vegetation cover.
Historical data show that this wetland system has consistently and reliably operated within discharge permit requirements.
Horizon Nursing Home ­ Page 7
Island Acres
Island Acres Facility Statistics Nearest Town: Aerated Lagoon
Grand Junction Mesa Colorado River Non-discharging 1995 380 5763 0.020 0.015 1
County: River Basin: Receiving Water Body: Year Online: Population:
Edge of wetland cell showing plant diversity
Elevation (feet): Design Flow (mgd): Average Flow (mgd): Size (acres):
Wetland cell
Facility Description The total treatment process consists of an initial sedimentation tank, primary treatment with an aerated lagoon, and final treatment in a zero discharge constructed wetlands marsh.
Accumulated sludge in the sediment tank is removed and disposed of off-site.
The aerated lagoons are designed to remove a minimum of 50% of the BOD at maximum flow rates.
The lagoons are lined with a synthetic liner and equipped with Aeromix system Tornado Aeration Units.
Background Information Island Acres State Recreation Area is located 15 miles east of Grand Junction, Colorado on Interstate 70.
An expansion to the park offered full service hook-ups for campsites, including shower and laundry facilities.
Prior to the expansion the only wastewater treatment facilities within the Park were individual disposal systems for the Park maintenance building and the residence building.
Only vault toilets were available to
Island Acres ­ Page 1
Island Acres the public.
The expansion added 66 full service campsites with related facilities to the Park's 34 unimproved overnight campsites.
Several treatment options were ruled out at this site.
Leach fields were ruled out because of the water table in the aquifer, the closeness of the Colorado River, and the swimming and fishing lakes being fed by the aquifer.
The Division of Parks has used package treatment plants at other locations and had bad experiences.
In addition, both of the above solutions are discharge systems; and a primary treatment goal was to have a zero discharge system.
This left two treatment options for further consider evaporative lagoons or constructed wetlands.
Of these two alternatives, constructed wetlands were more desirable to the Division of Parks for the following reasons:
!" Ability to accommodate extreme flow variations !" Ease of operation and maintenance !" patibility with Park operations Com !" Potential benefits !" iliarity.
Fam The Division of Parks currently has two wetland systems in the Western Region at Highline Lake and Ridgeway Reservoir State Parks.
Energy Analysis The primary energy consumers at this site are the aerators and mixers in the lagoon.
Flow through the wetland is achieved by gravity.
Wetland Design Design Methods The peak loadings for 100% usage and occupancy at complete buildout are 20,000 gpd with a corresponding BOD of 72 #/day.
Wastewater effluent is measured with a 60-degree V-notched trapezoidal flume.
Wastewater discharges from the sewer system into a sedimentation / grit chamber that consists of a 4000 gallon septic tank.
This provides 3.6 to 9.6 hours of detention, at maximum and average daily flows.
The aeration basin consists of a single cell with a total capacity of 200,000 gallons.
The basin is rectangular with rounded corners.
Aeration and mixing are provide by two 1.5 hp Aeromix System Tornado Aerators.
The system is designed to maintain a minimum of 2.0 mg/l of dissolved oxygen and supply 1.5 lbs. of oxygen for each pound of BOD.
The Effluent is conveyed via a pipeline from the aerated lagoon to the wetland.
The two major design components for the wetlands are climatic date and evapotranspiration rates to size the wetland.
The second component is the hydraulic and organic loading rate.
Objectives The main treatment goals of the constructed wetland marsh are to complete the biological treatment of the wastewater and to dispose of the excess fluids through an evapotranspiration process.
Size The wetland system is comprised of a single 3.90 surface flow cell.
Average flows are well below design flows.
This results in a transition area in the wetland from inundated soils to varying moisture levels.
This Island Acres ­ Page 2
Island Acres `over-sizing' in a wetland boundary similar to a natural wetland.
Changes in vegetation dominance are evident as the flow and nutrient load of the wastewater decrease along the flowpath.
Shape The wetland cell is generally rectangular, with some irregular borders necessary in order to fit within the site.
Hydraulics Discharge from the lagoon system is discharged through a pvc pipe to a river rock lined corner of the wetland cell.
The wetland is sloped so that the flow is distributed diagonally across the wetland cell.
This system is an evaporative system.
Plumbing is available to collect effluent at the outlet end of the wetland, if discharge is ever required.
Treatment Goals Permitted Discharge Limitations Oil and Grease: CBOD5: BOD5 Removal: TSS: PH, su (min ­ max) Chlorine Residual: Fecal Coliform Bacteria: 10 mg/l (Daily Max) 25 mg/l (30-day ave) 85% 105 mg/l (30-day ave) 6.5 ­ 9.0 (Daily Max) 0.5 mg/l (Daily Max) 6,000 organisms per 100 ml (Daily Max)
Water Quality Data This wastewater treatment facility operates under a groundwater permit.
Since it is not discharging into a surface water, monthly discharge monitoring reports are not required.
Water quality data is not available for this site.
General Ecological Setting Island Acres is the eastern-most unit of the Colorado River State Park, a 20-mile long reach of the Colorado River.
Ecologically, uplands support desert shrublands dominated by species such as big sagebrush and greasewood.
Big sagebrush communities are well represented, occupying high terraces along the river.
Much of the landscape along the river has been altered to support agricultural crops, flood control, and highway construction.
Within the river corridor, diverse wetland and riparian communities occur on islands, point bars, and along the banks.
Island Acres ­ Page 3
Island Acres
Cell Vegetation The Island Acres wetland has two plant communities.
Plant community 1, which represents 85 percent of the total cell area, is dominated by cattail (Typha latifolia).
Other dominant species include softstem bulrush (Scirpus tabernaemontana), creeping spikerush (Eleocharis palustris), and Torrey's rush (Juncus torreyi).
Plant community 2, 15 percent of the cell, is dominated by short-awn foxtail (Alopecurus aequalis).
Planting/Seeding The constructed wetland at construction was planted with cattail.
Weeds Tamarisk or saltcedar (Tamarix chinensis), a noxious weed, is prolific along the Colorado River reach adjacent to Island Acres and saplings of the escaped ornamental are present in the wetland.
Tamarisk is a facultative phreatophyte, i.e., it can draw water from underground sources but once established it can survive without access to ground water.
It consumes large quantities of water, possibly more than woody native plant species that occupy similar habitats.
Maintenance Issues Tamarisk is a maintenance concern for park staff and is commonly controlled in riparian areas and wetlands because of its potential to displace native vegetation and its lower value as wildlife habitat.
Wildlife The vegetative structural diversity and subsequent wildlife habitat value are moderate.
When viewed at the landscape level, the Island Acres constructed wetland has not added significantly to the acreage of suitable, adequately isolated habitat for waterfowl and other wildlife along the reach of the Colorado River.
Proximity to a public campground and Interstate 70 will generally preclude specialist species from using the wetland.
Species for which habitat is available include various songbirds, waterfowl, muskrat, deer mouse, raccoon, coyote, and mule deer.
Wetland Biodiversity Functional Assessment The general wildlife habitat, habitat diversity, and uniqueness of the Island Acres constructed wetland all rated moderate to low.
Total functional points were 52% of the total possible for this wetland, and it was rated as a category III wetland.
Wetland Biodiversity Functional Assessment.
Function and Value Variables General Wildlife Habitat General Fish/Aquatic Habitat Production Export/Food Chain Support Habitat Diversity Functional Points (0.1 to 1) 0.5 (mod.) 0.0 0.7 (mod.) 0.2 (low) Possible Points 1 1 1 1
Island Acres ­ Page 4
Island Acres
Wetland Biodiversity Functional Assessment.
Function and Value Variables Uniqueness Total Points Wetland Category (I, II, III, or IV) Functional Points (0.1 to 1) 0.2 (low) 2.6 (52%) III Possible Points 1 5
Human Use The wastewater wetland is part of a restricted public access area, and has never been used for educational purposes.
This wetland has moderate aesthetic value.
The aesthetic value of this wetland is limited because of its proximity to Interstate 70, but its location along the Colorado River and its location in a state park give it aesthetic and recreational value.
Overall Site Comments This wetland functions effectively in the treatment of wastewater and it also has healthy vegetation cover.
It has value to the public because it is located in a state park and can be used for public education and is an excellent conservation measure for the park.
Island Acres ­ Page 5
La Veta
La Veta Facility Statistics View of aerated lagoon
Nearest Town: County: River Basin: Receiving Water Body: Year Online: Population:
La Veta Huerfano Middle Arkansas Cucharas 1993 850 6910 0.125 0.075 1.6
Perimeter of wetland cell
Elevation (feet): Design Flow (mgd): Average Flow (mgd): Size (acres):
Effluent end of wetland cell
Facility Description The Town of La Veta has a domestic, minor municipal lagoon wastewater treatment facility.
The Town of La Veta's wastewater treatment facility utilizes a partially aerated lagoon system followed by a constructed wetlands system to treat influent wastewater.
The Town's treatment facility utilizes the following treatment components and unit processes: influent flow measurement, lagoon system consisting of one mechanically aerated cell and two stabilization cells, wetland system consisting of two cells, chlorination, dechlorination using sulfur dioxide, effluent flow measurement and a continuous effluent flow measuring device.
Lagoons The La Veta lagoon system consist of one aerated cell and two stabilization cells.
The aerators are operated 24 hours a day, 7 days a week during the winter and 8 hours a day during the rest of the year.
Some features of this lagoon system are detailed in the table below.
La Veta ­ Page 1
La Veta
Lagoon Information Cell No.: Surface Area (sq. ft.) Avg.
Depth (ft) Avg.
Volume (Million gallons) Detention time (days) Aerator size (hp) 17.5 3 44.8 NA 18.9 NA 1 46,180 4.85 1.554 2 118,040 4.85 3.972 3 43,380 5.5 1.674
Background Information La Veta's original wastewater collection and treatment facilities were constructed in 1974 to provide central sewage treatment to residents of the service area.
The 1992 expansion and modification of the original treatment facility was brought about as a result of the original treatment facility being overloaded, its inability to produce an effluent which could consistently comply with the facility's discharge permit limitations and the need to provide additional treatment capacity to accommodate projected growth in the service area.
Energy Analysis The wastewater flows through the system by gravity.
Energy is consumed in the aerated lagoons by submersible 3hp pumps.
During the winter months these pumps run 24 hours a day.
The rest of the year, the pumps are operated 8 hours, during the night.
A typical energy bill is about $450 a month.
Construction Costs This wetland system cost approximately $365,000 to construct.
Since it was established in an abandoned lagoon, earthwork was minimized.
Wetland Design Design Methods The design of the wetland system is based on BOD5 removal using the first order, plug flow, reaction kinetics model developed by Reed, Middlebrooks and Crites.
It is assumed that the bulk of settleable solids will be removed in the lagoon system, therefore; influent BOD5 will be primarily soluble BOD and floatable or suspended algal material.
A water balance was done to determine the typical wetland hydraulic loading rate.
The required water depth for a hydraulic residence time of 11.9 days in the winter and 5 days in the summer will be an operating depth of 6" to 12", with the maximum depth kept to less than 24".
Objectives The main objective of the wetland cells is to remove TSS due to algal carryover from the lagoons.
La Veta ­ Page 2
La Veta Size The wetland system is a surface flow system consisting of two cells.
The total area of the wetland system is 69,400 square feet (1.6 acres).
Shape As shown by the schematic, the sedimentation forebay is rectangular and the wetland cells are rectangular with a direct flow path.
The wetland cells are constructed within the embankments of an abandoned lagoon.
Hydraulics Each wetland cell is equipped with its own influent and effluent flow system.
A timber wall equipped with a longitudinal weir plant at its top, runs along the width of each wetland.
This structure provides uniform flow into the wetlands.
Both wetland cells can be bypassed, or one cell can be taken offline for maintenance.
The water flow to each wetland is controlled by adjustment of the weir plates installed in the influent control structure.
Flow depth in the wetland cells can be adjusted by installing stop planks at the effluent end of each cell.
During normal summer months, the depth in the cells operates in the range of 6 to 12 inches.
During the winter, the flow is maintained 4 to 6 inches under the ice cover.
The effluent end of each wetland cell consists of timber walls with semi-circular corrugated metal pipe fitted in open sections.
Outlet pipes are located outside the timber walls.
Each outlet pipe is equipped with a perforated cap and buried in river rock.
Treatment Goals Permitted Discharge Limitations Oil and Grease: BOD5: BOD5 Removal: TSS: PH, su (min ­ max) Total Chlorine Residual Total Ammonia (as N), mg/l Fecal Coliform Bacteria: 10 mg/l (Daily Max) 30 mg/l (30-day ave) 85% 75 mg/l (30-day ave) 6.5 ­ 11.5 (Daily Max) 0.048 (Daily Max) 5.2 ­ 68 (varies seasonally, based upon the allowable instream total ammonia concentrations.)
6,000 organisms per 100 ml (Daily Max)
Water Quality Data TSS Data
La Veta ­ Page 3
La Veta The TSS graph plots the percent removal on the left axis and TSS in mg/l in the effluent on the right axis.
The average monthly TSS in the influent, since 1996, has been 245 mg/l and the average monthly effluent has been 26 mg/l.
This meets the permit discharge requirement of 75 mg/l.
La Veta TSS Performance Wetlands Operational Summer 1993 100.0% 90.0% 80.0% 70.0% 60.0% 50.0% 40.0% 30.0% 20.0% 10.0% 6 l-9 Ju 6 y-9 Ma 6 r-9 Ma 6 n-9 Ja 7 l-9 Ju 7 y-9 Ma 7 r-9 Ma 7 n-9 Ja 6 v-9 No 6 p-9 Se 8 l-9 Ju 8 y-9 Ma 8 r-9 Ma 8 n-9 Ja 7 v-9 No 7 p-9 Se 0 n-0 Ja 9 v-9 No 9 p-9 Se 9 l-9 Ju 9 y-9 Ma 9 r-9 Ma 9 n-9 Ja 8 v-9 No 8 p-9 Se
80 70 60 50 TSS % Removal TSS in Effluent 40 30 20 10 0 TSS in Effluent, mg/L
BOD Data The BOD data is plotted similarly to the TSS data, with mg/l in the effluent on the right axis, and percent removal on the left axis.
The average monthly influent amount has been 217 mg/l and the average monthly effluent amount has been 20 mg/l.
La Veta BOD Performance Wetlands Operational Summer 1993
100.0% 90.0% 80.0% 70.0% Percent Removal 60.0% 50.0% 40.0% 30.0% 20.0% 10.0% 8 n-9 Ja 7 v-9 No 7 p -9 Se 6 l-9 Ju 6 y -9 Ma 6 r -9 Ma 7 n-9 Ja 6 v-9 No 6 p -9 Se 7 l-9 Ju 7 y -9 Ma 7 r -9 Ma 6 n-9 Ja 0 n-0 Ja 9 v-9 No 9 p -9 Se 8 l-9 Ju 8 y -9 Ma 8 r -9 Ma 9 l-9 Ju 9 y -9 Ma 9 r -9 Ma 9 n-9 Ja 8 v-9 No 8 p -9 Se
Percent Removal
45 40 35 BOD in Effluent, mg/L 30 25 20 15 10 5 0
BOD % Removal CN_BOD_EFF
La Veta ­ Page 4
La Veta pH and Fecal Coliform Data for these two categories has been plotted on the same graph.
Data reflect the quality of the effluent, not influent measurements are taken for these parameters.
The pH values plotted are an average of the minimum and maximum 30-day values that are reported in the monthly reports.
Previous to the wetland implementation, data indicate that average pH values in the effluent were close to the maximum daily allowable of 11.
An amendment to the discharge permit changed the maximum pH limitation from 9.0su to 11.0 s.u. La Veta was eligible for this amendment because it met both applicable requirements, 1) no inorganic chemical could be added to the wastestream, and 2) contributions from industrial sources do not cause the pH of the effluent to be less than 6.0 s.u. or greater than 9.0 s.u.
It was determined that the high pH in the system was due to significant algae bloom in the lagoons.
A chlorination-dechlorination system is provided as a part of the treatment to meet the fecal coliform permit limitations.
This system has not been used in the last 5 years because effluent quality has been suitable for discharge without their use.
La Veta ­ Page 5
La Veta La Veta pH and FC in Effluent 9 16000 15000 14000 13000 12000 11000 Fecal Coliform 10000 9000 8000 7000 6000 5000 4000 3000 2000 1000 0 Apr-95 Oct-95 May-96 Dec-96 Jun-97 Jan-98 Jul-98 Feb-99 Aug-99 Mar-00 6 Oct-00 6.5 7 7.5 8 CN_FC_EFF PH_OUT 8.5
Ammonia The discharge permit for the wastewater treatment facility required a two-year ammonia monitoring program.
All data gathered during this monitoring program was submitted to the Water Quality Control Division to establish ammonia discharge parameters.
The average monthly ammonia in the effluent has been 7.6 mg/l.
La Veta Ammonia in Effluent 25
20
Ammonia in Effluent (mg/l)
15
10
5
0 Apr-95 Oct-95 May-96 Dec-96 Jun-97 Jan-98 Jul-98 Feb-99 Aug-99 Mar-00 Oct-00
La Veta ­ Page 6
La Veta
General Ecological Setting The two LaVeta constructed wetland cells are flat and rectangular.
The wetland discharges to the Cuchares River.
The LaVeta treatment wetlands are located in the broad valley of the Cucharas River, at the base of a piñon pine-dominated bluff.
Cell Vegetation Two cells are present at the LaVeta site.
Cell 1 is composed of 80 percent water, 10 percent litter, and 10 percent vegetation.
The vegetation communities for cells 1 and 2 are identical.
Community 1, which composes 90 percent of each wetland cell, is dominated by cattail (Typha latifolia), with Scirpus americanus and duckweed (Lemna minor) present but not dominant.
Vegetation community 2, which composes the remaining 10 percent, is dominated by cattail, softstem bulrush (Scirpus tabernamontanae) with duckweed, willowherb (Epilobeum ciliata), creeping spikerush (Eleocharis palustris), foxtail barley (Hordeum jubatum)and sandbar willow (Salix exigua) present but not dominant.
The site is dominated by 95 percent water and 5 percent vegetation.
Planting/Seeding Cattails were planted at the site in the fall.
The planting rate is not known..
Weeds Canada thistle (Cirsium arvense), mullein (Verbascum thapsus), and gumweed (Grindelia squarosa) are present around ponds and wetlands in both cells.
Canada thistle and mullein are on the State Noxious Weed list.
They are invasive in areas of recent disturbance, and spread quickly.
They also prevent the establishment of native species and have low wildlife value.
Maintenance Issues No maintenance items were noted.
Wildlife The LaVeta wetland provides habitat for muskrat, beaver, red winged black birds, waterfowl, and geese.
Mallards and herons were observed during the site visit.
This wetland has structural diversity in the form of small patches of open water interspersed with cattail stands.
From a landscape perspective, it provides valuable wildlife habitat.
There are no other similar wetland/open water complexes in the area, and the treatment facility gains extra value because of its location between the Cucharas River floodplain and the piñon bluff.
Wetland Biodiversity Functional Assessment Sediment/nutrient/toxicant removal and production export/food chain support both rated high.
General wildlife habitat rated moderate.
Habitat diversity and uniqueness of the constructed wetland rated moderate to low.
This wetland received 45 percent of the total possible functional points.
It rated as a category III wetland.
La Veta ­ Page 7
La Veta
Wetland Biodiversity Functional Assessment.
Function and Value Variables General Wildlife Habitat General Fish/Aquatic Habitat Production Export/Food Chain Support Habitat Diversity Uniqueness Total Points Wetland Category (I, II, III, or IV) Functional Points (0.1 to 1) 0.5 (mod.) 0.0 0.2 (low) 0.2 (low) 0.2 (low) 2.7 (54%) III Possible Points 1 1 1 1 1 5
Human Use The wastewater wetland is part of a restricted public access area.
A local student studied the wetland system and participated in a science fair.
This wetland has high aesthetic value because it is well vegetated and located in a visually interesting area.
Overall Site Comments This wetland functions well in treating wastewater and it has high biological and aesthetic value.
La Veta ­ Page 8
Las Animas
Las Animas Facility Statistics Nearest Town: Aerated Lagoon
Las Animas Bent Lower Arkansas Diversion Ditch routed to Arkansas River 1999 2500 + 1000 inmates
County: River Basin: Receiving Water Body: Year Online: Population:
View of wetland cells
Elevation (feet): Design Flow (mgd): Average Flow (mgd): Size (acres): 0.50 0.25 2.1
Removable sleeves are used to control the water elevation in the wetland cells.
Fines from unwashed media results in plugging
Las Animas ­ Page 1
Las Animas
Facility Description The Las Animas wastewater treatment system is a domestic minor municipal lagoon system.
The facility consists of a continuous influent flow-measuring device, two aerated lagoons, one settling pond, a constructed wetland, ultraviolet disinfection and a continuous effluent flow-measuring device.
Lagoons Some of the features of the Las Animas lagoon system are detailed in the table below.
Lagoon Information Cell No.: Surface Area (sq. ft.) Avg.
Depth (ft) Avg.
Volume (Million gallons) Detention time (days) Aerator size (hp) 7 100 6.6 14 2.9 7.5 1 540,000 4.1 16.56 2 540,000 4.1 16.56 3 250,000 6.0 11.22
Background Information The Las Animas wastewater treatment plant was initially constructed in 1958 as a three-cell, facultative lagoon system, with a design capacity of 0,22 mgd.
The plant was later expanded in 1983 to a four-cell, facultative lagoon system, with a design capacity of 0.36 mgd.
The only unusual waste source in the City's service area is that coming from blowdown from water softeners in the community.
The City has experienced problems with meeting discharge requirements since the system came online in 1983.
These violations are attributed to high TSS related to algae growth.
In October 1986 the City of Las Animas was issued a Notice of Violations and Cease and Desist Order.
The City had several violations, including violations of BOD5 percent removal, BOD5 concentrations, TSS concentrations, pH exceedances, and fecal coliform exceedances that persisted through the summer of 1994..
Constructed wetlands were chosen to be the most promising method to achieve algae removal.
The City undertook a 3-year pilot scale study, starting in October 1991, to design and construct 4 pilot scale wetlands.
Each wetland was 20 x 40 feet, 3 feet deep, had a 2% slope, and was planted with 200 locally harvested cattails.
Each was loaded at 1000 gpd. Three of the wetlands were designed to be subsurface.
Gravel size was varied for each wetland (4", 1.5" and .75" sizes were tested).
The fourth wetland cell was designed as a surface flow system.
The results from this study were used to design the full size subsurface wetland system.
Energy Analysis The wetland system operates under gravity.
Energy is consumed by the aerators in the lagoons, and by the UV disinfection system.
Las Animas ­ Page 2
Las Animas
Wetland Design Design Methods Results from the pilot scale study were used to design a full size subsurface system.
Some of the conclusion from this study that were used in the final design are discussed below.
!" surface flow wetlands did not consistently remove algae, in fact, at times algae cell numbers The
increased due to algae growth in the system.
This was due to a short detention time in the surface flow wetland.
!" subsurface wetlands significantly removed algae cells.
The !" plugging occurred in the subsurface wetlands.
Performance increased as the gravel size decreased.
In No addition, the two coarser gravel wetlands had poorer plant development compared to the finer gravel wetland.
!" subsurface wetlands were oxygen limited for nitrification but had sufficient oxygen for BOD5 The removal.
!" subsurface wetland with a 0.75 inch gravel size was chosen for the full scale wetland because of its The performance in algae removal and BOD5 and TSS reduction without plugging problems during its two years of operation.
Objectives The wetland was sized using empirical data collected during the pilot scale study.
The primary objective of the wetland component was to remove BOD and TSS from the lagoon effluent.
Size An existing lagoon was retrofit to include the subsurface wetland cells.
Shape As shown by the schematic, the wetland cells are rectangular.
Hydraulics Lagoon effluent is introduced into the wetland cells by perforated pipes installed approximately 36" below the ground surface.
PVC piping was used.
PVC risers distribute the water within the wetland.
Adding or removing collars onto PVC tees within effluent collection boxes controls the water level.
At the time of the visit, the system was experiencing plugging problems.
A potential cause of the plugging was theorized to be the use of unwashed gravel in the wetland cells.
Hypochloride was being introduced into the pipes to clean them out.
Las Animas ­ Page 3
Las Animas
Treatment Goals Permitted Discharge Limitations Oil and Grease: BOD5: BOD5 Removal: TSS: PH, su (min ­ max) : Ammonia (as N): Chlorine Residual: Fecal Coliform Bacteria: 10 mg/l (Daily Max) 30 mg/l (30-day ave) 85% 105 mg/l (30-day ave) 6.5 ­ 9.0 (Daily Max) 26.7 (lbs/day) 0.026 mg/l (Daily Max) 6,000 organisms per 100 ml (Daily Max)
Water Quality Data TSS Data The TSS graph plots the percent removal on the left axis and TSS in mg/l in the effluent on the right axis.
The average monthly TSS in the influent, since the wetland implementation, has been 240 mg/l and the average monthly effluent has been 24 mg/l.
This meets the permit discharge requirement of 105 mg/l.
Las Animas TSS Performance Wetlands Operational 1998 100.0% 90.0% 100 80.0% 70.0% Percent Removal 60.0% 60 50.0% 40.0% 30.0% 20 20.0% 10.0% 9 c-9 De 9 g-9 Au 9 t-9 Oc 9 n-9 Ju 9 b-9 Fe 8 t-9 Oc 9 r-9 Ap 8 c-9 De 8 n-9 Ju 7 b-9 Fe 8 b-9 Fe 7 r-9 Ap 8 r-9 Ap 7 n-9 Ju 6 t-9 Oc 6 c-9 De 8 g-9 Au 7 c-9 De 6 n-9 Ju 7 g-9 Au 6 g-9 Au 7 t-9 Oc
120
TSS % Removal TSS in Effluent, mg/L TSS in Effluent 80
40
0 0 b-0 Fe
BOD Data
Las Animas ­ Page 4
Las Animas The BOD data is plotted similarly to the TSS data, with mg/l in the effluent on the right axis, and percent removal on the left axis.
The average monthly influent amount has been 176 mg/l and the average monthly effluent amount has been 17 mg/l.
Las Animas BOD Performance Wetlands Operational 1998 100.0% 90.0% 50 80.0% 70.0% Percent Removal 60.0% 30 50.0% 40.0% 30.0% 10 20.0% 10.0% 6 n -9 Ju 6 t-9 Oc 6 g-9 Au 8 n -9 Ju 6 c-9 De 8 t-9 Oc 7 t-9 Oc 7 g-9 Au 8 c-9 De 7 c-9 De 9 b-9 Fe 8 r-9 Ap 7 r-9 Ap 8 b-9 Fe 7 b-9 Fe 7 n -9 Ju 8 g-9 Au 9 n -9 Ju 9 r-9 Ap 9 g-9 Au 9 c-9 De 9 t-9 Oc
60
BOD % Removal BOD in Effluent, mg/L BOD in Effluent 40
20
0 0 b-0 Fe
pH and Fecal Coliform Data for these two categories have been plotted on the same graph.
Data reflect the quality of the effluent; no influent measurements are taken for these parameters.
The pH values plotted are an average of the minimum and maximum 30-day values that are reported in the monthly reports.
Since the wetland implementation, pH values have consistently stayed within the allowable range of 6.5 to 9.
Las Animas pH and FC in Effluent 9 16000 15000 14000 13000 12000 11000 Fecal Coliform 10000 9000 8000 7000 6000 5000 4000 3000 2000 1000 0 May-96 Dec-96 Jun-97 Jan-98 Jul-98 Feb-99 Aug-99 Mar-00 6 Oct-00 6.5 7 7.5 8 CN_FC_EFF PH_OUT 8.5
Las Animas ­ Page 5
Las Animas
General Ecological Setting The Las Animas constructed wetland is flat, rectangular, and are 90 percent vegetated and 10 percent rock.
The wetland discharges into the Arkansas River.
The treatment wetland is located on the north side of the Town of Las Animas, near the Arkansas River floodplain.
Cell Vegetation Two vegetation types are present in the wetland cell.
Plant community 1, which comprises 80 percent of the wetland, is dominated by cattail (Typha latifolia), narrow leaved cattail (Typha angustifolia), and softstem bulrush (Scirpus tabernamontanae).
Curley dock (Rumex crsipus), witchgrass (Panicum capillare), and switchgrass (Spartina pectinata) are present but not dominant.
Plant community 2 accounts for 20 percent of the cell's vegetation cover.
It is dominated by cattail, softstem bulrush, and ragweed (Amaranthus retroflexis), with tamarisk (Tamarix chinensis) and gumweed (Grindelia squarosa) present but not dominant.
Planting/Seeding The site was planted with cattail and softstem bulrush to encourage vegetation establishment.
Weeds Tamarisk or saltcedar (Tamarix chinensis), a noxious weed, is a facultative phreatophyte, i.e., it can draw water from underground sources, but once established it can survive without access to ground water.
It consumes large quantities of water, possibly more than woody native plant species that occupy similar habitats.
Tamarisk is a maintenance concern and is commonly controlled in riparian areas and wetlands because of its potential to displace native vegetation and its lower value as wildlife habitat.
Maintenance Issues The water level for the wetland cell is about 1.5 feet below the design elevation of about 3 to 6 feet below the surface, which has resulted in plants drying up and dying.
This die-off is particularly significant in community 2, where vegetative cover is only 50 percent.
Community 1 has 80 to 90 percent vegetative cover.
In addition, gravel at the mouth of the distribution pipe is causing clogging.
A strategy should be developed to mitigate this.
Wildlife The Las Animas wetland provides habitat for red winged black birds, songbirds, and potentially muskrats.
No wildlife species were observed during the site visit.
The site is located near the Arkansas River floodplain, and is not a unique feature in the area.
Riparian areas along the river, and wetlands and open water associated with the John Martin Reservoir likely provide more valuable habitat.
Because there are some gravel areas devoid of vegetation, there is some structural diversity, but this is probably not very valuable to wildlife.
Wetland Biodiversity Functional Assessment Sediment/nutrient/toxicant removal rated high in this wetland.
General wildlife habitat and production export/food chain support rated moderate.
Habitat diversity and uniqueness of the constructed wetland rated
Las Animas ­ Page 6
Las Animas low.
The wetland received 35 percent of the total possible functional points and was rated as a category III wetland.
Wetland Biodiversity Functional Assessment.
Function and Value Variables General Wildlife Habitat General Fish/Aquatic Habitat Production Export/Food Chain Support Habitat Diversity Uniqueness Total Points Wetland Category (I, II, III, or IV) Functional Points (0.1 to 1) 0.4 (mod.)
NA 0.4 (mod.) 0.1 (low) 0.2 (low) 2.1 (42%) III Possible Points 1 1 1 1 1 5
Human Use The wastewater wetland is part of a restricted public access area, and has never been used for educational purposes.
This wetland has moderate aesthetic value.
It is dominated mainly by emergent vegetation, but has some openings composed of bare gravel.
A pilot scale wetland study was performed at this site1.
The results of this study were used in the design of the existing facility.
Several subsequent wetland systems have cited this study for design parameters.
Overall Site Comments This wetland functions effectively in the treatment of wastewater, and vegetation has established over most of the site.
Problems with the water distribution system into the wetlands may adversely impact vegetation establishment and health if the problems are not addressed, but the plant operators are taking a proactive role in addressing these problems.
Richard, Michael Ph.D., and Snyder, John M.S., "Results of the Pilot Wetlands Study at Las Animas, CO, Final Report", submitted to John Trent Public Works Director, City of Las Animas, CO, February 10, 1994.
1
Las Animas ­ Page 7
Manzanola Manzanola
Lagoon
Manzanola Facility Statistics Nearest Town: County: River Basin: Receiving Water Body: Manzanola Otero Lower Arkansas Unnamed irrigation ditch, less than 1 mile from Arkansas River 1998 450 4230 0.125 0.045 2.3
First wetland cell
Year Online: Population: Elevation (feet): Design Flow (mgd): Average Flow (mgd): Wetland cells #1 and #2
Size (acres):
Influent pipe to cell #1
Manzanola ­ Page 1
Manzanola
Facility Description The Manzanola wastewater treatment facility is a domestic minor municipal lagoon system.
The facility consists of one aerated lagoon, a settling pond, constructed wetlands followed by chlorine disinfection.
Lagoons The Manzanola lagoon system consists of 2 cells, separated by two floating curtains.
Some features of this lagoon system are detailed in the table below.
Lagoon Information Cell No.: Surface Area (sq. ft.) Avg.
Depth (ft) Avg.
Volume (Million gallons) Detention time (days) Aerator size (hp) 12.5 - 36 12 2.7 ­ 7.6 NA 1 51,500 5 1.559 2 12,200 5 0.339
Background Information The Town of Manzanola has operated its wastewater treatment facility since the 1930's.
The original system consisted of a two-cell stabilization lagoon.
Actual effluent discharge data was not reported by the Town until September of 1994.
The Town's inability to meet permit regulations resulted in a notice of significant non-compliance for exceeding BOD5 and fecal coliform limitations in March 1995 the Town of Manzanola received.
This noncompliance continued resulting in the issuance of a Notice of Violation and Cease and Desist Order in July 1995.
An engineering evaluation concluded that a new mechanical facility would require both substantial initial capital cost and heightened ongoing annual operation and maintenance costs.
They also require a higher level of operator certification.
Small communities like Manzanola are best served by adhering to a simpler form of treatment if only secondary treatment levels are required.
The recommended improvements converted the original two-cell facultative lagoon into an aerated cell, a facultative cell, followed by a surface flow constructed wetland.
Energy Analysis The lagoon aerators and the chlorine injection system are the primary energy consumers.
The lagoon system uses 4 ­ 3hp aerators.
Wetland Design Design Methods The design of the constructed wetland was based on a minimum hydraulic residence time of 6 days and a minimum aspect ratio of 8 to 1.
A secondary consideration was BOD5 removal during the spring.
A water
Manzanola ­ Page 2
Manzanola balance was done to determine the hydraulic loading rate of the constructed wetland system.
The hydraulic loading rate was based on a volume per area basis.
For the Manzanola system a maximum design HLR of 1.228 gpd/ft2 was selected.
BOD reduction was modeled by first order, plug flow, reaction kinetics model developed by Reed, Middlebrooks and Crites.
This is an iterative design method necessary to ensure that all minimum design requirements are met.
Objectives The primary design concern is solids (algae) carry-over in the treatment facility effluent and the BOD5 load associated with these solids.
Two of the most significant design parameters with regard to TSS control are hydraulic residence time (HRT) and aspect (length to width) ratio.
Size The wetland system consists of two treatment cells, each with an area 49,800 ft.
The total area for the wetland system is 99,600ft2, or 2.3 acres.
of
Shape The constructed wetland cells are rectangular with a serpentine flow pattern.
Hydraulics Gravity conveyance is used throughout the system.
Perforated pipes are used to introduce the wastewater into the wetland cells.
Adjustable tees are used to vary the water depth in the wetland.
A serpentine flow path provides prevents short-circuiting through the system.
Treatment Goals Permitted Discharge Limitations Oil and Grease: BOD5: BOD5 Removal: TSS: PH, su (min ­ max) Fecal Coliform Bacteria: 10 mg/l (Daily Max) 30 mg/l (30-day ave) 85% 75 mg/l (30-day ave) 6.0 ­ 9.0 (Daily Max) 6,000 organisms per 100 ml (Daily Max)
Manzanola ­ Page 3
Manzanola
Water Quality Data TSS Data The TSS graph plots the percent removal on the left axis and TSS in mg/l in the effluent on the right axis.
Manzanola TSS Performance 100.0% 90.0% 80.0% 100 TSS in Effluent, mg/L TSS % Removal TSS in Effluent
Wetlands Completed 1998
140
120
70.0% Percent Removal
60.0% 50.0% 40.0%
80
60
40 30.0% 20.0% 10.0% 20
0 20 1/ 2/ /1 /1 12 /1 /1 10 19 1/ 8/ 19 1/ 6/ 19 1/ 4/ 19 1/ 2/ /1 /1 12 /1 /1 10 19 1/ 8/ 19 1/ 6/ 19 1/ 4/ 19 1/ 2/ /1 /1 12 /1 /1 10 19 1/ 8/ 19 1/ 6/ 19 1/ 4/ 19 1/ 2/ /1 /1 12 /1 /1 10 19 1/ 8/ 19 1/ 6/ 19 1/ 4/ 19 1/ 2/ /1 /1 12 /1 /1 10 19 1/ 8/ 5 99
The average monthly TSS in the influent, since the wetland implementation, has been 121 mg/l and the average monthly effluent has been 34 mg/l.
This meets the permit discharge requirement of 75 mg/l.
95
5 99
96
99
6 99
9 99
96
99
8 99
96
96
97
6 99
9 99
97
97
8 99
00
99
99
7 99
97
98
7 99
98
98
98
BOD Data The BOD data is plotted similarly to the TSS data, with mg/l in the effluent on the right axis, and percent removal on the left axis. .
The average monthly influent amount has been 211 mg/l and the average monthly effluent amount has been 23 mg/l.
Manzanola BOD Performance Wetlands Competed 1998 100.0% 90.0% 80.0% 50 BOD in Effluent, mg/L BOD % Removal BOD in Effluent
70
60
70.0% Percent Removal
60.0% 50.0% 40.0%
40
30
20 30.0% 20.0% 10.0% 10
0 00 20 1/ 2/ 9 99 /1 /1 12 9 99 /1 /1 10 99 19 1/ 8/ 99 19 1/ 6/ 99 19 1/ 4/ 99 19 1/ 2/ 8 99 /1 /1 12 8 99 /1 /1 10 98 19 1/ 8/ 98 19 1/ 6/ 98 19 1/ 4/ 98 19 1/ 2/ 7 99 /1 /1 12 7 99 /1 /1 10 97 19 1/ 8/ 97 19 1/ 6/ 97 19 1/ 4/ 97 19 1/ 2/ 6 99 /1 /1 12 6 99 /1 /1 10 96 19 1/ 8/ 96 19 1/ 6/ 96 19 1/ 4/ 96 19 1/ 2/ 5 99 /1 /1 12 5 99 /1 /1 10 95 19 1/ 8/
Manzanola ­ Page 4
Manzanola pH and Fecal Coliform Data for these two categories have been plotted on the same graph.
Data reflect no influent measurements are taken for these parameters.
The pH values plotted minimum and maximum 30-day values that are reported in the monthly reports.
implementation, data indicate that average pH values in the effluent were close, the quality of the effluent; are an average of the Previous to the wetland and sometimes exceeded,
Las Animas pH and FC in Effluent 9 16000 15000 14000 13000 12000 11000 Fecal Coliform 10000 9000 8000 7000 6000 5000 4000 3000 2000 1000 0 May-96 Dec-96 Jun-97 Jan-98 Jul-98 Feb-99 Aug-99 Mar-00 6 Oct-00 6.5 7 7.5 8 CN_FC_EFF PH_OUT 8.5
the maximum daily allowable of value 9.
Since the wetland implementation, pH values have consistently stayed within the allowable range of 6.5 to 9.
General Ecological Setting The Manzanola constructed wetland is located along a ditch that empties into the Arkansas River.
The cells are flat, rectangular, and are 99 percent vegetated and 1 percent open water.
The wetland is located on the north side of Manzanola, on the Arkansas River terrace.
The design of this treatment wetland is identical to the Town of Crowley treatment wetland.
Cell Vegetation The Manzanola site consists of two identical cells, which total 2.3 acres.
The two cells have similar plant communities dominated by cattail (Typha latifolia) and duckweed (Lemna minor); however, the west cell (cell 1) has significant algal growth, and the vegetation is almost entirely dead.
No water is currently flowing into or out of the wetland.
Vegetation covers 45 percent of the wetland, open water covers 45 percent, and litter accounts for the remaining 10 percent cover.
The soil surface is inundated from 0 to 1 Manzanola ­ Page 5
Manzanola foot.
The east cell (cell 2) is 80 percent covered by vegetation, 10 percent open water, and 10 percent litter.
This cell also has narrow leaved cattail (Typha angustifolia), and has no significant amount of algal growth.
Die-off is not as significant as in the western cell.
Planting/Seeding The site was planted to encourage vegetation establishment; however, no records document the species and amounts planted.
Weeds No noxious weeds were noted.
Maintenance Issues The cause of vegetation die-off should be identified and mitigated.
Wildlife The Manzanola wetland provides habitat for muskrat, waterfowl, songbirds, and red winged black birds.
During the site visit, waterfowl, songbirds, and red winged black birds were observed.
Muskrat have caused problems for site maintenance, and are being eliminated.
When the cattail stands are in good health, this wetland probably has some vegetative structural diversity because of the presence of the shallow water pockets.
The presence of shallow water and emergent vegetation provides habitat for waterfowl, songbirds, and muskrats.
Wetland Biodiversity Functional Assessment Sediment/nutrient/toxicant removal rated high, and production export/food chain support rated moderate.
General wildlife habitat rated moderate because of the presence of open water and potential habitat; however, extensive open water is present because a significant number of cattail have died.
Habitat diversity and uniqueness of the constructed wetland rated low.
Wetland Biodiversity Functional Assessment.
Function and Value Variables General Wildlife Habitat General Fish/Aquatic Habitat Production Export/Food Chain Support Habitat Diversity Uniqueness Total Points Wetland Category (I, II, III, or IV) Functional Points (0.1 to 1) 0.5 (mod.) 0.0 0.7 (mod.) 0.2 (low) 0.2 (low) 2.8 (56%) III Possible Points 1 1 1 1 1 5
Manzanola ­ Page 6
Manzanola
Human Use The wastewater wetland is part of a restricted public access area, and has never been used for educational purposes.
This wetland has low aesthetic value because it is dominated by areas of bare gravel and weedy species.
Overall Site Comments A large portion of the site has not developed wetland vegetation.
The sewage lagoons at the site provide open water habitat for wildlife, but the treatment wetland provides only limited habitat.
This site has consistently had trouble meeting discharge permit limitations.
Manzanola ­ Page 7
Ouray
Avondale Facility Statistics Lagoon
Nearest Town: County: River Basin: Receiving Water Body: Year Online: Aerated influent end of wetland
Ouray Ouray Uncompahgre River Uncompahgre River 1995 700 (winter) 2000 (summer)
Population:
Elevation (feet): Design Flow (mgd): Average Flow (mgd): Size (acres): Effluent end of wetland cell
7700 0.363 0.26 0.76
Vista down wetland cells
Facility Description The Ouray wastewater treatment facility is a domestic minor municipal lagoon system.
This new facility consists of headworks with a bar screen, a Parshall flume, a grit channel, and an influent lift station followed
Ouray ­ Page 1
Ouray by two aerated lagoons, a wetlands system for polishing, an effluent Parshall flume, hypochlorination, a chlorine contact chamber, and dechlorination prior to discharge to the Uncompahgre River.
Lagoons The Ouray lagoon system consist of 2 cells operated in series.
Multiple take-off elevations are provided for the effluent from cell 2.
The table below discusses some of the lagoon features.
Lagoon Information Cell No.: Surface Area (sq. ft.) Avg.
Depth (ft) Avg.
Volume (Million gallons) Detention time (days) Aerator size (hp) 5.8 - 8.4 30 5.0 - 7.2 15 1 18,880 14.8 2.09 2 16,920 14.3 1.81
Background Information The City's main collection system was constructed in the early 1900's as a combination groundwater, storm sewer, and sanitary sewer with a direct discharge to the river.
Ouray's first treatment system was built in 1969 as an activated sludge wastewater system.
An aerated lagoon was added in 1976.
In 1989 a 201 Facility Study suggested that a new aerated lagoon system be constructed.
Energy Analysis This system uses energy in its aerated lagoons.
A lift station is provided after the headworks to convey the flow to the lagoons.
The forebay to each wetland cell provides compressed air into the wastewater.
Wetland Design Design Methods The facility consists of a headworks with a bar screen, a Parshall flume, a grit channel, and an influent lift station followed by two aerated lagoons, a wetlands for polishing, and effluent Parshall flume, hypochlorination, a chlorine contact chamber, and dechlorination prior discharging to the Uncompahgre River.
The wetland cells follow aerated lagoon #1 (volume = 2.09mg with a summer hrt of 5.8 days and a
Ouray ­ Page 2
Ouray winter hrt of 8.4 days), lagoon #2 (volume = 1.81 mg with a summer hrt of 5 days and a winter hrt of 7.2 days).
The wetland cells have a summer hrt = 2 days and a winter hrt = 2.9 days.
Objectives The primary treatment objective was the removal of TSS due to algal carryover from the lagoons.
Size The constructed wetland consists of two 70' X 470' basins, with a maximum depth of 1.5'.
Shape The wetland cells are contoured to fit the site topography.
As shown in the schematic, the borders are curved.
Hydraulics A swivel tee located in a manhole prior to discharge from the plant allows for variability in the water level in the wetland system.
Flexibility in the system allows for cells to be bypassed and dried out.
This proved to be an important feature when anoxic conditions became a problem in a wetland cell.
Taking the cell offline allowed it to dry out and reaerate.
In addition, drying out the cell resulted in muskrats leaving the site.
Treatment Goals Permitted Discharge Limitations Oil and Grease: CBOD5: BOD5 Removal: TSS: PH, su (min ­ max) Chlorine Residual: Fecal Coliform Bacteria: 10 mg/l (Daily Max) 25 mg/l (30-day ave) 85% 30 mg/l (30-day ave) 6.5 ­ 9.0 (Daily Max) 0.5 mg/l (Daily Max) 6,000 organisms per 100 ml (Daily Max)
Water Quality Data Monthly discharge monitoring reports document the historical performance of the Ouray system.
Treatment before and after the wetland implementation show a clear improvement in the system performance after the addition of the wetlands.
Ouray ­ Page 3
Ouray TSS Data The TSS graph plots the percent removal on the left axis and TSS in mg/l in the effluent on the right axis.
The average monthly TSS in the influent, since 1996, has been 139 mg/l and the average monthly effluent has been 7 mg/l.
This clearly meets the permit discharge requirement of 30 mg/l.
Ouray TSS Performance Wetlands Completed 1992
100.0% 90.0% 80.0% 70.0% Percent Removal 60.0% 50.0% 40.0% 30.0% 20.0% 10.0% TSS % Removal TSS in Effluent
160 140 120 100 80 60 40 20 0 0 b-0 Fe -99 c De -99 t Oc -99 g Au -99 n Ju 9 r-9 Ap 9 b-9 Fe -98 c De -98 t Oc 8 g-9 Au -98 n Ju -98 r Ap -98 b Fe -97 c De -97 t Oc -97 g Au -97 n Ju -97 r Ap 7 b-9 Fe -96 c De -96 t Oc -96 g Au -96 n Ju 6 r-9 Ap 6 b-9 Fe -95 c De -95 t Oc 5 g-9 Au -95 n Ju -95 r Ap -95 b Fe -94 c De -94 t Oc 4 g-9 Au -94 n Ju -94 r Ap 4 b-9 Fe -93 c De -93 t Oc -93 g Au -93 n Ju 3 r-9 Ap 3 b-9 Fe -92 c De -92 t Oc -92 g Au -92 n Ju 2 r-9 Ap -92 b Fe -91 c De -91 t Oc 1 g-9 Au -91 n Ju -91 r Ap -91 b Fe -90 c De
BOD Data The BOD data is plotted similarly to the TSS data, with mg/l in the effluent on the right axis, and percent removal on the left axis. .
The average monthly influent amount has been 96 mg/l and the average monthly effluent amount has been 4 mg/l.
Ouray ­ Page 4
TSS in Effluent, mg/L
Ouray
Ouray BOD Performance Wetlands Completed 1992 100.0% 90.0% 50 80.0% BOD in Effluent, mg/L 70.0% Percent Removal 60.0% 50.0% 40.0% 30.0% 10 20.0% 10.0% 0 0 b- 0 Fe -99 c De -99 t Oc -99 g Au -99 n Ju 9 r-9 Ap -99 b Fe -98 c De -98 t Oc -98 g Au -98 n Ju 8 r-9 Ap -98 b Fe -97 c De -97 t Oc -97 g Au -97 n Ju 7 r-9 Ap 7 b- 9 Fe -96 c De -96 t Oc -96 g Au -96 n Ju 6 r-9 Ap 6 b- 9 Fe -95 c De -95 t Oc -95 g Au -95 n Ju 5 r-9 Ap 5 b- 9 Fe -94 c De -94 t Oc -94 g Au -94 n Ju 4 r-9 Ap 4 b- 9 Fe -93 c De -93 t Oc -93 g Au -93 n Ju 3 r-9 Ap 3 b- 9 Fe -92 c De -92 t Oc -92 g Au -92 n Ju 2 r-9 Ap 2 b- 9 Fe -91 c De -91 t Oc -91 g Au -91 n Ju 1 r-9 Ap -91 b Fe -90 c De
60
40
BOD % Removal BOD in Effluent
30
20
pH and Fecal Coliform Data for these two categories has been plotted on the same graph.
Data reflect the quality of the effluent, not influent measurements are taken for these parameters.
The pH values plotted are an average of the minimum Ouray pH and FC in Effluent 9 16000 15000 14000 13000 12000 11000 Fecal Coliform 10000 9000 8000 7000 6000 5000 4000 3000 2000 1000 0 May-90 Sep-91 Jan-93 Jun-94 Oct-95 Mar-97 Jul-98 Dec-99 6 Apr-01 6.5 7 7.5 8 CN_FC_EFF PH_OUT 8.5
and maximum 30-day values that are reported in the monthly reports.
Over the recorded period, pH values have consistently stayed within the allowable range of 6.5 to 9.
Ouray ­ Page 5
Ouray The average fecal coliforms in the effluent has been 1300 organisms per 100 ml.
This clearly meets the discharge permit requirements of 6,000 organisms per 100 ml.
General Ecological Setting Situated at 7,760 feet, the constructed wetland is surrounded by the San Juan Range, the youngest and steepest range of the Rocky Mountains.
Peaks surrounding Ouray rise 13,000 to 14,000 feet.
Numerous aspen forests are found in the valley around Ouray, particularly in areas once heavily disturbed by mining, logging, and grazing.
Vegetation communities along the Uncompahgre River include mixed conifer forests, piñon-juniper woodlands, mixed mountain shrublands, and western slope grasslands.
Cell Vegetation Vegetation in all six cells is 80 to 90 percent cattail (Typha spp.) with the exception of cell 3, which is 80 percent duckweed (Lemna minor) and 20 percent cattail (Typha latifolia).
Two small stands of phragmites or common reed (Phragmites australis) are present in cells 1 and 4.
Other species present included curly dock (Rumex crispus) and lady's thumb (Polygonum persicaria).
Planting/Seeding Cattails were planted in each cell.
Weeds Phragmites is a large perennial rhizomatous grass frequently regarded as an aggressive, unwanted invader in the East and upper Midwest; however, in the western United States, phragmites can be regarded as a stable, natural component of a wetland community if the habitat is pristine and the population does not appear to be expanding.
Many native populations of phragmites are "benign" and pose little or no threat to other species and should be left intact.
Maintenance Issues The wetland system experiences an outside flow problem with sulfates, which concentrate in filters.
The addition of aeration should mitigate this problem.
Wildlife The constructed wetland in Ouray provides habitat muskrat, raccoon, rodents, waterfowl, and songbirds.
Red winged blackbirds and mallard were observed during the site visit.
The vegetative structural diversity and wildlife habitat value of the constructed wetland are moderate when isolated.
At the landscape level, the constructed wetland does not add significantly to wildlife habitat found within the Uncompahgre River Valley.
Wetland Biodiversity Functional Assessment Wildlife habitat rated moderate due primarily to the overall size or available habitat.
Habitat diversity and uniqueness of the Ouray constructed wetland rated moderate and low.
Total functional points were 52% of the total possible for this wetland, and it was rated as a category III wetland.
Ouray ­ Page 6
Ouray
Wetland Biodiversity Functional Assessment.
Function and Value Variables General Wildlife Habitat General Fish/Aquatic Habitat Production Export/Food Chain Support Habitat Diversity Uniqueness Total Points Wetland Category (I, II, III, or IV) Functional Points (0.1 to 1) 0.5 (mod.) 0.0 0.7 (mod.) 0.2 (low) 0.2 (low) 2.6 (52%) III Possible Points 1 1 1 1 1 5
Human Use The constructed wetland in Ouray is located along Highway 550 and has an informal associated pullout area.
As parks and trails are developed in the valley, the wetland may be used for interpretive purposes.
This wetland has high aesthetic value, and can be seen from the highway.
Overall Site Comments This wetland has good vegetation cover and functions well in treating wastewater.
It has wildlife and aesthetic value.
Ouray ­ Page 7
Platteville
Platteville Facility Statistics Nearest Town: Lagoon
Platteville Weld Middle South Platte South Platte River 1992 2500 5100 0.348 0.13 3
County: River Basin: Receiving Water Body: Year Online: Population: Elevation (feet):
Wetland cells
Design Flow (mgd): Average Flow (mgd): Size (acres):
Discharge point at South Platte River
Facility Description The Platteville waster treatment facility is a domestic minor municipal lagoon system.
The system consists of an aerated lagoon, a settling lagoon and two surface flow constructed wetland cells, followed by chlorine disinfection.
Background Information Platteville converted a portion of their third lagoon to a constructed wetland to eliminate effluent quality problems resulting from excessive algae growth in the polishing pond.
Platteville received a notice of significant noncompliance in July of 1997 for exceeding BOD5 limitations.
These violations were considered to be the result of various problems with the aeration equipment.
Energy Analysis Energy in the system is used to aerate the lagoon.
Typical energy expenditures are $500 per month.
Platteville ­ Page 1
Platteville
Wetland Design Design Methods The plug-flow first order kinetics equation was used.
The design water elevations were a minimum depth of 6" and a maximum depth of 2'.
Detention times of 6 days for summer operations and 1.6 days for winter operations were determined to be sufficient for suspended solids removal.
Objectives The shallow lagoons at this site produce excessive amounts of algae during summer months.
This algal carryover results in high TSS and BOD in the lagoon effluent.
The primary objective of the wetland system was the removal of TSS from the lagoon effluent.
An influent BOD5 of 40 mg/l was determined to be the average value that the wetlands will see from the lagoon system.
Size This system was sized to accommodate an average daily flow of 0.348 mgd.
The wetland consists of 2 cells, with a total surface area of 3 acres.
Shape An abandoned lagoon was retrofit to accommodate the wetland cells.
As a result, the wetlands are rectangular with a direct flow path.
Hydraulics Lagoon effluent enters the two parallel wetland cells by a perforated irrigation pipe.
A splitter box is located prior to the wetland cells and provides for the bypass of the wetland system.
Wastewater flows by gravity towards the outlet end of the wetland cells.
An 8" perforated collection pipe is oriented along the width of the wetland cell.
Flow is directed through the collection pipe to a flow control structure.
The water level in the wetland can be adjusted in the flow control structure by the use of moveable weir plates.
Treatment Goals Permitted Discharge Limitations Oil and Grease: BOD5: BOD5 Removal: TSS: PH, su (min ­ max) Chlorine Residual: Fecal Coliform Bacteria: 10 mg/l (Daily Max) 25 mg/l (30-day ave) 85% 75 mg/l (30-day ave) 6.5 ­ 9.0 (Daily Max) 0.5 mg/l (Daily Max) 6,000 organisms per 100 ml (Daily Max)
Platteville ­ Page 2
Platteville
Water Quality Data TSS Data The TSS graph plots the percent removal on the left axis and TSS in mg/l in the effluent on the right axis.
The average monthly TSS in the influent, over the period of record, has been 271 mg/l and the average monthly effluent has been 30 mg/l.
This meets the permit discharge requirement of 75 mg/l.
Platteville TSS Performance Wetlands Completed May 1993 100.0% 90.0% 100 80.0% 70.0% Percent Removal 60.0% 50.0% 40.0% 30.0% 20 20.0% 10.0% 0 2 1/ 1/ / /1 11 1 1/ 9/ 1 1/ 7/ 1 1/ 5/ 1 1/ 3/ 1 1/ 1/ / /1 11 1 1/ 9/ 1 1/ 7/ 1 1/ 5/ 1 1/ 3/ 1 1/ 1/ / /1 11 1 1/ 9/ 1 1/ 7/ 1 1/ 5/ 1 1/ 3/ 1 1/ 1/ / /1 11 1 1/ 9/ 1 1/ 7/ 1 1/ 5/ 1 1/ 3/ 1 1/ 1/ / /1 11 1 1/ 9/ 1 1/ 7/ 1 1/ 5/ 1 1/ 3/ 1 1/ 1/ / /1 11 1 1/ 9/ 1 1/ 7/ 1 1/ 5/ 1 1/ 3/ 1 1/ 1/ / /1 11 1 1/ 9/ 1 1/ 7/ 1 1/ 5/ 1 1/ 3/ 1 1/ 1/ / /1 11 1 1/ 9/ 1 1/ 7/ 1 1/ 5/
120
TSS % Removal TSS in Effluent
60
40
BOD Data The BOD data is plotted similarly to the TSS data, with mg/l in the effluent on the right axis, and percent removal on the left axis.
The average monthly influent amount has been 272 mg/l and the average monthly effluent amount has been 26 mg/l Platteville BOD Performance Wetlands Completed May 1993 100% 80
70 90% 60 BOD in Effluent, mg/L
Percent Removal
80% BOD % Removal BOD in Effluent 70%
50
40
30
20 60% 10
50%
0 0 20 1/ 1/ /19 /1 11 199 1/ 9/ 199 1/ 7/ 199 1/ 5/ 199 1/ 3/ 199 1/ 1/ /19 /1 11 199 1/ 9/ 199 1/ 7/ 199 1/ 5/ 199 1/ 3/ 199 1/ 1/ /19 /1 11 199 1/ 9/ 199 1/ 7/ 199 1/ 5/ 199 1/ 3/ 199 1/ 1/ /19 /1 11 199 1/ 9/ 199 1/ 7/ 199 1/ 5/ 199 1/ 3/ 199 1/ 1/ /19 /1 11 199 1/ 9/ 199 1/ 7/ 199 1/ 5/ 199 1/ 3/ 199 1/ 1/ /19 /1 11 199 1/ 9/ 199 1/ 7/ 199 1/ 5/ 199 1/ 3/ 199 1/ 1/ /19 /1 11 199 1/ 9/ 199 1/ 7/ 199 1/ 5/ 199 1/ 3/ 199 1/ 1/ /19 /1 11 199 1/ 9/ 199 1/ 7/ 199 1/ 5/ 0 99 9 9 9 98 9 8 9 8 8 7 8 7 8 97 7 7 96 6 7 6 6 6 6 95 3 3 92 3 5 4 93 5 5 94 5 3 3 4 2 2 5 2 4 4 4
Platteville ­ Page 3
TSS in Effluent, mg/L
80
0 00 99 19 9 99 9 99 9 99 9 99 9 99 98 19 8 99 8 99 8 99 8 99 8 99 97 19 7 99 7 99 7 99 7 99 7 99 96 19 6 99 6 99 6 99 6 99 6 99 95 19 5 99 5 99 5 99 5 99 5 99 94 19 4 99 4 99 4 99 4 99 4 99 93 19 3 99 3 99 3 99 3 99 3 99 92 19 2 99 2 99 2 99
Platteville pH and Fecal Coliform Data for these two categories has been plotted on the same graph.
Data reflect the quality of the effluent; no influent measurements are taken for these parameters.
The pH values plotted are an average of the minimum and maximum 30-day values that are reported in the monthly reports.
Over the period of record, pH values have consistently stayed within the allowable range of 6.5 to 9.
The average fecal coliform level has been 1009 organisms per 100 ml.
This meet the discharge permit requirements of 6,000 organisms per 100 ml.
Platteville pH and FC in Effluent 9 16000 15000 14000 13000 12000 11000 Fecal Coliform 10000 9000 8000 7000 6000 5000 4000 3000 2000 1000 0 Sep-91 Jan-93 Jun-94 Oct-95 Mar-97 Jul-98 Dec-99 6 Apr-01 6.5 7 7.5 8 CN_FC_EFF PH_OUT 8.5
General Ecological Setting The Platteville wetland is a flat, rectangular basin situated on the northern side of Platteville, adjacent to farmland.
The site is in an upland area about 3 miles east of the South Platte River.
Cell Vegetation The Platteville treatment wetland consists of one cell with a single vegetation community.
The cell, which is approximately 1.8 acres, is dominated by cattails (97 percent--Typha latifolia) and lady's thumb (3 percent--Polygonum persicaria) with trace amounts of softstem bulrush (Scirpus tabernamontanae), curly dock (Rumex crispus), and duckweed (Lemna minor).
Planting/Seeding There were no records of the planting or seeding plans for this wetland.
Platteville ­ Page 4
Platteville Weeds Canada thistle and cheatgrass are present in small amounts in the Platteville constructed wetland.
Both species are State Noxious Weeds.
They are invasive in areas of recent disturbance, spread quickly, prevent the establishment of native species, and have low value as wildlife habitat.
Maintenance Issues No maintenance issues related to vegetation health were noted.
Wildlife The constructed wetland at Platteville provides habitat for songbirds.
Red winged blackbirds and barn swallows were observed at the site visit.
This wetland is not structurally diverse , and probably is of limited value to wildlife.
Red winged black birds probably nest in the wetland, but the wetland does not provide unique, diverse habitat for wildlife.
Wetland Biodiversity Functional Assessment Sediment/nutrient/toxicant removal rated high.
Production export/food chain support rated moderate.
All other parameters measured low.
This wetland received 33 percent of the total possible functional points, and was functionally rated as a category IV wetland.
Wetland Biodiversity Functional Assessment.
Function and Value Variables General Wildlife Habitat General Fish/Aquatic Habitat Production Export/Food Chain Support Habitat Diversity Uniqueness Total Points Wetland Category (I, II, III, or IV) Functional Points (0.1 to 1) 0.1 (low) 0.0 0.6 (mod.) 0.1 (low) 0.2 (low) 2.0 (40%) IV Possible Points 1 1 1 1 1 5
Human Use The wastewater wetland is part of a restricted public access area, and has never been used for educational purposes.
This wetland has moderate aesthetic value.
The wetland is comprised mainly of a uniform stand of cattail.
Overall Site Comments This treatment wetland supports healthy vegetation, and no maintenance problems were noted.
At the time of the site visit, however, it was not discharging into the South Platte River.
The wetland system appeared to Platteville ­ Page 5
Platteville be healthy and operating as designed.
However, the primary treatment lagoon system was not operating as intended, which resulted in excessive loading to the wetland system and difficulty in meeting permit limitations.
Platteville ­ Page 6
Ridgway
Overview of the Wastewater Treatment Facility
Ridgway Facility Statistics Nearest Town: County: River Basin: Wetland serves as an aesthetic water feature for park entrance
Ridgway Ouray
Receiving Water Body: Year Constructed: Population: Elevation (feet): Design Flow (mgd): Average Flow (mgd):
Non-Discharging 1994 290 6800 .015
An island is incorporated into the wetland design for habitat value
Size (acres):
A cobbled pathway serves as an overflow structure to connect the wetland cells
Ridgway ­ Page 1
Ridgway
Facility Description This wastewater treatment facility consists of a septic tank for primary sedimentation followed by an aeration cell.
Effluent from the lagoon system is further treated in a surface flow constructed wetland system.
Lagoons The Ridgway lagoon system is described in the table below.
The cells are designed to operate in parallel or series.
Lagoon Information Cell No.: Surface Area (sq. ft.) Avg.
Depth (ft) Avg.
Volume (Million gallons) Detention time (days) Aerator size (hp) 5 3 5 3 1 5766 10 0.0375 2 5766 10 0.0375
Background Information Choosing a wetland system was based upon an extensive analysis of several alternatives.
The seasonal operation of the park, combined with ideal climatic factors, affords an excellent opportunity to construct an evaporative system.
It was also important that constructed wetlands can provide wildlife viewing areas.
Energy Analysis Aerators in the lagoon system are the primary energy consumers at this facility.
Cost breakdown: The costs estimated in a technical report1 for this system are outlined below.
These costs are based upon work by Urban Engineering and actual construction costs associated with the Horizon Nursing Home wetlands in Eckert, Colorado.
Concrete basins Earthwork Impervious liner Controls / aerators Wetland plantings Engineering 1
$30,000 $30,000 $75,000 $15,000 $33,000 $15,000
"Ridgway State Park Cow Creek Recreation Site Wastewater Treatment Technical Design Report" Colorado Division of Parks and Outdoor Recreation, Ridgway Design Office, Montrose, CO, March 25, 1992.
Ridgway ­ Page 2
Ridgway O
Labor (1/2 hr per day at $20 per hour) Electrical Power (aeration) Replacement Parts (motors, controls, etc.) $1,300 $400 $500
Wetland Design Design Methods The wetlands were sized based upon estimated inflows, evaporation data, and organic loading parameters.
The total annual discharge to the wetland is estimated to be 0.819 mgd.
The design of the wetland involves two major components.
The first involves the design and analysis of climatic data and evaportranspiration rates to properly size the wetland surface area.
The second involves the design of the wetland to ensure that wetland capacity with regard to hydraulic and organic loading and oxygen transfer is not exceeded.
The hydraulic loading rate chosen was 0.015 mgd/acre/day.
The organic loading rate was chosen to have a seasonal average load of 5.7 lbs/acre/day, a peak month (August) of 9.7 lbs/acre/day and a peak day (assuming 15,000 gpd with 5 day retention and 50% BOD5 removal rate) of 35.5 lbs/acre/day.
Objectives The primary consideration in designing the wetland system was to provide adequate removal of organic loading from the lagoon system.
This system also included the aesthetic component in it design.
The system is located at the park entrance, and it therefore highly visible.
The shape and layout of the wetland cells are oriented to blend into the scenic surroundings.
Size The wetland is configured with three ponds.
Ponds A and B have a total surface area of 1.0 acre.
These ponds are utilized as the primary containment and treatment area.
Pond C is 0.5 acres and provides additional storage area, which is used during wet year conditions.
Shape Since aesthetic value was a design objective, irregular borders and natural shapes were provided for this system.
The schematic shows the general shape and relation of the three wetland ponds to each other.
Hydraulics A gated pipe on the surface introduces wastewater from the lagoon to the wetland cells.
There are 7 lateral pipes that distribute flow equally into the wetland system.
Dam water can be used as an additive to keep the wetland from drying up.
Batter boards are used to change water levels.
Original boards were wooden, but muskrats destroyed.
Subsequently the wooden boards were replaced with plastic boards.
The piping configuration provides for independent diversion of water into each pond.
The water is diverted through
Ridgway ­ Page 3
Ridgway gated irrigation pipe for even distribution into the ponds.
Pond B contains a deeper water level to maintain an open area in the pond.
Treatment Goals Permitted Discharge Limitations Oil and Grease: CBOD5: BOD5 Removal: TSS: PH, su (min ­ max) Chlorine Residual: Fecal Coliform Bacteria: 10 mg/l (Daily Max) 25 mg/l (30-day ave) 85% 105 mg/l (30-day ave) 6.5 ­ 9.0 (Daily Max) 0.5 mg/l (Daily Max) 6,000 organisms per 100 ml (Daily Max)
Water Quality Data This wastewater treatment facility operates under a groundwater permit.
Since it is not discharging into a surface water, monthly discharge monitoring reports are not required.
Water quality data is not available for this site.
General Ecological Setting The park's vegetation communities include mixed conifer forests, piñon-juniper woodlands, mixed mountain shrublands, and western slope grasslands.
Diverse wetland communities have become established around the reservoir and in the Uncompahgre River Valley above the reservoir and below the dam.
Cell Vegetation The Ridgway State Park constructed wetland has three cells.
Cell 1 (A) is about 0.6 acres and had about 15 percent open water and 85 percent vegetation cover in a single plant community.
About 90 percent of the vegetation in the cell was cattail (Typha latifolia).
Cell 2 (B) is about 0.3 acres with a small constructed island.
About 70 percent of the vegetation cover in cell 2 (B) is duckweed (Lemna minor) and 30 percent is broadleaf cattail (Typha latifolia).
Cell 3 (C) is 0.3 acres, has 15 percent open water and a single vegetation community dominated by broadleaf cattail (Typha latifolia), duckweed (Lemna minor), and reed canarygrass (Phalaris arundinacea).
Planting/Seeding Cattail was planted in summer 1993 and amended with substrate pulled from existing wetlands nearby.
Weeds Canada thistle (Cirsium arvense) occurs along the margins of cell 1 (A).
Canada thistle is invasive and particularly troublesome in riparian and other wet areas in the intermountain west.
Canada thistle threatens natural communities by directly competing with and displacing native vegetation, decreasing species
Ridgway ­ Page 4
Ridgway diversity, and changing the structure and composition of some habitats.
Canada thistle spreads primarily by vegetative means, and secondarily by seed.
Maintenance Issues Mowing temporarily reduces aboveground biomass, but does not kill Canada thistle unless repeated monthly for up to 4 years.
Mowing adjacent to the wetland is not practical due to the placement of large cobbles for aesthetic purposes.
Wildlife The constructed wetland at Ridgway State Park incorporates several features beneficial to wildlife, especially waterfowl.
The inclusion of areas designed as wildlife habitat within the Park's wetland system allows the project to serve as a small wildlife area and opens up the site for other uses in addition to wastewater treatment and disposal.
The combination of cover, open water, and a small island provides a potential nesting site for waterfowl.
However, spatial requirements of waterfowl (e.g., mallard) may limit the site to one nesting pair.
Viewed in isolation, the vegetative structural diversity and wildlife habitat value of the constructed wetland are moderate.
At the landscape level, the constructed wetland does not add significantly to wildlife habitat found within the Uncompahgre River Valley.
The location of the complex adjacent to a park entrance road and maintenance facility may limit wildlife use to human commensal species (e.g., mule deer, raccoon, and skunk).
Wetland Biodiversity Functional Assessment General wildlife habitat rated relatively high due in large part to the presence of open water and the island designed for waterfowl.
Habitat diversity and uniqueness of the Ridgway State Park constructed wetland rated moderate and low.
Total functional points were 56% of the total possible for this wetland, and it was rated a category III wetland.
Wetland Biodiversity Functional Assessment.
Function and Value Variables General Wildlife Habitat General Fish/Aquatic Habitat Production Export/Food Chain Support Habitat Diversity Uniqueness Total Points Wetland Category (I, II, III, or IV) Functional Points (0.1 to 1) 0.7 (mod.) 0.0 0.7 (mod.) 0.2 (low) 0.2 (low) 2.8 (56%) III Possible Points 1 1 1 1 1 5
Ridgway ­ Page 5
Ridgway
Human Use The trail to Dutch Charlie with access at the Enchanted Mesa Trailhead skirts the south end of the constructed wetlands.
An interpretative sign at that location provides hikers with information on the function of the treatment wetlands.
This wetland has high aesthetic value because it is located along a trail in a state park, with interesting visual features and because it has a healthy vegetation cover.
Overall Site Comments This wetland functions effectively in treating wastewater and it also has a healthy vegetation cover.
This site provides waterfowl and wildlife habitat, and the incorporation of an island and irregular borders into the treatment wetland design adds to the habitat and aesthetic values of this wetland.
Ridgway ­ Page 6
Rocky Mountain Center
Rocky Mountain Shambhala Center Facility Statistics Nearest Town: Septic tank system
Red Feather Larimer
County: River Basin: Receiving Water Body: Year Online: Population:
Non-discharging 1996 200 (winter) 500 (summer)
View from influent end of wetland cell
Elevation (feet): Design Flow (mgd): Average Flow (mgd): Size (acres):
7800 0.05 Fluctuates seasonally 0.23
Ben Pressman in wetland cell
Discharge point
Rocky Mountain Shambhala Center ­ Page 1
Rocky Mountain Center
Facility Description The Rocky Mountain Shambhala Center wastewater facility is a small evaporative system.
Each building in the community has an individual septic system.
Overflow from these septic systems are collected and conveyed to a bank of 6 ­ 2200 gallon septic tanks.
Overflow from these tanks is then distributed into two parallel subsurface wetland cells.
Effluent from the wetlands is discharged into an abandoned lagoon for evaporation and groundwater seepage.
No discharges are made to surface waters.
Background Information The Rocky Mountain Shambhala Center is a non-profit Buddhist organization that provides space for group retreats.
The primary use of this Center is during summer months.
Planned expansions at the Center will upgrade from temporary housing structures (tent platforms, trailers, etc.) to permanent housing structures that will be used year round.
In anticipation of this growth, the Center began the process of upgrading its wastewater treatment system.
Some considerations that were taken into account by the Center when choosing a new system were:
!" Must be able to handle fluctuations in waste loadings due to seasonal population !" Operation and maintenance must be simple !" Must be able to operated during sustained low temperatures !" Costs must be minimal !" system should operate in harmony with the natural environment.
The The Center decided to install a pilot scale subsurface wetland system.
The U.S. Bureau of Reclamation and the U.S.G.S. are currently assisting the Center with performance testing of the wetland system.
Energy Analysis Energy consumption in the system is minimal.
Flow through the wetlands is by gravity.
The septic tanks are pumped annually, at a minimal energy expenditure.
Construction Costs Construction of the wetland was approximately $200,000.
Wetland Design Design Methods The design method used is based on first order plug flow for BOD and the nitrogen removal model developed by Reed, Middlebrooks, and Crites1.
The nitrogen model used assumes a that most of the nitrogen will be removed by the nitrification of ammonia and then the denitrification of nitrate.
The uptake of nitrogen by the wetland plants is assumed to be negligible.
This design procedure is an iterative process.
Reed, Sherwood C., Crites, Ronald W., Middlebrooks, E. Joe, Natural Systems for Waste Management and Treatment, McGraw-Hill Inc., New York, 1995.
Rocky Mountain Shambhala Center ­ Page 2 1
Rocky Mountain Center The kinetic equations are first used to size the wetland for BOD and nitrogen removal.
A heat loss equation is then used to determine the temperature conditions in the wetland cell.
This temperature is then used to modify the kinetic equations for BOD and nitrogen removal.
This process is repeated until the temperatures calculated by both the kinetic equations and the heat loss equation agree.
Objectives The primary design objectives for this system were to decrease BOD and TSS in the septic overflow.
Nitrogen removal was also addressed by the design methods.
Size This system has two parallel subsurface flow wetland cells that each have a surface area of 5000 square feet.
The dimensions of the surface are 42' by 120'.
The average wetted depth is 1.8 feet.
The porosity of the gravel is 0.38.
Shape As shown by the schematic, the wetland cells are rectangular.
Each wetland cell has an aspect ratio of 2.9:1.
Hydraulics The effluent from the septic tanks flows to a splitter box.
Flow is discharge through to the subsurface wetland cells.
Each wetland cell is fully lined with a 30-millimeter polypropylene liner to prevent groundwater interaction.
Flow in the wetland was designed according to Darcy's Equation.
Sufficient head was provided to ensure that flow would remain subsurface through the system, even in the event of some clogging in the bed.
The water level can be maintained with a swiveling Tee attached to the outlet pipe.
This system has experienced problems with maintaining a sufficient water level at the inlet portion of the system to promote plant growth.
A temporary sprinkler system was installed to allow the plants to develop root structures that will intercept the water level in the wetland.
Treatment Goals Treatment Goals BOD5: TSS: TN (as TKN) 10 mg/l 50 mg/l 40 mg/l
Rocky Mountain Shambhala Center ­ Page 3
Rocky Mountain Center
Water Quality Data This wastewater treatment facility operates under a groundwater permit.
Since it is not discharging into a surface water, monthly discharge monitoring reports are not required.
The U.S. Bureau of Reclamation and the U.S.G.S. are currently assisting the Center with performance testing of the wetland system.
Data presented below are from the samples collected during this effort.
Removal rates in the wetland system varied over system fluctuated from a low of 45% to a high of removal, with some internal loading of TSS expe however internal loadings were also experienced design levels.
Parameter Temp, °C Inflow Cell 1 Outflow Cell 2 Outflow Conductance,µS/cm Inflow Cell 1 Outflow Cell 2 Outflow DO, mg/l Inflow Cell 1 Outflow Cell 2 Outflow pH Inflow Cell 1 Outflow Cell 2 Outflow BOD, mg/l Inflow Cell 1 Outflow Cell 2 Outflow N-Ammonia, mg/l Inflow Cell 1 Outflow Cell 2 Outflow
the two-year study period.
BOD removal in the wetland 97%.
TSS removal fluctuated between 50% and 70% rienced in the wetland.
Some ammonia removal was noted, in the wetland.
Removal efficiencies are not operating at
March 1998 4.22 0.76 0.76 969 960 989 0.31 0.67 0.46 7.18 7.20 7.14 310 170 190 34 26 32 
July 1998 18.41 15.78 14.79 918 863 8449 0.79 0.73 0.51 6.69 6.89 6.95 210 110 61 61 42 37 
Sept 1998 18.48 15.50 15.21 966 865 933 2.36 0.50 0.61 6.95 7.03 6.96 130 25 13 50 49 54 
Dec 1998 7.98 3.63 3.43 684 773 720 1.75 2.64 2.45 6.90 7.14 7.19 180 68 
Jan 1999 9.41 2.53 2.42 763 717 748 1.46 2.24 1.90 6.96 7.11 7.10 255 60 80 54 40 34 0.09 0.11 0.09
July 1999 19.10 15.26 15.39 1035 844 827 1.72 0.84 0.87 7.14 7.28 7.28 295 32 56 85 62 62 0.05 
Sept 1999 16.25 11.25 10.90 857 954 929 7.78 1.30 2.03 8.33 7.25 7.24 140 4 6 53 64 62 0.12 0.6 
N-Nitrate/Nitrite, mg/l Inflow Cell 1 Outflow Cell 2 Outflow
Rocky Mountain Shambhala Center ­ Page 4
Rocky Mountain Center
Parameter N-Nitrite, mg/l Inflow Cell 1 Outflow Cell 2 Outflow P-Total Phosphate, mg/l Inflow Cell 1 Outflow Cell 2 Outflow Dissolved solids, mg/l Inflow Cell 1 Outflow Cell 2 Outflow TSS, mg/l Inflow Cell 1 Outflow Cell 2 Outflow Fecal Coliforms, MPN/100ml Inflow Cell 1 Outflow Cell 2 Outflow
March 1998 
July 1998
Sept 1998
Dec 1998
Jan 1999
July 1999
Sept 1999
9.6 8.3 8.5
9.3.
6.4 6.7
7.8 5.2 6.0
11.6 5.3 5.5
10.1 9.8 10.9
10 7.2 7.3
7.9 6.6 6.9
710 630 620 44 20 26
390 398 366 50 42 34
470 340 350 40 36 32
360 370 340 44 40 20
400 360 380 41 16 22
420 320 310 72 
410 350 310 76 
1,600,000 1,600,000 240,000 40 22,000 430 11 50,000 210
1,600,000 
>
General Ecological Setting The ponderosa pine forests surrounding the constructed wetlands at the Rocky Mountain Shambhala Center are generally open with varying tree density.
An abundant herbaceous understory is associated with more open areas.
This understory may include common wild geranium and sticky cinquefoil.
Bunch grasses and sedges are also common in the open forests.
Rocky Mountain Shambhala Center ­ Page 5
Rocky Mountain Center
Cell Vegetation Vegetation cover in both cells of the constructed wetland was less than 30 percent.
Of the species present, cattail (Typha latifolia) is dominant.
Other species include hardstem bulrush (Scirpus acutus), Nebraska sedge (Carex nebrascensis), beaked sedge (Carex rostata), curly dock (Rumex crispus), and wild iris (Iris missouriensis).
Both willow (Salix spp.) and chokecherry (Prunus virginiana) were recently planted in less saturated areas of the subsurface wetland.
Planting/Seeding The constructed wetland was planted in spring 1996 with three-square bulrush (Scirpus americanus), Colorado rush (Juncus confuses), sunflower (Helianthus nuttallii), hardstem bulrush, Nebraska sedge, beaked sedge, and wild iris.
The initial planted suffered very high attrition due to the planting of bare root stock.
Weeds Noxious weeds were not observed in the wetland.
Areas without vegetation cover were heavily mulched with straw, which may have inhibited establishment by noxious weeds.
Maintenance Issues Preventing damage to newly planted willow and cherry should be considered.
The three most successful methods for limiting damage from deer, rabbits, and other animals include-- 1.
Fencing to exclude deer.
Conventional deer-proof fence is 8 feet high and constructed of woven wire.
Enclosures can also be constructed for individual seedlings and designed to exclude both deer and rabbits.
2.
Installing tubes of netting around individual seedlings and small trees.
The material (Vexar) degrades in sunlight and breaks down in 3 to 5 years.
These tubes can be installed to protect only the growing terminals, or can completely enclose small trees.
3.
Installing budcaps.
Budcaps are rectangular pieces of material folded and stapled around the terminal branch.
They form a protective barrier around the leader and bud.
Wildlife Vegetation in the constructed wetland provides habitat for songbirds and small and mid-sized mammals.
A heavy browse line attributed to mule deer was observed on the willows and cherry.
Cottontail rabbits were observed consuming the buds of these plants.
In general, the constructed wetland does not add to wildlife habitat available in the surrounding landscape.
Wildlife habitat and habitat diversity rated low.
Total functional points were 30% of the total possible, and this wetland was rated a category IV wetland.
Rocky Mountain Shambhala Center ­ Page 6
Rocky Mountain Center
Wetland Biodiversity Functional Assessment Wetland biodiversity functional assessment.
Function and Value Variables General Wildlife Habitat General Fish/Aquatic Habitat Production Export/Food Chain Support Habitat Diversity Uniqueness Total Points Wetland Category (I, II, III, or IV) Functional Points (0.1 to 1) 0.1 (low) NA 0.1 (low) 0.1 (low) 0.2 (low) 1.5 (30%) IV Possible Points 1 1 1 1 1 5 -
Human Use From a human use perspective, the Rocky Mountain Shambhala Center treatment wetland was designed as an integral part of the landscape.
Wastewater treatment is regarded within the context of the Center's land management.
This wetland has low aesthetic value because it is dominated by areas of bare gravel and weedy species.
Overall Site Comments The wetland system has experienced some trouble with establishment of plants.
Water quality data show that the system is not operating to the level intended.
However, it does perform the function of polishing septic overflow before discharge into an evaporative lagoon.
An abandoned sewage lagoon provides open water habitat for waterfowl.
Rocky Mountain Shambhala Center ­ Page 7
Silt
View of lagoons
Silt Facility Statistics Nearest Town: County: River Basin: Receiving Water Body: Wetland cells
Silt Garfield Lower Colorado Colorado River 1992 1700 5700 0.236 0.110 0.83
Year Online: Population: Elevation (feet): Design Flow (mgd): Average Flow (mgd): Sunken wetland cell
Size (acres):
View towards discharge point
Silt ­ Page 1
Silt
Facility Description The Silt wastewater treatment facility is a domestic minor municipal lagoon system.
The system consists of influent Parshall flume for flow monitoring, two aerated lagoons, a polishing pond, surface flow constructed wetlands, chlorine gas disinfection, and a V-notch weir for effluent flow monitoring.
Lagoons Silt operates a 3-lagoon system.
The first cell is a shallow (5') aerated cell, with 4 ­ 5hp aerators.
The second cell is aerated with 3 ­ 5hp aerators.
The third cell is used as a polishing pond.
Piping is provided to allow subsurface flow between the cells.
However, surface transfers have been observed.
Excessive algae growth has been experienced in the lagoon.
Operators have attempted to alter the effluent piping to avoid algae, installed a fabric liner on the lagoon surface to prevent sunlight penetration, and most recently introduced duckweed into the lagoon cells.
Background Information In February 1991 Silt was given a Notice of Violation and Cease and Desist Order.
In 1992 a 0.85 acre constructed wetland was added to assist with algae removal from the shallow, 5-foot deep, 57-day detention time lagoons.
The wetlands have experienced performance problems leading to ongoing compliance difficulties for Silt.
Problems with the wetland have included an unintended plumbing by-pass from lagoons directly to the chlorine contact chamber, piping from lagoons pulling from surface of water, large areas of the wetland cells not filled in with vegetation and muskrat damage.
In November 1999 the CDPHE issued a Notice of Significant Noncompliance for failing to meet BOD and TSS limitations, as well as failure to repair / replace their flow measuring devices.
At the time of the site visit, Silt was in noncompliance.
Energy Analysis The wastewater flows through the Silt system by gravity.
The aerated lagoons utilize 7 ­ 5hp submersible aerators.
The aerators run 24 hours a day, 7 days a week.
Energy costs at this site are approximately $1800 per month.
Wetland Design Design Methods The Silt facility has one of the older treatment wetlands in Colorado.
It was determined that a surface flow constructed wetland was the best option for this site because land was available and cost could be minimized by utilizing City crews to perform the earthwork.
The wetlands were sized to
Objectives This site has had ongoing problems with excessive BOD and TSS effluent from their shallow lagoon system.
Size
Silt ­ Page 2
Silt The wetland system consists of three wetland cells that are approximately 120' by 100'.
The total surface area for all three cells is 0.83 acres.
Shape The wetland cells are rectangular, with an aspect ratio of 1.2:1.
The flow path is direct.
Hydraulics The original hydraulic design of this system included a `step-feed' distributor as a part of the influent system.
Introducing the wastewater in this manner distributes the wastewater more uniformly across the wetland surface area than a typical header distributor pipe.
Silt found that more detention time was needed in the wetland, and subsequently, changed the influent to the distributor pipe at the head of each wetland cell.
A splitter box is provided to allow the lagoon effluent to bypass the wetland cells.
Adjusting the v-notch weir at the inlet controls water level in the wetland.
The wetland cells were originally designed to be able to be dewatered.
Unfortunately, the bed of the wetland cells sank about 18" due to the weight of the wetland media, vegetation and water.
This resulted in areas within the wetland that cannot be dewatered.
Pea gravel was added to two of the cells in order to raise the ground level and allow plant establishment.
The third cell was not easily accessible, and the addition of gravel was not feasible.
It has standing water and large, unvegetated areas.
A pvc liner is provided in the wetland cells to prevent groundwater interactions.
Treatment Goals Permitted Discharge Limitations Oil and Grease: BOD5: BOD5 Removal: TSS: PH, su (min ­ max) Chlorine Residual: Fecal Coliform Bacteria: 10 mg/l (Daily Max) 30 mg/l (30-day ave) 85% 75 mg/l (30-day ave) 6.0 ­ 9.0 (Daily Max) 0.5 mg/l (Daily Max) 6,000 organisms per 100 ml (Daily Max)
Water Quality Data TSS Data The TSS graph plots the percent removal on the left axis and TSS in mg/l in the effluent on the right axis.
The average monthly TSS in the influent, during the period of record, has been 202 mg/l and the average monthly effluent has been 27 mg/l.
This meets the permit discharge requirement of 75 mg/l.
Silt ­ Page 3
Silt Silt TSS Performance Wetlands Completed November 1992 100.0% 80
90.0%
70
80.0%
60
70.0% Percent Removal
TSS in Effluent 60.0%
50
40 50.0% 30 40.0% 20
30.0%
20.0%
10
10.0% 0 n -0 Ja 9 v-9 No 9 p -9 Se 9 l-9 Ju 9 y-9 Ma 9 r -9 Ma 9 n -9 Ja 8 v-9 No 8 p -9 Se 8 l-9 Ju 8 y-9 Ma 8 r -9 Ma 8 n -9 Ja 7 v-9 No 7 p -9 Se 7 l-9 Ju 7 y-9 Ma 7 r -9 Ma 7 n -9 Ja 6 v-9 No 6 p -9 Se 6 l-9 Ju 6 y-9 Ma 6 r -9 Ma 6 n -9 Ja 100% 90% Percent Removal 80% BOD % Removal BOD in Effluent 70% 50 40 30 60% 20 10 50% 0 n- 0 Ja 9 l-9 Ju 9 y-9 Ma 9 r-9 Ma 9 v-9 No 9 p-9 Se 9 n- 9 Ja 8 v-9 No 8 p-9 Se 8 l-9 Ju 8 y-9 Ma 8 r-9 Ma 8 n- 9 Ja 7 l-9 Ju 7 y-9 Ma 7 r-9 Ma 7 v-9 No 7 n- 9 Ja 7 p-9 Se 6 v-9 No 6 r-9 Ma 6 p-9 Se 6 l-9 Ju 6 y-9 Ma 6 n- 9 Ja
0
BOD Data The BOD data is plotted similarly to the TSS data, with mg/l in the effluent on the right axis, and percent removal on the left axis. .
The average monthly influent amount has been 229 mg/l and the average monthly effluent amount has been 30 mg/l.
Several exceedances of the permit limitation have been experienced.
Silt BOD Performance Wetlands Completed November 1992 100 90 80 70 60 BOD in Effluent, mg/L
0
Silt ­ Page 4
TSS in Effluent, mg/L
TSS % Removal
Silt pH and Fecal Coliform Data for these two categories have been plotted on the same graph.
Data reflect the quality of the effluent; no influent measurements are taken for these parameters.
The pH values plotted are an average of the minimum and maximum 30-day values that are reported in the monthly reports.
During the period of record, pH values have consistently stayed within the allowable range of 6.5 to 9.
Silt pH and FC in Effluent 7500 7000 6500 6000 5500 5000 Fecal Coliform 4500 4000 7.5 3500 3000 2500 2000 1500 6.5 1000 500 0 Apr-95 Oct-95 May-96 Dec-96 Jun-97 Jan-98 Jul-98 Feb-99 Aug-99 Mar-00 6 Oct-00 7 8 CN_FC_EFF PH_OUT 8.5 9
General Ecological Setting The Colorado River corridor in the Silt area contains a number of diverse wetland and riparian communit
