ESTABLISHING A COMPREHENSIVE STRATEGY TO COMBAT TERRORISM Testimony By Mr. Gary Stubblefield
President
GlobalOptions LLC
United States House of Representatives
Judiciary Subcommittee on Immigration and Claims
Hearing on Terrorist Threats to the United States
January 25, 2000
Mr. Chairman and Members of the Subcommittee, thank you for the opportunity to testify before the Subcommittee on Immigration and Claims.
As a career U.S. Navy SEAL and subsequently an international security consultant, I have been involved in planning how to penetrate the border security of potential adversaries as well as protecting U.S. and friendly borders from outside threats for more than 30 years.
So I feel well qualified to participate in today's discussions.
As we begin the New Millennium, one of the gravest dangers to our nation's security is the threat posed by terrorists.
While the level of state-sponsored terrorism has declined, terrorist groups continue to receive state assistance in the form of money, weapons, training, and safe havens.
State sponsors of international terrorism, as listed by the State Department, include Iraq, Iran, Libya, Sudan, Syria, Cuba, and North Korea.
At the same time that state sponsored terrorism is declining, we are witnessing the growth of freelance terrorism.
Osama bin Laden, who is believed to have master-minded the bombings of the U.S. embassies in Kenya and Tanzania, is the best example of this new trend.
Bin Laden has substantial personal wealth and business contacts.
He is believed to be bankrolling and training various Islamic extremist organizations.
Bin Laden is part of the World Islamic Front for Jihad Against the Jews and Crusaders, which advocates that it is the religious duty of Muslims to attack Americans wherever they may be.
The most alarming development in terrorism, in my view, is the growing likelihood of a chemical or biological attack.
We all recall the deadly nerve gas attack in the Tokyo subway by the Japanese doomsday cult, Aum Shinrikyo, that left 12 people dead and 5,300 injured.
What happened in Tokyo must be a wake-up call for what can happen in America.
The threat is real.
President Clinton, in a news interview last year, said a chemical or biological attack in the United States was "highly likely."
Former Senator Sam Nunn said it is no longer a question of if the United States will be attacked by terrorists with weapons of mass destruction, but only a question of when.
In response to the escalating threat of terrorism, we have tightened security at our airports, embassies, and military bases abroad.
We have increased funding to our intelligence agencies to monitor terrorist activities.
On the diplomatic front, the State Department has sought to increase anti-terrorism cooperation with other countries.
We have directed additional resources to law enforcement for training and to prepare first responders so they can deal effectively with a chemical or biological attack.
Congress has boosted the budget for U.S. Customs to enhance security along our borders.
We have also employed military force in retaliation to terrorist attacks.
We have also stirred up a hornet's nest by bombing four sovereign nations in the past 24 months, three of which have harbored terrorists or were involved in creating weapons of mass destruction.
Taken as a whole, America has mobilized resources in response to terrorist threats.
We are gradually improving our abilities to detect and deter terrorist activities.
But the job is incomplete.
Much more can and should be done to protect America, its citizens, and its international role.
A continuing and obvious weakness in our defense against terrorism is the inadequacy of security along our Northern border.
This is not a new issue.
The problem is not difficult to describe.
We have only 300 Border Control agents to protect a 4,000 mile border with 90 crossings.
Many of the smaller points of entry are not staffed at night.
Additionally, when people enter the United States from Canada, there is no requirement to present a visa or other documentation unless they plan an extended stay.
We create no record of who enters the U.S. or determine if they subsequently depart.
Put another way, our security is so lax along our Northern border, Ahmed Ressam, who was apprehended with more than 100 pounds of high explosive initiator and four sophisticated timing devices, chose to cross into the U.S. at a checkpoint instead of over an open frontier.
He obviously had confidence our security is so inadequate that he could easily slip into the U.S. and did not bother with finding an alternative route that is less protected.
Ressem, according to a recent news article, may have been operating in the U.S. since 1997, which means he probably traveled back and forth across the border numerous times over a three year period without being apprehended.
Clearly, terrorists such as Ressam believe our border security is a joke.
The inadequate security controls on our Northern border would not be such a concern if Canada had tougher laws to keep out potential terrorists.
But as we are all aware, Canada has generous immigration laws.
This translates to us through easy crossings from Canada into the United States.
As a result, today there are at least 50 terrorist organizations operating in Canada.
Canada has become a staging ground for terrorists to raise money, recruit new members, and plan attacks against America.
Canada is fully aware of this problem.
A report by the Canadian Security Intelligence Service, which is often quoted but nevertheless bears repeating, concludes the following: "Most of the world's terrorist groups have established themselves in Canada, seeking safe haven, setting up operational bases and attempting to gain access to the USA."
Canada is a close friend of the United States.
It should be noted that, as a sovereign country, it has the right to establish whatever laws it wants regarding immigration policy.
This said, and because Canada has lax immigration controls, we must take this factor into account when determining procedures and allocating resources to ensure America's security.
Ahmed Ressam was apprehended with 100 pounds of high explosives and four timing devices.
It is important to understand that he was not plotting to explode four, 25-pound, high-explosive bombs.
This type of high explosive is often used as an initiator to detonate a much larger bomb.
The timing devices trigger the high-explosives, which in turn ignite a much larger bomb made from materials such as ammonia nitrate or fertilizer.
In my view, Ressam was planning up to four massive attacks on the scale of the Oklahoma Federal Building or World Trade Towers bombings.
As horrific as this scenario may seem, the terrorist threat to America is far more serious.
We must consider the possibility that the next Ressam who crosses our border may be transporting not conventional explosives, but sarin gas.
If terrorists succeed in attacking America with a chemical or biological weapon, casualties will not be in the hundreds, but in the thousands or tens of thousands.
Members of this Subcommittee, this is the threat we face as a nation, and to which we must respond, to protect America.
It is critical that we tighten security in areas - such as our northern border - which are clearly lacking for effective security.
We must establish a comprehensive, integrated strategy that responds to terrorism along multiple fronts.
To protect America, in my view, it is imperative that we accelerate the establishment of an entry-exit control system.
The system must not only control all our border entries, it must also permit tracking aliens that have overstayed their visa permits.
As land ports of entry on our borders improve security, we can expect terrorists to respond accordingly.
When future Ressams realize they cannot easily slip across our borders through established check points, they will seek alternative routes in the same manner as drug traffickers and illegal immigrants.
The future Ressams will travel to more remote locations that are less secure.
So we must also enhance security between check points.
This can best be accomplished by technology and by increasing the number of Border Patrol agents and other law enforcement resources.
Our goal must be to improve detection and identification capabilities all along our borders and make available law enforcement personnel to effectively respond to violations.
We must not forget our maritime frontiers.
These are, for the most part, wide open to entry from the sea.
Our scant resources on the land crossings are exceeded only by the inability to adequately monitor and protect our coastlines and harbors from illegal entry or crossings.
As important as it is to improve security along our 4,000 mile Northern border, this action alone will be insufficient to deter future terrorist attacks against the United States.
Our ability to combat terrorism is only as good as our weakest link.
We can expend vast resources to enhance security along our borders, but will remain vulnerable to attacks if we fail to maintain an effective intelligence network.
Creating a cordon sanitaire is not the solo answer to an effective anti-terrorism policy.
Terrorists must understand that America will act swiftly and with certainty if attacked.
Taliban authorities in Afghanistan are providing a safe haven for Osama bin Laden and refuse to hand him over to Western authorities, despite sanctions imposed by the United Nations.
The U.S. government should publicly announce that it will hold Afghanistan responsible for any terrorist attacks connected to Osama bin Laden and we will retaliate with the full force of American military power to ensure the complete destruction of the Taliban regime.
We should make clear that our response will be overwhelming, not just an action like the retaliation by the current Administration following the bombings of the U.S. embassies in Africa.
We should also unambiguously announce that we will consider it an act of war and will respond with overwhelming force if any nation is connected to an attack on U.S. soil employing chemical or biological weapons.
Such a declaration would be a variation of the MAD (Mutually Assured Destruction) doctrine, which successfully maintained peace between the United States and the Soviet Union for more than 40 years.
Such a policy would ensure no nation miscalculates its support of terrorist groups or misreads America's intentions.
In a recent article, Neil Livingstone, our chairman at GlobalOptions and one of the leading experts on terrorism, states:
"The New World Order lacks the rules and structure that prevailed during the Cold War.
A clear statement of this nation's unwillingness to tolerate terrorist attacks on its citizens anyplace in the world, and the consequences that will flow from such attacks, will give much needed shape and form to the international landscape and provide greater protection for our citizens."
Livingstone warns, "We cannot afford to wait for the Ressams of this world to carry out their wicked designs but must act decisively and with dispatch to discourage terrorists and their government patrons from even contemplating the murder of Americans."
Thank you for the opportunity to appear before your Subcommittee and I look forward to answering any questions that you may have.
