Testimony of Vernon S. Ellingstad, Director Office of Research and Engineering National Transportation Safety Board before the Subcommittee on Aviation Committee on Transportation and Infrastructure House of Representatives Regarding Pilot Fatigue August 3, 1999 _______________________________________________________________________
Good morning, Chairman Duncan and Members of the Committee.
It is a pleasure to represent the National Transportation Safety Board before you today to discuss pilot fatigue - an item on the Board's Most Wanted list of safety improvements since its inception in 1990.
Human fatigue in transportation operations is one of the most widespread safety issues in the transportation industry.
Fatigue problems permeate our entire society, exacting a heavy toll on our safety, productivity, and quality of life.
While it remains one of the more perplexing problems to substantiate in accident investigations, the body of scientific evidence collected over the past decade clearly reflects the critical need for adequate rest for those people operating safety-critical equipment.
The Safety Board's first aviation safety recommendation related to human fatigue was issued in May 1972 -- more than a quarter century ago.
It asked the Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) to revise FAR 135 to provide adequate flight and duty time limitations (A-72-055).
Since that initial recommendation, Safety Board investigations have identified serious and continuing problems concerning the far-reaching effects of fatigue, sleepiness, sleep disorders and circadian rhythm disruption in transportation system safety.
We have seen repeated instances of poor scheduling of work and rest periods in all modes of transportation that have adversely affected the performance of the operating personnel.
Following completion of several aviation accident investigations during the 1980s that involved operator fatigue, the Safety Board, in May 1989, issued the following three recommendations to the Department of Transportation (DOT):
Expedite a coordinated research program on the effects of fatigue, sleepiness, sleep disorders, and circadian factors on transportation system safety.
(I-89-1)
Develop and disseminate education material for transportation industry personnel and management regarding shift work; work and rest schedules; and proper regimens of health, diet, and rest.
(I-89-2)
Review and upgrade regulations governing hours of service for all transportation modes to assure that they are consistent and that they incorporate the results of the latest research on fatigue and sleep issues.
(I-89-3)
In 1992, in response to these safety recommendations, the FAA established the flight crewmember flight/duty rest requirements working group of its Aviation Rulemaking Advisory Committee (ARAC).
However, by mid-1994 the working group had concluded its work, having failed to reach a consensus.
In the 10 years that have passed since the above three multi-modal recommendations were issued, only the one focusing on fatigue research had been fulfilled by the modal agencies of the DOT.
The current status of the recommendation on education materials is open--acceptable.
The safety recommendation on hours of service regulations is in a closed--unacceptable status, superceded by a follow-on recommendation in June 1999.
Mr. Chairman, unfortunately, since the time that these safety recommendations were issued, commercial aviation has experienced two major accidents in which the detrimental effects of fatigue adversely affected pilot performance.
* On August 18, 1993, a Douglas DC-8-61 freighter, registered to American International Airways, Inc., operating as flight 808, collided with level terrain about 1/4 mile from the approach end of runway 10, at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba, after the captain lost control of the airplane while approaching the Leeward Point Airfield at the U. S. Naval Air Station.
The airplane was destroyed by impact forces and a post-accident fire, and the three flight crewmembers, although fortunately not killed, sustained serious injuries.
The Board determined that the probable cause of the accident was, in part, the impaired judgment, decision-making, and flying abilities of the captain and flight crew due to the effects of fatigue.
The accident investigation revealed that the flight crew had been on duty for about 18 hours and had been flying for about 9 hours at the time of the accident.
The Safety Board cited, as an additional factor contributing to the cause of the accident, the inadequacy of the flight and duty time regulations applied to Title 14 Code of Federal Regulations (CFR) Part 121, Supplemental Air Carrier, international operations, and the circumstances that resulted in the extended flight/duty hours and fatigue of the flightcrew members.
As a result of this accident, in May 1994, the Safety Board issued two additional safety recommendations to the FAA regarding the need to review and update current flight and duty time regulations.
Those recommendations asked the FAA to: Revise the applicable subpart of 14 CFR, Part 121, to require that flight time accumulated in noncommercial "tail end" ferry flights conducted under 14 CFR, Part 91, as a result of 14 CFR, Part 121, revenue flights, be included in the flight crewmember's total flight and duty time accrued during those revenue operations.
(A-94-105) Expedite the review and upgrade of Flight/Duty Time Limitations of the Federal Aviation Regulations to ensure that they incorporate the results of the latest research on fatigue and sleep issues.
(A-94-106) * On February 16, 1995, a Douglas DC-8-63, operated by Air Transport International was destroyed by ground impact and fire during an attempted three-engine takeoff at the Kansas City International Airport, Kansas City, Missouri.
The three flight crewmembers were fatally injured.
Because the number one engine was inoperative, the flight was being conducted as a maintenance ferry flight under 14 CFR Part 91.
The Safety Board concluded in its report that the flightcrew assigned to the ferry had a shortened rest break after performing an international trip, and that the flightcrew was fatigued as a result of the limited opportunities for rest, disruption to their circadian rhythms, and lack of sleep in the days before the accident.
The Safety Board determined that the probable cause of this accident was, in part, the failure of the company to ensure that the flightcrew had adequate experience, training, and rest to conduct the non-routine flight.
Contributing to the accident, the Safety Board stated, was the inadequacy of FAA oversight of ATI and FAA flight and duty time regulations that permitted a substantially reduced flightcrew rest period when conducting a non-revenue ferry flight under 14 CFR Part 91.
As a result of this accident, in November 1995 the Safety Board issued an additional recommendation related to flight crew fatigue: Finalize the review of current flight and duty time regulations and revise the regulations, as necessary, within 1 year to ensure that flight and duty time limitations take into consideration research findings in fatigue and sleep issues.
The new regulations should prohibit air carriers from assigning flightcrews to flights conducted under 14 Code of Federal Regulations Part 91 unless the flightcrews meet the flight and duty time limitations of 14 CFR Part 121 or other appropriate regulations.
(A-95-113)
The role of fatigue is once again under review by the Safety Board in the air carrier accident involving American Airlines flight 1420 that crashed in heavy rain and winds on landing in Little Rock, Arkansas, on June 1, 1999.
As a routine part of our on-going investigation, Safety Board investigators are collecting all of the available information about the captain's and first officer's sleep schedules, duty times, flight times, and other factors that can result in fatigue and affect pilot performance.
Initial indications are that the pilots had flown slightly less than 8 hours, and been on duty for slightly more than 13 hours on the day of the accident.
Although information for the captain is not yet available, in the case of the first officer, it appears that he may have been awake for about 16.5 hours on the day of the accident, and obtained about 9.5 hours of sleep the preceding night.
Any conclusions about the cause of this accident are premature, but I want to assure you that the Safety Board will be taking a comprehensive look at these factors as we complete our investigation and conduct our deliberations on the probable cause.
In addition to the investigations of the above accidents, the Safety Board in the 1990s examined the issue of pilot fatigue in three safety studies.
In 1994, the Board issued a review of 37 flightcrew-involved major accidents of U.S. air carriers that occurred from 1978 through 1990.
The Board found that crews comprising captains and first officers whose time since awakening was above the median for their crew position made more errors.
As a result of this review, the Board recommended that the FAA require air carriers to educate pilots about the detrimental effects of fatigue, and strategies for avoiding fatigue and countering its effects.
In July 1996, the Safety Board closed this recommendation as a result of acceptable action by the FAA.
In 1994, the Board issued a safety study on commuter airline safety.
The Board found that self-reports from commuter airline pilots indicated that most of the pilots surveyed had flown while fatigued.
The most common reasons given for flying fatigued were the length of duty days, early shift duty followed by late shift duty, and inadequate rest periods.
The Board concluded that the practice of scheduling Part 135 pilots for training, check flights, or other non-revenue flights at the end of a full day of scheduled revenue flying, not only reduces the value of the training, but also increases the potential for fatigue-related accidents.
As a result of this study, the Board recommended that the FAA require that pilot flight time accumulated in all company flying conducted after revenue operations be included in the crewmember's total flight time accrued during revenue operations (A-94-194).
This recommendation currently remains in an open-acceptable status.
In a 1995 safety study on aviation safety in Alaska, the Board concluded that the consecutive, long duty days permitted by 14 CFR Part 135.261 for commuter airline and air taxi flight crews in Alaska can contribute to fatigue and are a detriment to safety.
As a result of this study, in December 1995, the Board recommended that the FAA develop appropriate limitations on consecutive days on duty, and duty hours per duty period for flightcrews engaged in scheduled and nonscheduled commercial flight operations, and apply consistent limitations in Alaska and the remainder of the United States (A-95-125).
Based on the FAA's inaction, this recommendation was placed in an open-unacceptable status in June 1999.
Mr. Chairman, in an effort to bring the transportation community together to discuss this important issue, in November 1995, the Safety Board co-sponsored an international, multi-modal symposium with the NASA Ames Research Center's Fatigue Countermeasures Program on the effects of fatigue in transportation.
Nearly 600 people from 16 countries attended.
The "Managing Human Fatigue in Transportation: Promoting Safety and Productivity" symposium highlighted the importance of fatigue countermeasures and provided tangible approaches for the transportation community to address the problem of fatigue.
At the symposium, former Secretary Peña provided a 1995 summary of the DOT's fatigue safety effort and stated that "fatigue among transportation operators remains a critical safety problem."
However, in a review this past May of the progress of the modal administrations to address this important safety issue, it was noted that little progress had been made to revise the hours-of-service regulations to incorporate the results of the modern scientific understanding of human fatigue.
The Board noted that the FAA is one of the few modal administrations that has initiated a wide range of research projects to address the issue of operator fatigue, and the FAA has developed and disseminated various educational materials to the industry on the detrimental effects of fatigue.
The Board applauds this effort.
However, education alone will not solve the problem.
Further, enough research has been conducted about fatigue to provide a sound scientific basis for new hours of service regulations.
The FAA's current regulations on flight, duty, and rest time limitations must be revised.
As a result of the Board's May review of DOT's activity on the fatigue issue, the Safety Board on June 1, 1999, issued a new safety recommendation and reiterated two 1995 recommendations.
The new recommendation asked the FAA to:
Establish within 2 years scientifically based hours-of-service regulations that set limits on hours of service, provide predictable work and rest schedules, and consider circadian rhythms and human sleep and rest requirements.
(A-99-45)
The Safety Board reiterated the two fatigue-related safety recommendations from its report on the 1995 accident at Kansas City and its safety study of aviation safety in Alaska, and classified the FAA's responses as unacceptable.
The Board is awaiting FAA action on these recommendations.
Unfortunately, little has been accomplished.
Please allow me to review the disappointing history of the FAA's efforts in this area.
On June 15, 1992, 3 years after the Board issued its intermodal recommendations, the FAA announced the establishment of the flight crewmember flight/duty rest requirements working group of its Aviation Rulemaking Advisory Committee (ARAC).
The working group included representatives of the air carriers and pilot labor unions.
In its final report submitted to the FAA on June 30, 1994, the working group indicated that although it had not reached consensus on specific changes to the regulations, it did agree on four major issues that should be addressed in FAA rulemaking: absence of a duty-time limitation, reserve scheduling, back-side-of-the-clock operations, and scheduled reduced rest.
With the failure of the ARAC participants to reach a consensus on changing the regulations, and following the Safety Board's reports and recommendations from the Guantanamo Bay and Kansas City accidents, the FAA announced that it would develop and promulgate the necessary regulatory changes without assistance from the external parties.
In December 1995, the FAA published a Notice of Proposed Rulemaking (NPRM) to revise the flight and duty time regulations of 14 CFR Part 121.
The NPRM had several favorable aspects, including: · Inclusion of standby reserve time, deadheading time, and all duties performed for the airline as duty time in the determination of flight, duty, and rest time requirements; · Inclusion of ferry, instructional, maintenance, check, and other flights in the determination of flight, duty, and rest time requirements; · Requirement of minimum daily rest periods of at least 10 consecutive hours, and 36 consecutive hours of rest within 7 consecutive calendar days of duty, for flight crewmembers; · Establishment of explicit standards for approving on-board flight crew rest areas; · Limitation of extensions of daily flight and duty intervals to periods of no more than 2 hours and only for operational reasons beyond the control of the airline; and · Limits on duty periods for crewmembers on reserve assignments depending on the amount of advance notification of reporting time.
With no FAA action taken and rulemaking effectively abandoned, on July 9, 1998, the ARAC on air carrier operations was asked to provide a review and analysis of industry practice with regard to reserve duty for flight crewmembers, which is only a small part of the flight and duty time issue.
A working group was formed and ultimately delivered recommendations to the FAA on February 9, 1999.
The pilots and air carriers on the working group were able to agree on the following: 1.
A pilot should be scheduled by the operator to receive a protected time period as an opportunity to sleep for every day of reserve duty.
The operator may not contact the pilot during this period.
2.
An operator should limit the movement of the pilot's protected time period during consecutive days of reserve duty to ensure circadian stability.
3.
A reserve pilot's availability for duty should be limited to prevent pilot fatigue as a result of lengthy periods of time-since-awake.
4.
Sufficient advance notice of a flight assignment can provide a reserve pilot with a sleep opportunity.
The ARAC members, however, could not reach agreement about how to meet these goals.
Mr. Chairman, the Safety Board understands the difficulty in reaching an agreement on the issue of reserve duty and rest.
Nevertheless, the Board remains deeply concerned and disappointed that no further rulemaking action has been taken on the overall issue of hours of service.
According to the FAA, it will likely issue a supplemental NPRM, rather than proceed to a final rule with the NPRM, which, in the Safety Board's opinion, will only further delay any resolution to this important safety issue.
Although the topic of my testimony today is pilot fatigue, I want to take a moment to mention that -- in addition to pilots -- the performance of other specialists such as maintenance workers and flight attendants is critical to flight safety.
The Safety Board recognizes that fatigue can also impair their ability to perform their duties.
The Board notes that duty limits and rest requirements have been in place for flight attendants since February 1996, but this is not the case for maintenance workers.
Although maintenance workers are required to have 24 hours off duty each week, there are no duty limits for these personnel.
In 1997, the Safety Board asked the FAA to review the issue of personnel fatigue and to establish duty time limits for maintenance personnel.
Although the FAA has not established these limits, the Board is currently considering the FAA's response to this recommendation.
I would also like to note that the FAA recently announced that it will vigorously enforce the existing regulations concerning flight time limitations and rest requirements for flight crew members -- regulations that have been on the books since 1985.
According to the FAA's announcement, these regulations require the airlines to provide all reserve pilots with a pre-scheduled and protected rest period of 8 hours sometime during the 24-hour period prior to completion of a flight assignment.
Whether the FAA interpreted its own regulations incorrectly in the past, or whether it simply failed to enforce these regulations, the Safety Board is encouraged that the FAA now intends to interpret the rules governing reserve duty in closer accordance with the factors that influence fatigue.
However, we are disappointed that the FAA will not vigorously enforce their regulations until January 2000.
We believe the FAA's action to enforce its existing regulations is only a small beginning.
The Safety Board will maintain a close watch over the FAA's actions until its good intentions are converted into actual practice.
Any further delays on the issue of pilot fatigue is an unacceptable risk to the traveling public, and we hope that the FAA will soon move forward with rulemaking that makes all of its flight and rest time regulations, for all flight crewmembers, consistent with the body of scientific knowledge that currently exists about fatigue.
Mr. Chairman, this concludes my testimony, and I am happy to respond to any questions you may have.
NTSB Home Page | Speeches and Testimony | NTSB Staff's Speeches
