United States Department of Agriculture - Economic Research Service - The Economics of Food, Farming, Natural Resources, and Rural America...
search our site _________________________ Submit Search
Home Research Emphases Key Topics Briefing Rooms Publications Data Site Map About ERS
home 
Briefing Room Icon
Briefing Room tomatoes: background
Fresh tomatoes Processing tomatoes
[3tomatoes.jpg]
[text.gif]
Fresh tomatoes The U.S. fresh-market and the processing tomato industries are separate markets.
Four characteristics distinguish the two industries: * Tomato varieties are bred specifically to serve the requirements of either the fresh or the processing markets.
Processing requires varieties that contain a higher percentage of soluble solids (averaging 5 to 9 percent) to efficiently make tomato paste, for example.
* Most tomatoes grown for processing are produced under contract between growers and processing firms.
Fresh tomatoes are largely produced and sold on the open market.
* Processing tomatoes are machine-harvested while all fresh-market tomatoes are hand-picked.
* Fresh-market tomato prices are higher and more variable than processing due to larger production costs and greater market uncertainty.
Commercial acreage.
California and Florida make up almost two-thirds of the acres used to grow fresh tomatoes in the United States.
Although acreage has gone down over the past decade, Florida remains the leading domestic source of fresh-market tomatoes.
Pennsylvania, Ohio, Virginia, New Jersey, Tennessee, South Carolina, and New York each plant between 3,000 and 4,500 acres.
Each state grows roughly 3 percent of the national total annually.
Yields.
Per-acre yields for fresh-market tomatoes trended higher by about 4 cwt (hundredweight) annually between 1980 and 1994.
Although yields were off substantially in 1995 and 1996 from freezes, heavy rain, and low market prices, the U.S. yield peaked in 1992 at 296 cwt per acre.
Severe flooding in Mexico that season sharply reduced production and exports to the United States.
A smaller volume of imports and higher prices prompted Florida growers to harvest fields more intensively, resulting in record-high yields in Florida (405 cwt).
U.S. fresh-market tomato imports have risen sharply since 1994, suppressing domestic grower prices.
Low market prices discouraged heavy gleaning of fields, with crops sometimes abandoned after one or two harvest passes.
With winter weather setbacks, per acre productivity has stagnated.
Production.
U.S. fresh field-grown tomato production steadily increased until peaking in 1992.
Production then trended downward and rose in 1999.
Declines likely reflected sharply rising imports, weather extremes (excessive rains, wind, and frost for several years), and increased competition from rapidly expanding greenhouse, hydroponic tomato growers.
Over time, fresh-market tomato production shifted South, with production falling in northern States.
Florida produced about 25 percent of domestic output in 1960 compared with 42 percent in 1999.
Tomatoes, one of the highest-valued crops in Florida, bring in one-third of the state's vegetable cash receipts and 7 percent of all agricultural cash receipts.
Florida is the second-largest tomato-producing State (including processing), but leads in fresh-market tomatoes.
Florida produced 42 percent of U.S. fresh-market tomatoes during 1997-99.
Florida's season, October to June of the following year, has the greatest production in April and May and again from November to January.
The leading counties are Collier and Manatee (each with roughly one-fourth of the crop) and Dade county (about 12 percent).
As in California, primary production areas change with the season.
For example, during the winter, most tomatoes come from southern Florida (Ft. Myers/Immokalee and the Homestead area of Dade County).
With warm weather, production moves north into areas around Manatee County (Palmetto-Ruskin) before finishing in Gadsden county (in the panhandle) in late June and early July.
California is the leading producer of all tomatoes in the United States, accounting for 95 percent of U.S. processing tomato output and 31 percent of the fresh crop.
Fresh tomatoes are produced across many counties in each season except winter, with San Diego (spring and fall) and Fresno (summer) Counties accounting for about a third of the crop.
Harvest of the California processing tomato crop is most active August to September, with more than half the crop produced in Fresno and Yolo Counties.
Other important tomato-producing States in 1999 included Virginia with 4 percent of the fresh-market, Georgia with 3 percent, and Ohio with 2 percent of processing tomatoes and 3 percent of fresh-market tomatoes.
South Carolina, Tennessee, and North Carolina each produced about 2 percent of the fresh crop.
New Jersey normally provides about 2 percent of fresh tomatoes, but hot, dry weather in 1999 reduced yields 24 percent--the largest year-over-year decline since 1952.
Seasonality of supply.
Fresh-market tomatoes are available year-round in the United States because imports supplement tomatoes grown in Florida and in scattered greenhouses in the winter.
Florida's winter crop is largely shipped to markets in the eastern half of the nation while the bulk of Mexico's crop is shipped to western States.
Commercial, fresh-market tomato shipments peak in the spring when Florida's volume is highest and California and various southeastern states begin to ship tomatoes.
Commercial volume is smallest and prices are lowest August to September due to the availability of local tomatoes.
Crop value.
Fresh-market tomatoes lead in farm value along with lettuce and potatoes, with a farm value of $920 million in 1999.
Because of higher prices during the winter, Florida accounts for 43 percent of the value of the U.S. fresh tomato crop.
The industry estimates that fresh-market tomato retail value exceeds $4 billion.
Some estimates suggest that the tomato market is about evenly divided between foodservice sales and retail consumer sales.
However, in terms of total consumption from all sources, about 70 percent is consumed at home with 30 percent consumed away from home according to the 1994-96 USDA food intake survey
Market structure.
Supermarkets carry many varieties of tomatoes today.
In addition to displays of plum (roma) tomatoes, an increasing volume of greenhouse and hydroponic tomatoes are now marketed in most of the country.
Claims of improved taste for these higher-priced tomatoes appear to be the dominant marketing concept behind the expansion.
In addition, some greenhouse, hydroponic tomatoes (which were initially imported from places like the Netherlands) are marketed "on-vine" (in clusters) to convey an appearance of freshness to consumers.
The tomatoes-sold-on-vine marketing approach is common in European nations.
These more expensive hothouse alternatives expanded rapidly from both imported and domestic sources.
In 1999, the U.S. imported fewer fresh-market tomatoes from every country except Canada, which rose 29 percent.
The volume of U.S. imports from greenhouse, hydroponic-producing countries like Canada, the Netherlands, and Israel increased 352 percent since 1995.
Estimates indicate these tomatoes account for about one-fifth of all fresh tomato imports.
Domestic producers recognized opportunity in this market niche.
As a result, new or expanded domestic greenhouse, hydroponic operations in several States began production with further expansion planned.
In Canada, firms in Ontario and British Columbia expanded tomato growing under glass, primarily to export to the United States.
Greenhouse and hydroponic fresh tomatoes are increasing their retail market share with Americans eating more than 1 pound per person.
With larger supplies in 1999, shipping-point prices dropped dramatically from the lofty heights of the mid-1990's.
Low prices also put a damper on the expansion plans of most firms and led to the bankruptcy of a major producer.
Prices.
In 1999, both shipping-point and retail prices of field-grown tomatoes averaged below levels of the year before.
The shipping-point price averaged $0.26 per pound, down 26 percent from a year earlier and the second lowest since 1986.
The U.S. retail price for field-grown tomatoes averaged $1.37 per pound--7 percent below the previous year.
Statistical analysis suggests that the retail price of tomatoes is linked directly to the shipping-point price.
Changes in the U.S. shipping-point price for tomatoes changes retail prices for that month and the next month.
Retail tomato prices include marketing costs such as wages, transportation, containers, advertising, fuel and power, and rent.
In 1999, preliminary data indicate that the shipping-point price for fresh tomatoes averaged about 23 percent of the retail price--the lowest share of retail in the past decade, which might reflect low shipping-point prices common to many commodities over the past 2 years.
Shipping-point prices for field-grown tomatoes have been under pressure since the mid-1990's largely due to increased imports and competition with hothouse products.
Over time, a declining share of the retail value might reflect faster productivity growth in the agricultural sector as compared to the retail sector.
Per capita use.
Excluding domestic hothouse product, Americans ate 4.8 billion pounds of fresh tomatoes in 1999.
This works out to 17.8 pounds per person--slightly less than the record 1998 level and about 15 percent higher than in 1990. Use has steadily increased since 1991.
The tomato is our fourth most popular vegetable.
Gains during the 1980's likely resulted from the increasing popularity of salad bars and fast foods, rising health consciousness, and a surge in immigrants with vegetable-intensive diets.
The popularity of cluster tomatoes (tomatoes sold still attached to the vine) and other greenhouse, hydroponic tomatoes may have increased tomato consumption in the 1990's.
One medium, fresh tomato (about 5.2 oz) has 35 calories and provides 40 percent of the USRDA of vitamin C and 20 percent of the vitamin A. University research shows that tomatoes may protect against some cancers.
[processtom2.jpg]
Processing tomatoes The U.S. tomato processing industry, primarily canned products, is distinctly separate from the fresh-market tomato industry.
Four characteristics distinguish the two industries:
* Tomato varieties are bred specifically to serve the requirements of either the fresh or the processing markets.
Processing requires varieties that contain a higher percentage of soluble solids (averaging 5 to 9 percent) to efficiently make tomato paste, for example.
* Most tomatoes grown for processing are produced under contract between growers and processing firms.
Fresh tomatoes are largely produced and sold on the open market.
* Processing tomatoes are machine-harvested while all fresh-market tomatoes are hand-picked.
* Fresh-market tomato prices are higher and more variable than processing due to larger production costs and greater market uncertainty.
Commercial acreage.
California accounted for 94 percent of the area harvested for processing tomatoes in the United States in 1999--up from 87 percent in 1990 and 79 percent in 1980.
Texas, Utah, Illinois, Virginia, and Delaware once harvested thousands of acres, but today they have little or none.
A total of 18,000 acres remain spread across Indiana, Ohio, Michigan, Pennsylvania, and New Jersey, with Indiana and Ohio holding the majority of the acreage.
Yields.
U.S. per-acre yields for processing tomatoes reached 36.63 short tons per acre, a record-high, in 1999.
Yields trended higher by about 4 short tons (hundredweight) annually between 1980-99.
National yields in 1999 were 25 percent higher than in 1990 and 55 percent higher than in 1980, because tomato farms are concentrated in California where yields are the highest and because both production and harvest technologies improved.
Production.
California leads in U.S. processing tomato production and the lead has been increasing.
In 1999, 95 percent of U.S. processing tomatoes came from California.
Indiana (1.7 percent) and Ohio (1.6 percent) accounted for most of the remaining production.
After bottoming out in 1981 at the close of a downturn that began in the mid-1970's, processed tomatoes began a steady climb that accelerated in the late 1980's with the rising popularity of pizza, pasta, and salsa.
High prices for tomato products in the late 1980's brought new investment in tomato-processing facilities in California.
The resulting surge in supply overwhelmed the market, however, causing prices to decline and forcing several processors to close in the early 1990's.
Market structure.
The 1990's also brought change to the structure of the processed tomato industry.
Growers contract with processors to process red-ripe tomatoes.
Although many firms manufacture pulp-based products, such as stewed and diced tomatoes, most initial processing is by firms that manufacture tomato paste, a raw ingredient.
Paste is manufactured and packed in bulk containers--large bags in boxes and barrels--and stored for use up to 18 months later.
This raw ingredient is distributed under contract or sold to remanufacturing firms that add water, spices, etc. to make retail and food-service packs of soups, sauces, catsup, and paste.
In the past, many firms made paste and also remanufactured this paste into other products.
The industry appears to be polarizing with several firms specializing in the manufacture of bulk industrial paste and others specializing in the remanufacture of industrial paste into consumer products.
Crop value.
Among the 13 leading processing vegetables (excluding potatoes, pulses, and mushrooms), tomatoes are the most highly valued with 53 percent of the $1.7 billion in 1999 farm value.
Processed tomatoes have historically accounted for a smaller share of all tomato cash receipts due to a low value per pound.
While fresh tomatoes are typically valued at 25 to 35 cents per pound, processing tomatoes are valued about 3 cents per pound.
As a result, during 1996-98, processing tomatoes accounted for just 38 percent of all tomato cash receipts despite a crop size that was 6 times greater than the fresh-market's.
Per capita use.
In 1999, domestic use of processing tomatoes (on a fresh weight basis) totaled 19.8 billion pounds--72.8 pounds per person.
On a per-capita basis, processing tomato use was highest during 1990-95 when use averaged nearly 76 pounds.
Over the past 4 years, use moderated, averaging 74.2 pounds per person.
Top of page
for more information, contact: Gary Lucier web administration: webadmin@ers.usda.gov page updated: December 18, 2000
Briefing room front page
Background
Trade
Market outlook
Policy
Key Topics Image [Ag Chemicals 
Select a Topic
Shortcuts Image [What's New..........]
Select a Shortcut _________________________________________________________________
USDA / FedStats / accessibility / privacy policy / contact us / advanced search / site map
