Skip Navigation National Cancer Institute Progress Review Groups [USEMAP:prg_uninav.gif] Prostate Cancer Home Final Report PRG Charge Roster Research Portfolio Initiatives Member Info ____________________ Search Biology, Progression, and Metastasis of Prostate Cancer This section summarizes the views of the PRG with regard to the current status of research into normal and neoplastic prostate development, prostate tumor progression and metastasis, prostate tumor-host interactions, and genetic influences on prostate carcinogenesis and progression.
Also reviewed are the roles of data collection and processing, the importance of a supportive infrastructure, and specific areas of research that, if studied in depth, appear most likely to contribute to the diminution, or even eradication, of human prostate cancer.
Current Status of the Field
Understanding prostate cancer biology, progression, and metastasis are fundamental to improving our abilities to successfully prevent, diagnose, and treat human prostate cancer.
To help discern the basic biology of prostate cancer, efforts must be devoted to analyzing the developmental, biological, and genetic aspects of prostate disease, emphasizing the identification of molecular mechanisms that can predict the risk of developing cancer and estimate a potential response to treatment.
Over the past decade our perception of normal and neoplastic prostate pathophysiology has improved dramatically.
Several important details regarding the developmental, tissue, and cellular biology of the prostate gland have been characterized.
For example, it is known that proliferation and development of prostate epithelium is initiated and subsequently maintained by angiogenic and surrounding mesenchymal stimuli through both autocrine and paracrine signals.
Furthermore, several therapeutic modalities have been created as a result of an improved understanding of hormonal influences on prostatic tissue.
The recognition that androgen receptors and metabolites are important in the regulation of prostate growth, differentiation, and neoplastic progression resulted in the development of the antiandrogens (e.g., flutamide, bicalutamide) and 5-alpha reductase inhibitors (finasteride) that are used clinically to treat prostate cancer.
Prostate cancer originates as a localized lesion.
It subsequently progresses to acquire increased invasive, migratory, and metastatic potentials.
Eventually, androgen independence develops and the tumor becomes refractory to conventional interventional therapies.
The progression of clinical prostate disease from a localized tumor to a widely disseminated disease state probably occurs through alterations in proliferation, cell-cell adhesion, invasion potential, and critical interactions between prostate cancer cells and surrounding host cells at both primary and metastatic tumor sites.
Unfortunately, contemporary methods of predicting how rapidly a given prostate cancer will acquire metastatic attributes and progress from an androgen-dependent to an androgen-independent state are unreliable.
The evolution of prostate cancer from a malignancy contained within the prostatic parenchyma to a systemic disease involving the seminal vesicles, lymph nodes, skeleton, and other distant organs involves fundamental changes dictated by genetic as well as epigenetic (environmental, behavioral, and dietary) influences.
Supporting this contention are clinical and laboratory studies that demonstrate putative roles for hereditary factors, tumor characteristics (including DNA repair, cell cycle progression, and apoptotic potential), and host factors (comprising stromal-epithelial interactions, angiogenic influences, and host immune surveillance) in prostate cancer progression and metastasis.
Unfortunately, our understanding of the underlying mechanisms that dictate prostate development, carcinogenesis, tumor progression, and metastatic dissemination is still very rudimentary.
The biochemical and molecular mechanisms that control cellular interaction during prostate organogenesis, morphogenesis, and functional differentiation remain undetermined.
The differentiative and proliferative potentials of prostatic stem cells have not been defined.
The inter- and intra-cellular signaling pathways that govern androgen receptor-mediated gene transcription and also communicate with other signal transduction pathways remain uncharacterized.
Moreover, the specific target genes and gene products that are directly controlled by key signaling molecules during the various stages of prostate cancer development and progression have not been identified.
Further research is needed into cellular signaling, cell surface receptor activity, and the interactions of prostate cancer cells with soluble and matrix-associated molecules that regulate prostate cancer growth, progression, and dissemination.
Tumor-host interactions are pivotal to the mechanisms of cancer cell invasion, migration, and metastasis.
Such interactions are reciprocal, and reflect both the endocrine and immunologic status of the host, which can either foster or reject the survival of the neoplastic cells.
The importance of understanding prostate cancer-skeletal interactions, in particular, is underscored by the strong propensity of prostate cancer to metastasize to the bone and the subsequent unique osteoblastic response observed in patients with metastatic disease.
Hence, it will be necessary to identify the molecular and biochemical features of bone physiology and pathophysiology that influence interaction between prostate tumor and bone cells, and the subsequent characteristic osteoblastic reactions that are induced when tumor cells metastasize to the skeleton.
Recently, new technologies such as microdissection, microarray, and comparative genomic hybridization have been utilized to evaluate clinical specimens, enabling the identification, cloning, and characterization of prostate cancer progression-associated molecular markers that might someday be used to define and characterize the malignant potential of prostate cancer in individual patients.
Despite the identification of these novel prostate cancer progression-associated biomarkers, validation of these findings, as well as discoveries of the molecular basis of cell communication and intra- and intercellular signaling, has not been performed with respect to progressively tumorigenic and metastatic clinical prostate cancer specimens.
An intensified pursuit is needed to delineate the relevant and basic biological parameters discovered thus far and relate them to such factors as: normal prostate development; prostate carcinogenesis; progression from an androgen-dependent to an androgen-independent state; acquisition of a metastatic phenotype; and interaction of prostate cancer cells with bone cells and other host factors.
Novel genetic and molecular pathways that will allow us to stratify and classify disease status based on these molecular and biochemical parameters will facilitate our ability to significantly improve the prevention, diagnosis, and treatment of prostate cancer into the next millennium (see also Section C, Early Detection, Diagnosis, and Prognosis).
Vision
Identifying novel molecular and genetic markers associated with prostate development, carcinogenesis, tumor progression, and metastatic spread should foster many subsequent developments in prostate cancer management.
These include the identification of underlying mechanisms of international and racial differences in prostate cancer development and progression; the separation of indolent and virulent forms of disease; improvements in diagnosing and monitoring patients; and the potential to predict the ultimate malignant potential of a prostate tumor while still at a localized state.
The development of relevant human prostate cancer models that mimic the clinical characteristics of prostate cancer growth, including the acquisition of androgen independence and the propensity to metastasize to bone, is also crucial.
Prostate cancer is a heterogeneous and multifocal disease.
To understand the clinical characteristics of prostate cancer, we must investigate the cellular and molecular basis of disease initiation and progression.
Studies that will identify prostate cancer stem cells, elucidate the reciprocal interactions between prostate tumor and host or bone cells, and define hormone receptor structure, function, and interaction with other cognate cell signaling molecules, transcription regulators, and cell-cell and cell-matrix intercommunication must be pursued.
Our ultimate goals are two-fold: to better understand key concepts of cancer biology, and to both prevent the development of prostate cancer and cure those men already afflicted.
Hence, our investigative approaches should place a high priority on developing those aspects of basic research that are most appropriate to clinical prostate disease and most promising for translational application.
Furthermore, as scientific thought is becoming more sub-specialized and individual researchers' interests and outlooks are becoming more focused, an interdisciplinary approach to prostate cancer research should be encouraged.
To accelerate the study of human prostate cancer, therefore, several major research directions must be pursued as follows:
First, strategies to identify genes and characterize novel genetic biomarkers that are differentially expressed or suppressed in the progression of prostate cancer to an androgen-independent and metastatic state must be developed.
These novel genes will be evaluated and validated in clinical specimens of men in which the biological potential and responsiveness to hormonal, radiation, biological, and chemotherapies is known.
Second, the search for intercellular signal transduction pathways that govern ligand-dependent or independent activation of hormone receptors or other factors affecting androgen sensitivity, and their interaction with other cognate factors that may determine gene transcription and the differentiation of cancer cells, must be expanded and intensified.
It is recognized that by delineating molecular pathways that control prostate development, differentiation, and senescence, exciting insights into the determinants of prostate cancer growth, proliferation, and apoptosis in response to physiological, pathological, and pharmacological perturbations (the hormonal status of the host, genetic background, age, and prior treatment history) will be developed.
Over the past few years, advances in basic prostate tumor science have improved our understanding of prostate carcinogenesis, metastasis, and progression.
Now is the ideal time to act if we are to capitalize on the current momentum.
However, such an endeavor will require an improved understanding of basic molecular and biochemical science, the creation and standardization of appropriate animal models, and reforms in the regulatory, financial, and proprietary infrastructure.
Challenges and Opportunities
A substantial gap remains in our understanding of the basic cellular and molecular biology of the normal prostate, especially with regard to the events that govern the early stages of neoplastic cell transformation and the subsequent progression and acquisition of a malignant phenotype and metastatic potential.
This lack of fundamental knowledge has impeded our progress in attacking prostate cancer in a rational fashion.
Several factors have contributed to the absence of information regarding the continuum of normal prostate development, the multiple steps of carcinogenesis, and the ultimate acquisition of a malignant and metastatic phenotype.
These include, but are not limited to, a lack of relevant animal models that closely mimic the development, transformation, and acquisition of androgen-independent and metastatic human prostate disease, and an absence in understanding of basic developmental processes, including the regulatory mechanisms of gene transcription and cell proliferation, differentiation, and senescence.
Likewise, there is an incomplete identification and characterization of the molecular and biochemical factors involved of hormone-regulation and cell signaling.
Insight into these processes is necessary if we are to fully understand how selective clones of transformed prostate cancer cells evolve from an androgen-dependent to an androgen-independent state and acquire proliferative and metastatic characteristics.
Because of the lack of understanding of the basic processes that underlie prostate cancer development, progression, and metastasis, our ability to prevent, diagnose, and assign prostate cancer patients to appropriate treatment modalities is significantly hampered.
To improve therapeutic and management options for men with prostate disease, we must develop relevant models to study prostate cancer biology, progression, and metastasis, and to also expeditiously identify, isolate, clone, and characterize relevant genes or gene products that may serve as reliable biomarkers of prostate cancer progression.
Subsequently, this information needs to be applied through translational projects and disseminated to medical practitioners.
Overcoming these significant challenges, however, can also be viewed as a golden opportunity to help eradicate clinical prostate disease.
For example, the development of new human prostate cancer cell lines and xenografts that closely mimic initial androgen dependency but are capable of progressing to an androgen-independent and metastatic phenotype will provide templates for translational research.
New strategies to screen large quantities of cells in different physiological and pathological states for differences in gene expression affords us an opportunity to identify marker genes associated with each stage of progression.
As a result, the causative genetic switches for each of the multiple steps from initial neoplastic transformation to disseminated, hormone-resistant disease can be identified and applied in the clinic.
Future biochemical, pharmacological, molecular, and structural studies of nuclear receptors that are closely related to androgen receptors will yield new experimental strategies that will improve our ability to search for and identify those genes that may be positively or negatively regulated by such hormones.
In 1997, the overall funding for prostate biology, progression, metastasis, tumor-host interaction, and genetics and data processing was insufficient.
Although additional funds were made available by the National Institute of Diabetes, Digestive, and Kidney Diseases (NIDDK) and the National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences (NIEHS) to support the investigation of the biology of benign prostate gland growth, these funds were not necessarily applicable to neoplastic prostate diseases.
This level of funding is inadequate in view of the importance of understanding the basic biology of normal and pathological prostate tissues.
We recommend that the level of funding to prostate cancer biology studies be quadrupled with approximately equal funding distributed between investigators with interest in normal and neoplastic prostate development, progression, metastasis, and tumor-host interactions, genetic applications, and data processing, and infrastructure development and support.
Research Priorities
PRIORITY ONE
Members of the PRG identified the following investigative questions as having the highest priority.
The high-priority assignments were made by the members of PRG because: 1) these questions are highly relevant to clinical prostate cancer, and any progress made in these areas will have a significant impact on cancer prevention and treatment; and 2) these questions are solvable, provided that adequate funding can be provided.
(See Section I for further discussion of classifications.).
What are the potential roles of nuclear receptors, their interactive proteins, and ligand-metabolizing enzymes on prostate growth, tissue interactions, and development?
This important topic receives exceedingly low levels of NCI funding.
The lack of funding could be misleading, however, because other NIH institutes, such as NIDDK and NIEHS may fund this general area of research.
Despite numerous research projects being performed by academic institutions and industry on the subject of nuclear receptors and drugs that may block receptor-ligand interaction, affect steroid metabolism, and interfere with prostate development, a lack of communication between academic and industrial centers on this topic has impaired development of this important research concern.
In addition, although many studies have been performed at the cellular and molecular levels to delineate steroid receptor action and any subsequent role in carcinogenesis, relationships between steroid hormone-induced gene transcription, growth, differentiation, and senescence at the organistic levels remain rudimentary.
The following are barriers to progress in this area: 1) lack of consensus on the most appropriate models and targets that should be pursued and validated; and 2) inadequacy of extrapolating data obtained from culture cells or cell-free systems to that of the prostate gland in situ.
Recommended Actions: * To understand the structure and activity of the well-defined molecules such as nuclear receptors and steroid-metabolizing enzymes, it is critical to obtain crystallography data on the molecules of concern.
In addition, increasing efforts need to be devoted to identifying and characterizing partners of nuclear receptors that may function together either alone or crosstalk with other cell signaling pathways to control proliferative and differentiative signals in cells.
* Expedite structural and pharmacological studies of important nuclear receptors and steroid-metabolizing enzymes.
* Expedite human genome-based studies and the identification, cloning, and characterization of proteins relevant to normal and cancerous prostate cells.
Such information may be valuable in assisting further progress in this area of research.
What are the molecular determinants that govern cancer invasion, migration, and metastasis?
While prostate cancer that metastasizes is known to metastasize with few exceptions to the skeleton, this natural history does not occur in the established animal models used in prostate cancer research.
To date, there is no clear understanding or molecular insight to explain this discrepancy.
Moreover, the treatment of men with advanced forms of metastatic prostate cancer has received limited research effort.
Although it is likely that treating patients with metastatic disease could result in significant improvements in quality of life and survival, there are few data in the literature that yield any meaningful information in dealing with this extremely important question.
A key barrier is that no animal or cell culture models allow for the study of the complete stages of carcinogenesis from initiation to promotion and from promotion through the cascade of progression that ultimately results in the establishment of skeletal metastasis with osteoblastic reaction.
Recommended Actions: * Develop additional models to study cancer metastasis, particularly with respect to skeletal pathophysiology and its associated biochemical characteristics.
* Because of the lack of animal models to study the complete cascade of prostate cancer development, progression, and metastasis, NCI should invite scientists to develop new models with a clear focus on prostate cancer metastasis.Because prostate cancer can spontaneously develop in the canine prostate, it is recommended that prostate cancer be more extensively studied in the dog.
Both the natural history and pathology of canine prostate disease need to be determined, and a recommendation should be made to the scientific community regarding the appropriateness of this model for human prostate cancer.
* Continue to define metastasis-associated genes and their expressions in rodent and human cell or tissue models and validate such findings by correlation with both primary and metastatic clinical prostate specimen
What are the biochemical and molecular events that govern the continuation of prostate development from early embryogenesis to the onset of adulthood, maturation, aging, and death?
Considering the importance of this question, current NCI funding is inadequate.
Members of the PRG noted that funding for this topic, along with other similar subject matters in the general areas of prostate development and early stages of cell transformation, is too low.
One reason that funding for this general area of research interest is insufficient is because the traditional authority over research involving normal prostate development and carcinogenesis lies with NIDDK or NIEHS.
Conversely, multistep carcinogenesis, tumor biology, and regulation of cancer growth and treatment programs are traditionally administered and funded by NCI.
It is important to point out, however, that this area of research represents a foundation for future clinical research.
Thus, expanded funding in this area with an emphasis on furthering our understanding of normal prostate development and the subsequent steps of carcinogenesis, cell aging, and apoptosis is warranted.
The genetic and molecular mechanisms involved in prostate gland development in mammalian species are complex.
Knowledge of prostate development, maturation, aging, and senescence is limited.
Difficulties remain in studying a continuum of development in man, beginning in utero and followed through to neonatal, prepubertal, pubertal, and adult periods.
Appropriate animal models must be established that recapitulate not only normal development but also its subsequent transformation by epigenetic and genetic modulations to express pre-neoplastic changes.
Currently, consensus in the scientific community is lacking regarding the standardization of current cell and animal model systems and the identification of new and future directions on model development.
Furthermore, investigations into international differences in prostate cancer development and how this may be applicable to prostate development and its early stages of neoplastic transformation in humans are needed.
Recommended Actions: * A consensus conference should be co-sponsored by NCI, NIDDK, and NIEHS to coordinate their resources and reach unanimity regarding appropriate models for the study of normal prostate development and early neoplastic transformation.
Emphasis should be placed on deciding the appropriateness of these models to predict multistep carcinogenesis in man.
* A clearinghouse to streamline information already available and information of high priority should be made readily available to the scientific community through websites, brochures, and consensus reports.
What are the specific cell-cell interactions between and among developing epithelial cells, stromal cells, endothelial cells, neuroepithelial cells, and inflammatory cells?
Cell-cell interactions maintain a fundamental role in normal prostate development and subsequent multistep carcinogenesis.
By identifying the principal cells that participate in these processes, we can then appropriately address the roles of nuclear receptors, steroid-metabolizing enzymes, and inter- and intracellular communication factors.
This area is clearly underfunded by NCI.
Cell-cell interaction occurs throughout development in multicellular organisms.
Investigators who devote their efforts to pursuing topics related to prostate development should keep abreast of progress made by basic scientists who focus on the study of basic developmental processes and cellular interaction in lower species (e.g., Nematode, Drosophila).
In addition, cell-cell interaction studies in the prostate have thus far been limited to stromal-epithelial interaction with particular emphasis on defining the roles of epithelial cells and their relationships with smooth muscle and fibroblast cells.
To date, little attention has been paid to defining the possible roles of other cell types, such as endothelial cells, neuroepithelial cells, or inflammatory cells in overall neoplastic processes.
Prostate cancer research, by and large, is conducted under the auspices of the clinical discipline of urology.
In order to expand this field and to attract a more sophisticated approach to studying prostate development, cellular interaction, and molecular mechanisms of the basic processes mentioned thus far, it is essential to expedite cross-fertilization between basic sciences departments and clinically based urology departments.
An insufficient number of investigators are well-trained, conversant, and have combined knowledge and research expertise in multiple areas of research, such as developmental biology, cancer biology, prostate biology, and clinical urology.
The lack of a multidisciplinary approach to prostate cancer research and the absence of such opportunities in the current climate of academic departmental organization.
Consequently, little communication exists between the basic science and clinical disciplines in many academic institutions.
Recommended Actions: * Support research that emphasizes specific cell-cell interactions between and among developing epithelial cells, stromal cells, endothelial cells, neuroepithelial cells, and inflammatory cells.
What are the regulatory effector molecules that control reciprocal interaction between epithelial and stromal cells, clonal interactions between cancer epithelial cells, and the interactions between cancer cells and most immune-reactive cells?
While a large number of grants in this general area of cell biology have been funded, there are still gaps in our understanding of cellular interactions involving more than two cell types.
Most of the funded studies devote their efforts to the investigation of interaction between two cell types; seldom are the interactions between three or more cell populations in the prostate gland evaluated.
Although a transgenic approach is extremely valuable, most of the funded studies also address the functions of one or two putative factors in the prostate gland.
Moreover, significant limitations exist in all of the models utilized (e.g., cellular interaction may be significantly affected by host factors), thus limiting the validity of control studies.
Deletions of genes by "knock-out" and additions of gene functions by "knock-in" techniques could adversely effect the survival of animals, hence hampering the analysis of transgenic animals from embryonic to adult and geriatric periods.
In the absence of critical evaluations of the rules of cellular interaction and androgen receptor in normal prostate development and its neoplastic processes, it is impossible to draw general conclusions from the results in this critical area of research.
Improved models that can be used to evaluate the concept of cell-cell interaction and the roles of cellular interaction in cancer development and progression are needed.
Assessing the molecular basis of such interactions is applicable to human cancer.
Improved validation of data obtained from experimental models derived from human prostate cancer specimens could be crucial.
Recommended Actions: * Support research in the areas of multicellular interactions in the prostate gland and improve transgenic and other animal systems by introducing factors to the prostate gland in the hope of recapitulating the natural history of prostate development and its neoplastic transformation.
* Support research in normal prostate development and general developmental processes in biology to accelerate discoveries in the understanding of multicellular interactions in the prostate gland and their underlying molecular basis.
Are there features of DNA damage, DNA repair, or cell cycle progression that are novel in prostate cancer cells?
This is a "hot" question in every area of cancer research.
It is surprising to note that although this question was given high priority by the PRG, only two projects specific to prostate and this question are currently being supported by NCI.
Because cancer is believed to be associated with DNA damage and with increasing genomic instability, the understanding of DNA replication, repair, and regulation of cell cycle progression in cancer cells is crucial to the prediction of tumor responses to therapy.
The challenges are to define whether there are prostate-specific features of DNA damage, repair, or regulatory checkpoints that are different from other solid tumors and whether one can take advantage of these features so that tumors resistant to hormonal, radiation, or chemotherapy can be rendered sensitive to such treatment.
In addition, prostate cancer cell lines and xenografts are difficult to establish.
Many of the currently available models have fast tumor doubling times that differ from those of clinical samples.
It is uncertain how information gained from these model studies may be applied and extrapolated to clinical disease.
No clear differences between the phenotypic and genotypic characteristics of prostate cancer cells and those of other human malignancies have been defined.
Some members of study sections may be reluctant to view projects favorably that are only geared toward prostate cancer, since this area of research is also funded for other forms of tumors.
Recommended Actions: * Encourage a multidisciplinary approach to address the roles of DNA damage, DNA repair, and cell cycle progression that are distinctly different in prostate cancer cells than in other forms of malignancies.
By expanding the investigation of this question to the prostate and by closely interacting with scientists and clinicians who may be interested in other forms of malignancies, we may be able to better understand why prostate cancer is less sensitive to radiation therapy and chemotherapy, which are often highly efficacious against the growth of other solid tumors.
What are the genetic and epigenetic determinants that affect progression of prostate cancer from the localized to disseminated state? What molecular markers are associated with such progression?
This important question appears to receive inadequate NCI support.
This broad topic addresses fundamental issues of prostate cancer growth and progression: to identify the precise genetic loci that are responsible for the susceptibility of individuals to cancer and the epigenetic constraints that may become activated in certain populations with defined genetic backgrounds (e.g. certain environmental factors may pre-dispose to prostate cancer development and progression).
For these reasons, the interaction between epigenetic and genetic factors deserves a substantial increase in support.
Mechanisms to translate information derived from animal models to human disease are not clearly defined.
In addition, there is a lack of clearly identifiable human data to pin down the genetic and epigenetic factors that could influence prostate cancer development and progression.
There also is a lack of consensus on how to interpret data produced from the studies of animal prostate cancers with human prostate cancers.
Recommended Actions: * Improved funding is needed to vigorously test the discoveries made in the understanding of the genetic, molecular, and tumor biological aspects of rodents to those of humans.
In this same context, it is also important to evaluate and validate findings made in cell culture studies with animal models and pathological specimens obtained from men.
* Support research to validate genetic and epigenetic molecular markers discovered by scientists in their investigation of tissue culture models and animal models, and to validate these markers by correlating them with clinical specimens with well-defined clinical data.
* Support research to establish powerful methods that will allow "fast-track" discoveries (including identification, sequencing, cloning, and characterization of molecular markers), whether genetic or epigenetic, that will then be applied and validated in human prostate diseases.
Are there hereditary markers, angiogenesis switches, and/or biochemical and molecular determinants that predict progression?
This high-priority question receives moderate financial support.
Unlike the previous topics, this question specifically focuses on the key genetic (e.g. hereditary markers) and epigenetic (e.g. angiogenesis) factors currently under investigation as biochemical and molecular markers that serve to predict prostate cancer progression.
Improvements in predicting and understanding tumor progression are important to improving patient management and reducing costs of health, since only one-third to one-half of the patients diagnosed with prostate cancer have progressive disease.
Despite intensive investigations into new genetic loci and biomarkers, their significance and value over existing molecular markers remains undetermined.
There appears to be little incentive and few mechanisms available to test novel biomarkers or compare them head-on with existing molecular markers.
An absence of comprehensive tissue and serum specimen banks with corresponding clinical correlation impedes the opportunity for conducting thorough comparative studies.
In addition, there is an understandable reluctance among practicing urologists to accept novel biomarkers without substantiated testing by the scientific community and the significant cost of validating and marketing any new biomarkers for clinical use.
There is currently no existing mechanism or financial support to conduct such comparative studies.
This type of research is in general considered "service-oriented" and has traditionally been discouraged by the scientific community.
Such investigations are not viewed by the scientific community as a high priority since these investigations do not generally result in publication or career advancement.
Recommended Actions: * Financial resources should be identified to perform the task of discovering new and better markers than PSA for the early diagnosis of patients who harbor fast-progressing and virulent forms of prostate cancer.
Additionally, relevant biomarkers associated with disease progression can be utilized to monitor clinical responses of patients to various forms of treatment modalities.
* Support "service-oriented" research and combine forces with industry (who will benefit most directly by the outcome of this type of research) to fund projects that may have merit in discovering new biomarkers predicting prostate cancer progression.
What are the critical housekeeping and regulatory genes that may be associated with human prostate cancer development and progression?
There is a lack of critical information regarding the applicability of discoveries of novel genes from cell culture and animal models and their applicability to human disease.
An absence of genetic databases readily available to research institutions has impeded basic investigations in this area.
In addition, the relevance of the information obtained from these studies to clinical specimens of human prostate cancer has not been validated.
These resource issues are compounded by uncertainty about pending or future patent rights of investigators and their working institutions.
Recommended Action: * Support the collaborative pursuit of discovering novel genes expressed during prostate cancer development and its progression to androgen independence.
How do we define genetic susceptibility of individuals to prostate cancer, and how is such susceptibility associated with other forms of malignancies or diseases?
This question emphasizes the importance of genetic susceptibility of hosts to cancer development and progression.
It is modestly funded by NCI.
Because prostate cancer disproportionately affects African Americans, there is a general consensus that devoting efforts to identifying the potential differences in genetic susceptibility between African Americans and other population groups will help answer questions about prostate cancer.
New understanding may be acquired from the study of populations at extremely low prostate cancer risk (e.g. Asians, Africans, and Asian or African immigrants living in North America) and their changes in risk upon immigration to "Westernized" countries.
While genetics may be an important contributing factor to cancer initiation and development, the importance of environmental influences (epigenetics) cannot be emphasized enough.
Both the scientific community and the public as a whole do not have a clear understanding of the interplay between the genetics of cancer and the environment, which may enhance or delay the rate of prostate cancer progression.
Research in this area is made difficult by the unavailability of genetically homogenous and relatively non-mobile populations for the proposed study and difficulties in obtaining funding for studies in low-risk populations (e.g., prostate cancer studies on Asian populations).
Recommended Actions: * Encourage international and immigration studies through RFA mechanisms to alleviate the lack of information in this general area of research.
* Build a consensus and create collaborative consortia among geneticists, epidemiologists, molecular biologists, and urologists to design the most efficient way to approach this topic.
PRIORITY TWO * What are the molecular and cellular mechanisms that control cell signaling and its subsequent influence on cell motility, migration, angiogenesis, and metastatic profiles? * What genes are directly regulated by androgen receptors during prostate development? * How do cells survive in the prostate gland upon androgen withdrawal? * What other signaling pathways regulate prostate growth, development, differentiation, and apoptosis? * What are the genetic polymorphisms that occur in the key regulatory molecules, such as androgen receptor, p53, cell cycle, regulatory molecules that control apoptosis, and senescence? * What is the nature of prostatic stem cells? * What are the molecular and cellular mechanisms that control the response of prostate cancer cells to alterations in androgens? What is the mechanism by which androgen antagonists, such as flutamide, switch from inhibitors to enhancers of prostate cancer cell growth during systemic therapy tumor progression?Are there molecular determinants that cause progression from high-grade prostatic intraepithelial neoplasia (PIN) to the malignant and metastatic phenotype? * Can interactions between bone and prostate cancer cells be interrupted, and can androgen-independent and metastatic phenotypes be reversed? * What are the genes, if any, that may explain international and racial differences in prostate cancer development, progression, and metastatic potential?
PRIORITY THREE * How are indolent and virulent prostate cancer defined? * What are the key determinants (either from metastatic cells or host cells) that influence tumor behavior and metastatic patterns? * What is the role of the immune system in prostate cancer progression? * What is the role of angiogenesis in metastasis? * Are there genes that can be considered hereditary prostate cancer genes? * Are there steps in prostate oncogenesis that recapitulate developmental events governing stem cell proliferation, migration, invasion, differentiation, or apoptosis? * Are there molecular determinants that can distinguish high-risk groups (e.g., African Americans) from low-risk groups (e.g., Caucasians)? * Do prostate cancer patients with soft tissue only disease (i.e., large lymph nodes or lung metastases, but not bone disease) have a phenotypically different disease? * Can the identification of such genes be applied to the general population for the diagnosis, prognosis, and treatment of prostate cancer? * What are the functions of other nuclear receptors, such as ER-beta, in the prostate? * What are the molecular determinants of prostate cancer metastasis to the skeleton? * How can genes be categorized? Should genes be categorized into high penetrance versus low penetrance genes, etc.?
Table of Contents
Next Section
Previous Section
NCI Home Page
Comments
Top of Page
Other U.S. Government Resources National Institutes of Health (NIH) Department of Health and Human Services FirstGov
Last updated 11.25.01 (dlb)
