<
Your name is used within this activity only.
The other information entered will be used only by NASA Office of Education to evaluate this product.
The National Aeronautics and Space Administration presents: (The Astro-Venture logo sweeps onto the screen letter-by-letter) (Astro Ferret zooms onto screen riding his scooter and introduces himself and the Astro-Venture Biology Training module.)
Astro Ferret: Congratulations! You have been accepted as a Junior Biologist at the Astro-Venture academy.
I'm Astro Ferret and I'll be your guide.
So, what is a biologist? Biologists are scientists who study living things.
(Astro zooms down to the surface of Earth.
The screen fills with different types of life including a tree, elephant, moose, snake, giraffe, monkey, etc.
The word "biologist" appears.)
There are many different types of biologists.
Some biologists study microscopic creatures like bacteria.
(A microscope appears on the screen.
A magnified view of its slide shows bacteria.
The word "microbiologist" appears).
Others study how living things interact with each other and their environment.
(Astro dives into the water.
A small fish gets eaten by a larger fish and the larger fish is eaten by an even bigger fish.
Astro looks distressed.
The word "ecologist" appears.)
And still others study the origins of life and the possibility of life on other worlds (Astro scoots around on a rover on the surface of Mars.
The word "astrobiologist" appears).
Here, during Astro-Venture Biology training, you will learn about the important characteristics of the biology on Earth how those features help make our planet habitable! (Astro stands next to a screen shot of the introductory graphic for the module.)
So let's get started with Astro-Venture Biology training! (Astro zooms across the screen towards the left.)
(New screen, the following text appears:) Welcome to Astro-Venture's Biology Training Module! As a Junior Biologist, your job is to change the biologic features of Earth and observe the effects.
You will also explore how these features work together to help make a planet habitable to humans.
Please enter the names of all members of your team, or a team name in the text box.
When you're finished, click the Enter button to get started! (Text box appears.
Enter names into the text box.
When you're done, press the Enter button.)
(New screen.
The interface appears and an introductory animation is playing.
The Sun is shining.
The Sun is labeled "Energy."
It rains.
Grass and plants grow.
They are labeled "Producer."
A fawn appears and eats the plants.
The fawn is labeled "Consumer."
The fawn ages and turns into an adult buck.
The buck dies.
It begins to rot.
A microscope zooms into the dead buck, showing microbes and fungi.
The things in the microscope are labeled "Decomposers."
The buck disappears and the soil becomes richer.
The scene goes back to the Sun shining and to indicate the process will begin again.
The screen fades into the intro graphic with the following icons in clockwise order: At the top the Sun icon is labeled "Energy."
An energy flow arrow points towards the plants and grass.
To the right, the plants and grass icon is labeled "Producer."
An energy flow arrow points toward the buck.
The buck icon is labeled "Consumer."
An energy flow arrow points toward the microscope.
The microbe/microscope icon is labeled "Decomposers.")
(A step-by-step tutorial shows students how to use the interface for the Atmosphere Training module.)
Astro Ferret: First choose a feature from the menu.
(Click on a main menu button--Energy, Producers, Consumers, Decomposers) Then choose a type of feature to cause a change on Earth.
(Sub menu choices are: Energy--low, medium, high Producers--none, many Consumers--none, some, many Decomposers--none, some, many) Next, click Play to see the effect on Earth.
(Click the Play button and animation will play.)
If you want to see the effect again, click the Replay button.
If not, enter your observation into your Astro Journal and then click Enter.
Be sure to take good notes.
You'll need them later! (Enter observation into text box.
After you have pressed the Enter key, a box pops up that gives feedback on what other scientists have observed for this same cause and effect.)
Want to know more? Check out the Astro-Facts! (Explore background information in Astro-Facts.)
Great! Now click a new feature and continue your training! (When each animation ends, enter your observation into the Astro Journal and press Enter.
After entering your observation, you will receive Scientist Feedback on what happened.)
(Each animation starts with a standard scene containing a deer, a mountain lion, a bee buzzing to a poppy and then off screen, a stream, animal-dependent trees and shrubs, conifers, and mountains.
To the left of the scene is a thermometer.)
Summary of animations and Astro-Facts for each category follows: ENERGY Introductory Animations Upon clicking the Energy button, All icons face away except the Sun.
The screen then shows our Sun and Earth, with the Earth in the foreground.
The graphic is labeled "Energy Source."
Upon clicking the Low button, the normal Sun turns into a small red star.
The graphic is labeled "Low Energy Source" Upon clicking the Medium button, the Sun stays the same and the graphic is labeled "Medium Energy Source."
Upon clicking the High button, the Sun turns into a large blue star.
Graphic is labeled "High Energy Source."
Low Energy Source Begin with the standard scene.
The sky becomes very dim because the star is not providing enough light.
The thermometer begins to decrease.
The scene becomes snowy and iced over.
Plants and animals die.
The thermometer shows a very cold temperature.
Scientist Feedback: Without enough energy, the planet would freeze.
Producers would have no source of energy to make food.
Medium Energy Source Begin with standard scene.
Things are normal because the Sun provides just enough energy to support life on Earth as we know it.
Scientist Feedback: With an energy source like our Sun, producers can make food from sunlight, carbon dioxide, and water.
The Sun also helps to keep our planet warm.
High Energy Source Start with standard scene.
The sky becomes very bright.
The thermometer begins to increase.
Water evaporates.
Trees, plants, and grass die and fade out.
Animals die and fade out of scene.
Scene looks desert-like.
The thermometer shows a very high temperature.
Scientist Feedback: Too much energy would cause an increase in temperature.
Water would evaporate and most life would die.
Astro-Facts for Energy Source: What is the biological energy flow? The energy that most living things need to survive comes from the Sun in the form of light and heat.
So, the Sun is where the energy flow begins.
Plants and other producers absorb the Sun's light to make food.
Consumers eat other living things to gain energy.
Decomposers gain energy from breaking down dead organisms such as animals and plants.
Energy is constantly being lost as heat or used by living things to move, grow and reproduce.
It all starts with the Sun! Why do astrobiologists study alternative forms of energy? Many microbes obtain their energy from rocks.
Others get energy from the material released from deep-sea vents.
Astrobiologists study organisms in these extreme environments to understand how they survive and why they live in these places.
By studying extreme environments and the organisms that live in them, we can learn where to search for life on other planets and moons.
What is the role of water in the energy flow? Water is important in every part of Earth's biological energy flow.
Energy could not move through living things without it.
The cells that make up all living things are primarily made of water.
Water is also required to complete the chemical reactions that happen inside and around cells.
Producers such as plants, need water in order to produce their own food and to transport nutrients.
Animals, such as humans, need water in order to regulate their body temperature and to carry nutrients throughout their bodies.
How do the oceans fit into the energy flow? Three-quarters of our planet is covered with oceans.
The large amount of life in the oceans has its own biological energy flow.
Creatures called phytoplankton (bacteria and small algae) are the major producers that create food and energy for consumers like fish.
(Phytoplankton are also responsible for most of the oxygen in our atmosphere.)
Decomposers in the oceans retrieve the last bit of energy from the waste and dead bodies of other organisms.
The energy flow in the ocean and the energy flow on land are closely related to each other.
PRODUCERS Introductory Animations Upon clicking the Producers button, all icons face away except the plants and grass.
The screen then shows a mosaic of different types of producers such as a fern, flowers, algae, a tree and some bushes.
The graphic is labeled "Producers."
Upon clicking the None button, the producer icons fade out and disappear.
The graphic is labeled "No Producers" Upon clicking the Medium button, the number of producers stays the same and the graphic is labeled "Many Producers."
No Producers: Begin with the standard scene.
All plants, trees and grass disappear.
The deer dies and turns into a skeleton.
The mountain lion dies and turns into a skeleton.
The skeletons fade as the thermometer begins to rise.
The water evaporates.
It gets hot.
Scientist Feedback: Without producers, there would be nothing for consumers to eat.
Eventually, carbon dioxide levels would rise and cause a temperature increase.
Many Producers: Begin with standard scene.
Things are normal because the producers provide the food to support life on Earth as we know it Scientist Feedback: Producers provide food for consumers.
They also keep oxygen and carbon dioxide at normal levels in our atmosphere.
Astro-Facts for Producers: What are producers? Producers are living things, such as plants, algae, and some bacteria, that can make their own food.
Producers also regulate the amount of carbon dioxide and oxygen in our atmosphere.
How do producers make their own food? Producers use the Sun's energy, carbon dioxide, and water to make sugars and release oxygen.
This process is called photosynthesis.
It is an example of energy being converted from one form to another.
Some producers can get energy from rocks to make their cell parts.
Why are producers so important in the flow of energy? Plants, algae, and some bacteria (called producers) are the only living things that can use energy, carbon dioxide, and water to produce food.
They provide the food energy that is passed on to all other life forms.
Without producers, the rest of us would have nothing to eat.
CONSUMERS Introductory Animations Upon clicking the Consumers button, all icons face away except the buck.
The screen then shows a mosaic of different types of consumers such as a bird, a buck, a human silhouette, a shark, a butterfly and a frog.
The graphic is labeled "Consumers."
Upon clicking the None button, the consumer icons fade out and disappear.
The graphic is labeled "No Consumers" Upon clicking the Some button, the number of consumers stays the same and the graphic is labeled "Some Consumers."
Upon clicking the Many button, the number of consumers increases and the graphic is labeled "Many Consumers."
No Consumers: Begin with the standard scene.
Bee, deer and mountain lion immediately disappear.
Animal-dependent plants, such as fruit trees, die and fade out.
The scene has a less diverse plant life.
The thermometer stays at normal levels.
Scientist Feedback: An Earth without consumers would lead to a loss in the diversity of plants.
Some Consumers: Begin with standard scene.
Things are normal because the right amount of consumers balance the biological energy flow on Earth.
Scientist Feedback: The presence of consumers keeps the energy flow and food webs on Earth in balance.
Many Consumers: Begin with the standard scene.
A large number of animals fill the screen and are densely packed.
Plants are chewed down to nubs.
Then the plants die and fade out.
The deer have no food, get skinny and turn into skeletons.
The cougars eventually have no food to eat and they also get skinny and die.
The skeletons fade out of the screen.
Eventually the thermometer rises as the Earth's surface gets hot.
Scientist Feedback: Too many consumers would eat all the producers.
Then the consumers would starve and die.
Without plants, Earth's temperature would increase.
Astro-Facts for Consumers: What is a consumer? A consumer is any living thing that eats other living things for food.
Consumers rely on producers (or other consumers that eat producers) to get their energy since consumers cannot make their own food.
Are there different types of consumers? There are four types of consumers: herbivores, carnivores, omnivores and scavengers.
Herbivores are animals like deer, some insects, and rabbits that only eat plants.
Carnivores are animals like wolves, cats, and coyotes that only eat other animals.
Omnivores are animals like bears and humans that eat both animals and plants.
Scavengers are animals such as vultures and crows that only feed on dead animals.
Do we really need animals to survive on Earth? Humans might not need animals to survive, but animals are extremely important to us.
They make life easier for us by providing food and clothing sources and by helping us with tasks like farming, travel, and transport over difficult terrain.
Animals also provide companionship as pets and inspire us with their complexity, beauty, and diversity.
Plants and animals have learned over time to rely on each other.
For example, some plants need animals to pollinate them or to scatter their seeds so that new plants will grow.
Animals also play a critical role in keeping Earth's delicate ecosystems in balance.
DECOMPOSERS Introductory Animations Upon clicking the Decomposers button, all icons face away except the microscope and slide The screen then shows a mosaic of different types of decomposers such as mushrooms/fungi, and bacteria.
The graphic is labeled "Decomposers."
Upon clicking the None button, the decomposer icons fade out and disappear.
The graphic is labeled "No Decomposers" Upon clicking the Some button, the number of decomposers stays the same and the graphic is labeled "Some Decomposers."
Upon clicking the Many button, the number of decomposers increases and the graphic is labeled "Many Decomposers."
No Decomposers: Begin with the standard scene.
The plants become yellow, smaller and fewer.
A few green grass blades are poking up.
Piles of leaves are under the trees.
A cut-away of the soil shows it becoming lighter in color and dusty.
The pile of plant debris becomes thicker as more plants die.
The deer gets skinny and dies because there are no plants left to eat.
The deer turns into a mummy.
The mountain lion has no food, gets skinny and dies.
It also turns into a mummy.
Eventually the thermometer increases as the Earth's surface temperature rises.
Scientist Feedback: Without decomposers, the bodies of dead things would not be broken down and recycled into nutrients.
Plants couldn't grow, so Earth's temperature would increase.
Some Decomposers: Begin with standard scene.
Things are normal because the right amount of decomposers balance the biological energy flow on Earth.
Decomposers also recycle vital nutrients and deposit them in the soil in order for plants to grow.
Scientist Feedback: Decomposers break down the waste materials and dead bodies of plants and animals.
They help keep the soil healthy and balance life's energy flow.
Many Decomposers: Begin with the standard scene.
Things begin to look unhealthy.
There are patches of fungi in the grass.
The deer and mountain lion are sick form infections.
The plants are yellow.
The screen zooms into a grass patch and shows a microscope with a bunch of decomposers wiggling around.
The screen zooms out.
The animals are skeletonized.
The plants, trees and grass are dead and gone.
Eventually, the thermometer increases as Earth's surface temperature rises.
Scientist Feedback: Too many decomposers would cause infection and disease in plants and animals, eventually killing them.
Without plants, Earth's temperature would increase.
Astro-Facts for Decomposers: What is a decomposer? If you have ever seen a mushroom or mold, you've seen a decomposer! Decomposers are a special type of consumer that absorb food from decaying dead plants and animals and break them down into minerals, nutrients, and rich soil.
Mushrooms and molds are examples of fungi.
Bacteria are single-celled organisms that are usually so small they can only be seen with a microscope.
Both fungi and some bacteria act as decomposers, breaking down dead animals and plants.
Why are decomposers an important part of the energy flow? The main job of a decomposer in the energy flow is to break down the bodies of dead plants and animals.
They gain energy and recycle nutrients that producers need back into the soil.
Are bacteria decomposers? What is their role in the energy cycle? In some cases bacteria act like decomposers.
For example, the bacteria E. coli breaks down food in your stomach, and L. acidophilus turns milk into yogurt.
Bacteria play the important role of recycling nutrients that are important to producers.
They are also used to break down and treat sewage waste.
Bacteria are also very hardy.
Some can live in extreme environments, places that are very hot, very cold, very salty, or have a high acid concentration--places where humans could not survive.
Scientists believe that if life exists on other planets it may exist in the form of microscopic life like bacteria because of their ability to survive almost anywhere.
How do earthworms and maggots fit into all this? We've all seen earthworms in the soil helping to break down dead plants and maggots wiggling around in rotting meat and dead animals.
However, earthworms and insects like maggots are not considered decomposers.
That's because it's actually the bacteria in their stomachs that act as decomposers to break down and recycle dead material into nutrients.
So, even though earthworms and maggots are very important in contributing to decomposition, they are really considered consumers.
(After viewing and submitting observations for all animations, Astro prompts you to take the Astro-Challenge.)
Astro-Ferret: Excellent! You have completed your training.
Click on me to take the Astro-Challenge.
(After clicking on Astro Ferret, a new screen appears.)
Hello there! Welcome to the Astro-Challenge! Now it is time to see what you have learned.
Above my head, a question will appear.
On the right side you'll have several options to choose from.
Click on the correct answer.
Feel free to check your Astro Journal notes in the scroll bar below.
Good luck! Question 1: What is the primary energy source for life on Earth? a) Sun b) Earth's core c) Oxygen d) Consumers (Correct answer: Sun) Question 2: Why is the Sun important for producers to make food? a) It provides vital solar wind.
b) It produces a protective magnetic field.
c) It provides energy.
d) It creates tides.
(Correct answer: It provides energy.)
Question 3: Why are producers vital to the flow of energy on Earth? a) They break down dead material.
b) They are the only life form that can convert sunlight to food.
c) They provide shade on hot days.
d) They produce atmospheric nitrogen.
(Correct answer: They are the only life form that can convert sunlight to food.)
Question 4: Which of the following are examples of producers? a) Trees, mushrooms, rocks b) Mushrooms, fungi, microbes c) Fish, cows, ferrets d) Algae, ferns, trees (Correct answer: Algae, ferns, trees) Question 5: Where do consumers get their food energy? a) Breaking down dead material b) Eating other life forms c) Converting sunlight to food d) Ultraviolet rays (Correct answer: Eating other life forms) Question 6: Which scene results if there are too many consumers? a) Snowy scene b) Normal scene c) Barren/desert scene d) Flooded scene (Correct answer: Barren/desert scene.)
Question 7: Without this type of living thing, other life forms could not re-use important nutrients: a) Consumers b) Producers c) Conductors d) Decomposers (Correct answer: Decomposers) Question 8: How does the flow of energy move? a) From the Sun to producers to consumers to decomposers b) From the Sun to decomposers to producers to consumers c) From the Sun to consumers to decomposers to producers d) From decomposers to consumers to producers to the Sun (Correct answer: From the Sun to producers to consumers to decomposers) Upon completion of Astro-Challenge, screen reads: Congratulations! You have successfully completed the Astro Challenge.
Now you can print your Astro-Journal notes and your Certificate! Astro Ferret: Congratulations! You have successfully completed the Astro-Challenge! Now you can print your Astro Journal notes and Certificate! (New screen displays certificate with all names that were entered in the beginning of the module.
There are three buttons: The button on the left says, "Print Certificate." .If you click on the left one, it will print the Certificate.
The button in the middle says, "Print Astro-Journal."
If you click on the middle one, it will print the Astro Journal.
The button on the right says: "Don't Print Anything."
If you click on the right one, a warning screen appears that reads: "WARNING! If you don't print your Astro-Journal or your Certificate now, you not be able to print them later!" Two buttons appear.
The button on the left says, "Go back to the print page."
The button on the right says, "I really don't want to print."
Follow the instructions and choose the buttons that suit your needs.
When you're finished, you will go to the Exit screen.)
Exit screen reads: Congratulations! Astro Ferret: Congratulations! You've been promoted to Senior Biologist! Click here to go back to the main page and explore more Astro-Venture.
(The Astro-Venture logo is on the screen.
Two buttons appear.
Astro Ferret stands in the left bottom corner and is pointing the top big button.
The big button on the top says: "Continue your Astro-Venture Training."
Clicking on this page will take you back to the Astro-Venture main page http://astroventure.arc.nasa.gov The bottom button says: "Back to the print page."
Clicking on this button will take you to back to the Print page.)
<
Link back to Astro-Venture Home Page
