Skip Navigation National Cancer Institute Progress Review Groups [USEMAP:prg_uninav.gif] Prostate Cancer Home Final Report PRG Charge Roster Research Portfolio Initiatives Member Info ____________________ Search Staging and Treatment of Localized Prostate Cancer Current Status of the Field When cancer is detected before it spreads beyond the region of the prostate, it can be cured (completely eradicated for the remaining life of the patient) in many patients using treatment techniques that are widely available in the United States today.
The increased awareness about prostate cancer among the American public and the widespread use of serum PSA assays to screen for prostate cancer have resulted in the detection of most cancers when they are still localized and can be treated definitively with surgery (radical prostatectomy) or irradiation therapy (external beam, interstitial, or both).
In fact, some cancers are discovered so early that they may not require active treatment, especially in men with a limited life expectancy.
For some prostate cancers "watchful waiting," or expectant management, is an appropriate strategy.
Although genuine options are available, we do not have sufficiently reliable ways to predict the behavior of an individual cancer or to assess the risk-benefit ratio of active treatment compared to conservative management, nor do we know how to predict whether an individual cancer will respond well to one particular treatment compared to another.
While treatment of localized prostate cancer is usually effective, none of the current treatment techniques are uniformly successful.
In some cases treatment fails because malignant cells have already spread to distant areas.
Staging tests available today--bone scans and CT scans--are not sufficiently sensitive to detect such cells in most patients.
And other more sensitive tests such as the RT-PCR (reverse transcriptase polymerase chain reaction) assay for prostate cells in the peripheral circulation or bone marrow cannot determine whether such cells have the capacity to become bona fide metastases.
Other cancers are not cured because the treatment fails to eradicate the local tumor completely.
Surgery, for example, may fail because the cancer extends beyond the margins of resection.
And irradiation therapy may fail because some cancer cells within the treated area are not fatally damaged.
Better techniques are urgently needed to determine the location, size, and extent of cancer within the prostate and surrounding tissues.
Better imaging studies would allow us to monitor changes in the cancer with different treatments.
And better indicators (e.g., genetic profiles determined by microarray technology, or key molecular markers of hormone responsiveness or of the cancer's capacity for apoptosis) are needed to predict the response of individual cancers to different forms and intensities of therapy.
To achieve this level of prediction will require much more information about the molecular mechanisms that govern progression and metastasis and response to therapy (see Section A, Biology, Progression, and Metastases).
Modern medical informatics can play a crucial role here by developing risk profiles for prognosis or the response to treatment.
Such profiles can incorporate and quantify multiple variables and correlate them with clinical outcomes such as pathologic stage and disease recurrence.
Tables and nomograms have already been developed which combine standard prognostic factors--clinical stage, tumor grade and PSA levels--to make such predictions.
Far more sophisticated analyses, requiring powerful computers, will need to be developed to incorporate the vast information from microchip genetic array technology into risk profiles or response assessments.
A limitation of all current treatment strategies--including conservative management--is the risk of troublesome side effects from treatment and of complications from growth of the cancer.
Radical prostatectomy, external beam irradiation, and brachytherapy (interstitial implantation of radioactive seeds) each carry a low but measurable mortality rate, some risk of urinary incontinence or proctitis, and a greater risk of erectile dysfunction.
And watchful waiting runs the risk that the cancer will grow and spread, with the chance to cure the cancer lost.
Many features of prostate cancer make the disease a good target for gene therapy.
There have been major advances in the therapeutic index for external beam irradiation therapy of prostate cancer, especially with the advent of three-dimensional conformal techniques, which have increased the rate of cancer control and decreased the risk of morbidity.
In addition, there have been major advances in surgery for prostate cancer, with better selection of cancers suitable for surgical eradication and with less risk of incontinence and erectile dysfunction for patients after the operation.
While we would welcome continued improvements in current treatments, the PRG believes that emphasis should be placed on the development of new therapeutic approaches which exploit innovations in engineering (e.g., intensity modulated radiotherapy, particle therapy) or that take advantage of revolutionary discoveries in modern molecular biology (e.g., gene therapy).
Prostate cancer, among the solid tumors, seems to be particularly suitable for gene therapy, since the organ is expendable, the primary tumor is accessible for applying treatment and monitoring the response, and a circulating marker of response is readily available.
Another attractive way to increase the effectiveness of local therapy is to combine different modalities--the classic examples are surgery followed by irradiation therapy or interstitial plus external beam irradiation therapy.
With improvements in chemotherapy and the development of novel biologic agents, combinations of systemic therapy with definitive local treatment offer promising new opportunities
.
Challenges and Opportunities
Staging of Prostate Cancer and Indicators (Markers) of Prognosis or Response to Therapy in the Primary Tumor
Determining the stage (size or local extent) of the primary tumor is particularly challenging in prostate cancer.
Palpation is subjective, insensitive and inexact.
In fact, more than half of all cancers detected today are not palpable.
Transrectal ultrasonography, in expert hands, adds some additional information about the location, size and extent of the cancer, but has not proven reliable in general clinical practice.
With the emergence of PSA screening, prostate cancer is being detected earlier in its natural history.
With standard staging studies such as bone scans and CT scans, few patients can be shown to have overt metastases at diagnosis.
Yet a third of patients treated with radical prostatectomy, for example, will subsequently recur, largely due the presence of occult micrometastases.
New techniques are urgently needed to detect metastatic cells and to determine their clinical significance.
In recent years molecular techniques have been used to identify prostate cells in the peripheral circulation and bone marrow.
While many patients show evidence of having such cells, their clinical significance is not known: prostate cells capable of becoming clinical metastases cannot be distinguished from those that are not capable of surviving.
Treatment may also fail to control an apparently localized cancer because some cells within the local tumor are not destroyed: the cancer may extend beyond the margins of surgical resection or cells within an irradiated field may not be sufficiently damaged.
Better methods are needed to determine the size and extent of the local tumor.
Better indicators are needed to predict the response of cancers to different forms and intensities of therapy so that therapeutic options can be applied that are appropriate to the characteristics of the cancers being treated.
Efficacy of Therapy for Localized Prostate Cancer
Radical prostatectomy, external beam irradiation therapy, and interstitial seed implantation (brachytherapy) are often are used in this country to treat clinically localized prostate cancer.
Radical prostatectomy, a major surgical procedure, carries a low but measurable mortality rate, some risk of surgical complications, a small risk of urinary incontinence, and a substantial risk of temporary if not permanent erectile dysfunction.
There are rare fatal complications of external beam irradiation as well, a treatment which extends over a long course (7 weeks or more), and risks of permanent bowel dysfunction (diarrhea, hematochezia) and loss of erections over time.
Brachytherapy (interstitial implantation of radioactive seeds), which seems to cause less erectile dysfunction, does require anesthesia and may have limited efficacy in the more threatening, potentially lethal cancers.
Brachytherapy may lead to urinary incontinence if a transurethral resection of the prostate becomes necessary to relieve urinary obstruction after the procedure.
And watchful waiting--a gamble that the cancer will not metastasize and lead to premature death before the patient dies of other causes--runs the risk that the cancer will grow and spread, leading to urinary tract obstruction, bleeding, and painful bony metastases.
Moreover, the chance to cure the cancer will have been lost.
For decades now specialists have debated the relative merits of these and other forms of therapy for localized prostate cancer.
While each is widely used today, and is reasonably safe and somewhat effective, we have insufficient evidence to argue that one approach is superior to another.
Unfortunately, there are no valid prospective controlled clinical trials we can turn to for information about the relative safety or efficacy of therapy for localized prostate cancer.
Currently, NCI (along with the Department of Veterans Affairs) sponsors the PIVOT trial (Prostate Cancer Intervention Versus Observation Trial), which compares radical prostatectomy to watchful waiting.
A similar trial is underway in Europe.
These long-term, Phase III clinical trials, however, are expensive to conduct, take many years to complete, and still leave unanswered questions about the most appropriate treatment for individual cancers in individual patients.
Nevertheless, there is a need to determine the relative efficacy of the various methods of treating localized prostate cancer.
The control arm of the PIVOT trial will be the first prospective trial of conservative management, and the surgical arm will provide important data about treatment-related morbidity.
This trial should certainly be completed.
Limited additional Phase III trials may be warranted to compare, in selected patients, interventions, such as brachytherapy versus external beam irradiation or versus radical prostatectomy.
At the same time, new treatment strategies are urgently needed, along with better methods to assess the efficacy of new treatments in an expeditious manner (see discussion of clinical trial design in Section F, Systemic Therapy).
Combination Therapy for Localized Cancer
Since no single therapeutic modality now available has proven uniformly successful in eradicating the local tumor, investigators have attempted to combine modalities (e.g., radical prostatectomy followed by adjuvant external beam irradiation therapy) to achieve greater success.
The efficacy of such combinations has not been established.
Systemic therapy (e.g., androgen ablation) has also been combined with local therapy.
Neoadjuvant hormonal therapy markedly reduces serum PSA level and shrinks the local tumor as well as the prostate itself.
In combination with radical prostatectomy, neoadjuvant hormonal therapy favorably alters the pathology of the cancer but does not reduce the recurrence rate.
In contrast, androgen ablation does appear to reduce the rate of biochemical progression when used in combination with external beam radiotherapy--a benefit demonstrated in several prospective trials.
In one study of locally advanced cancers, in fact, long term adjuvant hormonal therapy appeared to significantly improve survival when used for three years after external beam irradiation therapy compared to radiotherapy alone.
Much remains to be learned about such combinations.
The indications for using neoadjuvant hormonal therapy before irradiation need to be explored to determine the optimal duration and sequence of treatments tested.
The mechanisms of apparent synergy between irradiation and hormonal therapy need to be investigated, which could lead to modifications that would enhance the effect, whether by improved timing or duration of hormonal therapy or the identification of new systemic (or local) radiation sensitizers.
The discovery of molecular markers that predict, for example, hormonal responsiveness or the capacity for apoptosis, may help to better match for different forms and intensities of treatment to the disease in individual patients.
Studies are needed to test new agents, whether traditional cytotoxic drugs or novel biologic agents such as angiogenesis inhibitors, in the adjuvant or neoadjuvant setting, in combination with surgery and with radiotherapy.
The effects on the primary tumor of chemotherapeutic agents alone, or in combination with hormonally active drugs, need to be explored in depth.
Gene and Cellular Therapy
Many features of prostate cancer make the disease a good target for gene therapy.
Prostate cancer is slow growing, so that long-term control may be possible even if the cancer is not completely eradicated.
The prostate gland is a discrete organ, easily accessible through the rectum, and is dispensable.
There is no standard therapy for several phases of the disease (such as local recurrence after radiotherapy or hormonally resistant metastatic cancer).
And the response to therapy can be readily monitored with serum PSA levels and repeat biopsies of the prostate, as well as with the more traditional scans.
For localized disease, in vivo strategies which aim to revert the tumor phenotype or to provide for the specific killing of tumor cells are promising, but critically depend on gene transfer efficiencies currently not attainable.
While bystander killing has been observed in murine tumor models, the mechanism(s) underlying this phenomenon have not been studied in sufficient detail.
A better understanding of these mechanisms (particularly immune-related mechanisms) are likely to lead to the development of new, more effective anti-tumor strategies.
For disseminated disease, strategies which depend upon the ability to efficiently transduce tumor cells are unlikely to succeed.
Immunotherapeutic approaches which seek to augment the immunogenicity of tumor cells and thereby elicit a systemic anti-tumor immunity are most promising.
It is not currently clear whether such immune strategies are best directed toward specific tumor-associated antigens or to the diversity of potential antigens present within tumor cells.
The optimal method of presenting tumor antigens to the immune system (e.g., in vivo gene transfer with viral vectors or naked DNA, pulsing of dendritic cells (DCs) with antigen, use of genetically modified DCs) has also not yet been established.
The identification of new tumor-specific or associated antigens (termed "antigen-hunting") is very likely to yield important new reagents for both therapy and diagnosis.
The pursuit of new antigens in the context of existing clinical studies involving therapeutic vaccination strategies may be particularly useful for establishing correlation between specific immune responses and clinical outcome.
Current pre-clinical studies of gene therapy have employed a number of different tumor models, which significantly differ in their biological characteristics.
There is insufficient evidence of the degree to which the existing tumor models are predictive of efficacy in human studies.
Nevertheless, there are a number of characteristics of existing models (e.g., inherent immunogenicity of the tumor, invasive/metastatic, bone-homing potential) which will likely prove to be important components of valid tumor models.
While judgements must be made regarding whether results obtained in a particular model warrant movement of a potential therapy into clinical studies, such judgements are very difficult.
In some cases clinical studies may prove to be the primary means of assessing the early promise of a particular cancer gene therapy approach.
Magnetic resonance (MR) spectroscopy may prove to be a valuable diagnostic tool for staging and for monitoring the response of the local tumor to therapeutic interventions.
MR spectroscopy has been shown, for example, to be of value when compared to MR imaging (MRI) in distinguishing tumor from hemorrhage in the prostate after needle biopsy and for identifying recurrent tumor in the prostate after irradiation therapy.
There is a need for further development of MR spectroscopy, especially its application to the initial diagnosis and characterization of cancer.
New technologies should be sought that will allow safer, more effective treatment of the primary tumor.
The development of three-dimensional conformal irradiation therapy has allowed enhanced local tumor control, but further studies are needed to define the benefits of such intense therapy compared to conventionally planned and delivered external beam irradiation.
Research Priorities
The PRG identified the following investigative questions as having the highest priority.
These questions focus on developing better methods to detect micrometastases before treatment, better ways to control the local tumor while reducing the morbidity of treatment, better ways to characterize the biologic potential of a given cancer (that is, better prognostic markers) that would allow treatment to be tailored more accurately to the threat posed by an individual's cancer, and the development of novel therapeutic strategies to control the cancer, such as gene and cellular therapy.
PRIORITY ONE
What new techniques can be developed to detect clinically significant regional or distant metastases before treatment? What is the clinical significance of the detection by molecular techniques of circulating prostate cells (in the peripheral blood, lymph nodes, or bone marrow)? What is the relationship between these circulating cells and subsequent treatment failure or the development of clinical metastases?
No question was considered more important to progress in the treatment of clinically localized prostate cancer than the development of more sensitive techniques to detect the presence of metastases.
When local treatment fails, the cause is most often the presence of undetected metastases before local therapy.
If these metastases could be detected, many patients would be spared the side effects of local therapy.
Perhaps as important, clinical trials of systemic therapy could be tested in an adjuvant setting in patients with low volume metastases most likely to respond.
Despite the importance of this question, the PRG could identify only a few research projects focusing on the detection and characterization of circulating cancer cells.
Remarkably little funding was directed at this question.
While preliminary investigations have repeatedly found prostate cells in the peripheral circulation and in the bone marrow, the clinical significance of these cells has not been established.
The biological potential of the cells that are found has not been characterized, since there are no adequate tests to distinguish cells which have the capacity to persist and grow from those that will not survive.
Recommended Actions: * The PRG recommends that NCI vigorously support the development of assays to detect prostate cancer cells outside of the region of the prostate gland as well as investigations that will establish better ways to characterize the biologic potential of such cells, especially through the identification of molecular markers of metastatic capacity.
NCI should promote standardization of the assays used to detect such cells and should encourage cooperative groups to include studies of the presence of circulating cells during clinical trials so that long-term clinical correlations can be made.
What new technologies can be developed to decrease morbidity and enhance efficacy of therapy for the primary tumor? High dose irradiation therapy? Improved localization techniques?
Currently there is a modest level of support by NCI for the development of such new technologies for improved treatment techniques or better imaging of the local tumor.
Current funding for therapy trials is directly largely at the cooperative clinical trials groups, which focus on Phase II and III studies.
The number of funded investigators seeking novel local therapeutic strategies is few.
While there is legitimate debate about the relative merits of the existing forms of treatment for localized cancers (radical prostatectomy, external beam radiotherapy, and brachytherapy), the PRG concluded that each of these forms of therapy control the cancer in some but not all patients, and each places patients at risk for troublesome morbidity.
Direct comparisons of each of these therapies in large, randomized prospective controlled trials would be costly and take many years or decades to reach statistically significant end points.
With the rapid development of new therapeutic approaches the results of such trials may be obsolete by the time the trials were completed.
Funding should be continued for select Phase III studies within the existing cooperative clinical trials groups, which are poised to address straight-forward questions, such as interstitial brachytherapy versus external beam irradiation, or brachytherapy versus radical prostatectomy in selected patients.
External beam radiotherapy has been improved considerably in recent years through the development of three-dimensional conformal techniques, which have improved the rate of local control without a corresponding increase in the rate of complications.
Improved techniques for three-dimensional conformal radiotherapy are currently being supported through program project grants and the efficacy of three-dimensional therapy tested against conventional radiotherapy within the existing clinical trials mechanisms.
Further such studies are certainly warranted.
Recommended Actions: * The PRG recommends that resources should be committed to only a few, well-designed clinical trials addressing the relative merits of different techniques for treating the local tumor.
The current PIVOT trial should be completed, since it is the only trial in this country addressing the question of whether aggressive therapy is superior to conservative management of clinically localized prostate cancer.
Limited additional trials comparing different treatments may help to identify subsets of patients that can be more effectively (or more safely) treated with one modality versus another.
Further testing and refinements in three-dimensional conformal therapy, including intensity modulated radiation therapy, should be supported.
* The PRG strongly recommends that the greatest emphasis should be placed on the development of novel staging tools (especially imaging studies) and treatment approaches and of more informative techniques that would allow assigning therapeutic options more appropriately to patients based upon the characteristics of their individual cancers.
What critical features of the primary tumor determine the success of treatment? What are the clinical, pathological, and molecular features (markers of virulence) of a prostate cancer indicative of its rate of growth, its ability to invade, and its propensity to metastasize? Which features connote an "indolent" cancer? Which features indicate that a particular cancer cannot be controlled with local therapy alone? Can the results of multiple tests be combined using informatics to determine stage and prognosis more accurately?
While a variety of effective treatment options are available for localized prostate cancer, we do not have sufficiently reliable ways to predict the behavior of these cancers in order to assess the risk-benefit ratio of active treatment compared to conservative management.
Nor do we know how to predict whether certain cancers will respond well to one particular treatment compared to another.
Some cancers are not cured because the treatment fails to eradicate the local tumor completely.
Better techniques are urgently needed to determine the location, size and extent of cancer within the prostate and surrounding tissues.
Better imaging studies would allow us to monitor changes in the cancer with different treatments.
And better indicators (e.g., genetic profiles determined by microarray technology, key molecular markers of hormone responsiveness, a cancer's capacity for apoptosis) are needed to predict the response of cancers to different forms and intensities of therapy so that therapeutic options can be tailored to the characteristics of the cancers being treated.
To achieve the level of prediction needed will require much more information about the molecular mechanisms that govern progression and metastasis and response to therapy (see Section A, Biology, Progression, and Metastasis).
Modern medical informatics can play a crucial role here by developing risk profiles for prognosis or the response to treatment.
Such profiles can incorporate and quantify multiple variables, identifying correlations with clinical outcomes such as pathologic stage and local or distant recurrence.
Tables and nomograms have already been developed which combine standard prognostic factors--clinical stage, tumor grade and PSA levels--to make such predictions.
Far more sophisticated analyses, requiring powerful computers, will need to be developed to incorporate the thousands of bits of information from microchip genetic array technology into risk profiles or response assessments.
The study of the features of prostate cancer that correlate with its response to therapy has been of fundamental interest to investigators.
The review of the NCI portfolio identified a moderate number of research projects and funding for research aimed at discovering those features of the primary tumor that can be used to predict the biologic behavior of the cancer.
Much of this work, however, was aimed at the development of prognostic markers rather than those that determine the response to treatment.
Recommended Actions: * Studies that correlate the pathological and molecular features of the primary tumor with the natural history of the disease and the response to therapy require access to large tissue banks that link pathology specimens to accurate clinical and epidemiological information.
NCI should establish a national tissue bank for prostate cancer specimens and appropriate clinical and epidemiological information (see also Section H, Resources Needed).
* New technologies, such as MRI spectroscopy, should be explored to see if they can help to distinguish patients with a high likelihood of having cancer from those with a low likelihood, or those with indolent cancers from those with aggressive tumors.
* As the genes that regulate prostate cancer progression and metastasis are discovered, new markers need to be identified that correlate with response to therapy.
Informatics may help to combine multiple factors in ways that facilitate predictions of prognosis and of the response to a particular therapy.
Of the different strategies being considered for cancer gene therapy, which appear most suitable for the treatment of prostate cancer? Which treatments are most suitable for localized disease? Which treatments, including immunotherapeutic approaches, are most suitable for systemic disease?
Prostate cancer, among the solid tumors, seems to be particularly suitable for gene therapy, since the organ is expendable, the primary tumor is accessible, and a circulating marker of response is readily available.
Gene therapy has thus far been associated with low morbidity and could be applied repeatedly to palliate these slow growing cancers long enough for patients to live out their natural lives even if the cancer is not completely eradicated.
In addition, occult micrometastases may be particularly susceptible to gene therapy strategies that augment the immunogenecity of tumor cells.
Successful introduction of such novel approaches will require support for a special clinical trials consortium, since gene therapy requires active collaboration of basic and clinical investigators incorporating multiple approaches and should emphasize mechanistic questions rather than simply documentation of response.
Even now the opportunities in cancer gene therapy far exceed our capacity to evaluate them.
Gene and cellular therapy are complex.
Their clinical evaluation will require careful selection of strategies to be investigated as well as refinements in clinical trials methodology.
Treatment effects on the tumor and on the host must be identified and measured, valid intermediate endpoints of the immune response and of the antitumor response will have to be defined.
Currently there are few centers with active programs in gene or cellular therapy for prostate cancer.
A review of the NCI portfolio showed relatively few funded projects and very limited funds that could be used to seize upon such promising opportunities to develop a fundamentally new strategy for the treatment of cancer.
Recommended Actions:
* NCI should develop programs that support collaborative, inter-institutional studies of different gene therapy approaches in specific, well-defined animal models.
While the establishment of formal standards for evaluating different gene therapy approaches does not appear to be warranted, collaborative studies between investigators in different institutions might provide the ideal setting for comparative testing in similar models and for the establishment of useful informal standards for evaluation.
* NCI should facilitate the development of standardized definitions of tumor characteristics (stage, grade, prior therapy), response to therapy, and endpoints so that clinical trials of gene therapy can be compared across time and across institutions (see the section on clinical trials in Section F, Systemic Therapy).
Pre-clinical animal models have served to gate the entry of new therapies into clinical trials.
But early clinical studies, if designed properly, may, in the short term also prove to be a reliable mechanism for the assessment of potential new gene therapies.
It is critical to attempt to design clinical studies of gene therapy that will validate the specific characteristics of animal models used for pre-clinical testing.
* NCI should develop funding mechanisms devoted specifically to the support of Phase I and II clinical studies involving cancer gene therapy.
The current clinical trials groups are not ideal for gene therapy, which requires active collaboration of basic and clinical investigators incorporating multiple approaches and should emphasize mechanistic questions rather than simply documentation of response.
Thus far, the initiation of early clinical studies involving potentially important new therapies has depended on piecemeal funding strategies involving conventional RO1 grant support or industrial support.
Support from industry for cancer gene therapies has particularly waned in the past few years.
Since early studies are critically important for establishing the validity of existing animal tumor models, and may be the only reliable means of sorting through the myriad of potential treatment options, the dedication of funds for early clinical studies in cancer gene therapy is warranted.
A standard study section format could be used to review grants which specifically (and solely) focus on clinical studies, but which provide the results of pre-clinical studies as a focal point for the review process.
Peer review by experts in the pre-clinical science underlying the clinical studies, in clinical trial design, and in the development of clinical treatment strategies, would be critical.
In light of the standardization of analysis inherent in collaborative clinical investigation, the submission of funding requests by therapeutic consortia should be actively encouraged.
One goal of this new initiative would be to bring clinical studies further along the clinical development pathway than was possible previously, so as to maximize the chances that industry would become involved in the clinical development process.
PRIORITY TWO * What are the critical features of the tumor that determine response to irradiation therapy? Is there truly radio resistance on a cellular or genetic level, and if so, how can this be overcome? How can we identify which cells die or survive in response to radiation? What are the cellular and molecular mechanisms primarily responsible for cell death with irradiation? What is the role of oxygenation/hypoxia in radiation damage? * Are there cellular or genetic targets that can be identified which might increase the radiosensitivity of prostate cancer cells? What are the appropriate biomarkers of radiation response? * What is the relative efficacy of various methods of local treatment (including no treatment and conservative treatment, i.e., delayed hormonal therapy)? * What models (cells, lines, transgenic animals, xenografts) are most appropriate to study radiation responsiveness? * What are the intermediate endpoints that predict the efficacy of various local treatments? * Can local tumor control be improved by combining treatment approaches? Do combinations of local therapies increase local cancer control (e.g., interstitial brachytherapy plus external beam irradiation)? Do combinations of systemic and local therapy increase local control (e.g., neoadjuvant hormonal therapy and radiation)? * What is the natural history of presumed indolent tumors when observed over long periods? What are the consequences of deferred definitive treatment? * What are the performance characteristics of tests used to determine the clinical stage of the tumor before treatment (i.e., size and extent of the primary tumor, presence of regional or distant metastases)?
PRIORITY THREE * What is the efficacy of systemic treatment, especially androgen deprivation, for localized prostate cancer? * What are the criteria for initiating and funding a Phase III clinical trial for a localized therapy? What is the appropriate target population for a clinical trial of localized therapy? * What is the appropriate definition of treatment failure after local therapy? Does it vary by therapy? What is the relationship between failure defined by biochemical markers (e.g., rising PSA), clinical failure, and cancer-related mortality? What is the definition and clinical significance of local treatment failure? To what degree does local failure result from the biological features of the cancer, as opposed to variations in the application of each therapy? (Local failure after external beam irradiation relates directly to the dose delivered to the tumor.
For example, does the efficacy of brachytherapy or surgery relate to the accurate placement of seeds or the appropriate planes of dissection, respectively?) What host factors (e.g., ethnicity) affect the response to different treatments? * What is the rate-limiting step in producing vectors for gene therapy trials so that clinical grade vectors are readily available for appropriate prostate cancer clinical trials? * What is the morbidity of various methods of local treatment?
Table of Contents
Next Section
Previous Section
NCI Home Page
Comments
Top of Page
Other U.S. Government Resources National Institutes of Health (NIH) Department of Health and Human Services FirstGov
Last updated 11.25.01 (dlb)
