Skip Navigation National Cancer Institute Progress Review Groups [USEMAP:prg_uninav.gif] Prostate Cancer Home Final Report PRG Charge Roster Research Portfolio Initiatives Member Info ____________________ Search Laboratory and Clinical Models Current Status of the Field Laboratory and clinical models are critical for defining the mechanisms of prostate cancer progression and for testing preventive and therapeutic regimens.
Yet only a few laboratory and clinical models have been developed, all of which are encumbered by insufficient biological knowledge of the human cancer they aim to simulate.
A better understanding of the basic biology of human prostate cancer will accelerate and refine the process of model development.
A laboratory model ideally simulates all of the properties of prostate cancer in humans, but this is difficult to achieve in practice.
A constellation of models (e.g., animal, in vitro, and mathematical) must be developed to mimic distinct characteristics of human prostate cancer.
Each model then must be validated to permit a predictable level of extrapolation to humans.
There are several existing models of prostate cancer, each of which has advantages to exploit and limitations to overcome: * Xenograft models (in which human prostate tissue is transplanted into an animal, usually an immune-deficient mouse, in order to test aspects of prostate cancer in vivo) * Transgenic mice that express SV40 T-antigen (under the control of a promoter that drives gene expression in prostate tissue) * Syngraft models, in which urogenital sinus tissue (i.e., precursor prostate tissue) from rodent embryos is isolated, transfected with oncogenes, and then implanted into an adult host * Hormonally induced rat models that are susceptible to prostate cancer following treatment with androgens, estrogens, and carcinogenic agents, either alone or in combination * The dog model, which spontaneously develops prostate cancer has a high incidence of prostatic intraepithelial neoplasia (PIN) * Cell models, which are derived from prostate cancers and which have maintained phenotypic characteristics of the tumor, and * Computer models, which mimic the proliferation of prostate tumors
A significant resource for evaluating state-of-the-art models in prostate cancer was the First International Workshop on Animal Models of Prostate Cancer.
This workshop was organized by Drs. D. Waters, D.G. Bostwick, and G.P. Murphy and held at Purdue University, West Lafayette, Indiana in 1997.
Vision
Currently we are working in a void when it comes to understanding the etiology, progression, and metastasis of prostate cancer (see Section C, Early Detection, Prognosis, and Diagnosis).
Because of this lack of fundamental understanding, there are insufficient basic building blocks for model development.
It will be critical to define the molecular characteristics of the disease in order to develop more useful models that will mimic the natural progression of prostate cancer.
Additional xenograft models are needed.
These models offer the possibility of examining human tumors under a variety of experimental conditions.
Thus, xenograft models should be developed from as many stages and grades of human prostate tumors as is possible.
Additional prostate cancer cell lines, which are well defined and which mimic different levels of tumor progression, will contribute to these model systems.
The availability of a wide spectrum of human tumors grown in immunodeficient mice will provide an opportunity to define molecular changes associated with progression of the disease.
Xenografts grown in castrated mice should provide new insights into the mechanism of hormone-refractory cancer.
Moreover, they will offer the opportunity of testing novel treatment modalities in vivo.
Transgenic and reconstitution models are needed.
These models offer the possibility of testing various oncogenes and tumor suppressor genes for their ability to transform prostate cells in vivo.
However, before the ideal model can be generated, a better understanding of the biology of prostate cancer will be necessary.
Once a gene has been identified that is responsible for initiating human prostate cancer, it can be targeted into mice as a transgene.
Such models may more closely mimic the human tumor.
These models should elucidate the molecular changes associated with prostate cancer initiation and progression, as well as metastasis to bone.
Androgen ablation in this model will allow the study of molecular changes associated with androgen-refractory tumors.
In addition to the possibility of testing novel therapeutic regimens, this model can be used to test compounds that might prevent prostate cancer.
Additional models are needed to define the role of hormones in prostate cancer.
Rodent models that are susceptible to prostate cancer following treatment with androgens, estrogens, and carcinogenic agents, either alone or in combination, may elucidate the role, if any, that these agents play in the initiation and/or progression of the disease.
In addition, animal models are needed that spontaneously develop prostate cancer at a rate comparable to that in humans.
Such a model may help define environmental factors that might be involved in the initiation of prostate cancer.
Currently, the dog is the only animal model that appears to fit this criterion.
Prostate cancer cell lines are needed that mimic various stages of the disease.
Such cell lines will be useful for defining cell-signaling pathways that are critical for proliferation and apoptosis.
Moreover, injection of cells into immunodeficient mice will facilitate the development of new xenograft models that can be used for in vivo studies.
The development of computer models of tumor development is in an infant state.
However, as computers become more powerful and our understanding of the basic biology of prostate cancer increases, the use of computers should become a powerful tool in defining the complex interaction among cells during tumorigenesis.
The availability of new models will provide the means for testing new modalities of both prevention and progression of prostate cancer.
Such models will provide methods of testing both chemopreventive and chemotherapeutic agents.
Moreover, novel therapeutic protocols, such as gene therapy and immunotherapy, can be tested on these models.
Challenges and Opportunities Models that mimic human prostate cancer in initiation, progression and metastasis.
Laboratory models are critical for defining the mechanisms of prostate cancer progression and potential means of treating the disease.
There are few models specifically for prostate cancer, and there is insufficient biological knowledge upon which to base them.
Currently there is too little effort in this vital area of research.
It is recommended that high priority be given to the development of new models that mimic human prostate cancer initiation, progression, and metastasis.
However, before we can design ideal models, we need to understand the basic biology of prostate cancer initiation, progression and metastasis.
High priority should be given to identifying the mutated genes that lead to initiation of prostate cancer.
These mutated genes can then be inserted as transgenes into mice via prostate-specific promoters.
Only then can the natural progression of the disease be studied in an animal model.
Also, genes that are involved in progression and metastasis need to be defined.
A potential precursor lesion of prostate cancer is Prostatic Intraepithelial Neoplasia (PIN).
Because such lesions cannot be studied chronologically in humans, animal models such as the dog offer the best means of defining the role of PIN in prostate cancer progression.
Xenograft tissues and cell lines are needed that represent tumors at different stages of progression.
These xenograft models will allow the identification of genes that are involved in tumor progression.
These genes offer potential therapeutic targets.
Novel treatment regimens can then be tested against target genes in cell and animal models.
Use of models in detecting and treating prostate cancer.
Models are needed to screen and test potential chemotherapeutic agents.
Moreover, models are needed to test novel therapeutic approaches, such as gene therapy and immunotherapy.
Although there are several models available, many more are needed in order to mimic the wide heterogeneity of human prostate cancer.
Androgens are thought to play a major role in tumor development and progression.
Hormone-induced rodent models are needed to define potential environmental factors that could influence the development of prostate cancer.
Although hormonal therapy is the most widely used treatment against advanced prostate cancer, the majority of tumors return in an androgen-refractory state.
Little is known of the mechanisms that lead to androgen-refractory tumors.
The development of animal models that mimic the refractory nature of tumors will enhance our ability to treat these tumors.
Animal and cell models are needed to test potential chemopreventive agents.
Such agents, which are usually identified by epidemiological studies as part of natural dietary intake, should first be tested as crude extracts.
Then, individual purified components of these extracts should be tested in cell lines and animal models.
Such natural dietary components offer the potential for chemoprevention and chemotherapy.
Use of current models to understand prostate cancer progression and metastasis.
There are many shortcomings of the models that are available currently.
Those that should be developed in the future include xenografts, transgenics, syngrafts, and hormonally induced models.
Dog models need to be developed further in order to compare the natural progression of prostate cancer in this species with that of the human.
Additional cell lines need to be developed from human prostate cancer tumors.
Computer simulation of prostate cancer should be encouraged.
Research Priorities
PRIORITY ONE
Can models be designed to display the carcinogenic characteristics of human prostate cancer; namely, its genetic characteristics, host-tumor interactions, micro-environment, angiogenesis, and progression?
This question is important because a model should mimic the human disease as closely as possible.
Clearly, additional models are needed to mimic each aspect of prostate cancer.
This is all the more important because of the heterogeneity of the disease.
Ideally, a model would mimic all of the characteristics of the human disease.
However, in practical terms this may not be possible.
Thus it is important to choose a model based upon the question being asked.
The PRG believes that this area of research is seriously underfunded, since this represents a translational component that will bridge understanding of the basic biology of prostate cancer to potential therapy protocols.
Resources that are needed include: 1) increased efforts to identify mutations that drive the initiation of prostate cancer; and 2) additional cell and animal models that closely mimic the natural course of prostate cancer.
Recommended Actions: * Fund projects that focus on genes that drive the initiation process of prostate cancer development.
* Fund projects to develop new prostate cancer cell lines.
* Fund projects to develop new animal models.
Can models of human prostate cancer metastases be developed to mimic the affinity of human prostate cancer for bone marrow?
This question is important because prostate metastases are often different from other solid tumors.
First, prostate metastases are found predominantly in the bone.
Second, the bone metastases are predominantly osteoblastic rather than osteolytic.
Thus, animal models that mimic this particular trait of prostate tumor metastasis are needed, if we are to develop effective treatment regimens for metastatic disease.
Although the current level of NCI support for this question appears to be reasonable, to date few advances have been made in this area.
Thus a gap exists and new approaches should be tried.
Resources needed to address these questions include an animal model that recapitulates the bony metastasis of prostate cancer, and additional studies of bone factors that influence the growth of prostate cells and prostate factors that influence the growth of bone cells.
Recommended Actions: * Fund projects that focus on an animal model that mimics prostate metastasis to bone.
* Fund projects that focus on the interaction of bone cells and prostate cells.
Can models be designed to display the hormone responsiveness of human prostate cancer and its progression to hormone independence?
This question is important because hormones (both androgens and other hormones such as vitamin D3) play such an important role in prostate cancer development and progression.
Moreover, although hormonal therapy of advanced prostate cancer has a profound effect on tumors, in the majority of cases tumors return in an androgen-refractory state.
Thus, we need to understand the basic biology of androgen action in prostate cells and the mechanism by which prostate cells lose their dependency on androgens.
Both animal and cell models offer the ideal means of studying these processes.
The current level of NCI support for this question is insufficient.
Understanding how androgens regulate prostate growth and how prostate cells lose their androgen dependency offers potential therapeutic approaches in addition to the current hormonal therapy.
Moreover, such knowledge may challenge the current concepts upon which hormonal therapy is based.
Resources should be directed toward defining the mechanism of androgen action in prostate cells and the mechanism by which prostate cancer cells become refractory to the hormone.
Recommended Actions: * Fund projects that focus on the mechanism of hormone action in prostate cell lines and animal models.
* Fund projects that focus on the mechanism by which prostate cancer cells become refractory to androgens.
Can laboratory models be used to screen potential chemotherapeutic agents, clarify dose/response relationships, and understand the development of resistance to chemotherapy, and mechanisms of therapeutic response?
This question is important because novel chemotherapeutic agents can quickly be tested in cell and animal models in order to elucidate their effectiveness on tumor cells.
Specificity of these agents is important, and models can be used to test specificity.
The current level of NCI support for this question is insufficient, creating a wide gap in our efforts to identify potential therapeutic agents in model systems.
Resources are needed to develop more meaningful models to test these agents.
In particular, additional cell lines that maintain the well-differentiated phenotype of prostate cancer cells will be useful for such testing.
Also, better means of automated testing of compounds in cells are needed.
Recommended Actions: * Fund projects to develop cell lines that mimic the differentiated phenotype of prostate cancer cells.
* Fund projects that will develop automated methods of testing potential therapeutic agents.
Can models be used to test novel therapeutic approaches, such as cancer vaccines, gene therapy, immunological therapies or other biological therapies?
This question is important because gene therapy and immunotherapy are coming to the forefront as potentially powerful techniques for treating prostate cancer.
Animal models will play a critical role in developing such therapies.
The current level of support for this question is too low, perhaps because of the newness of the technology.
Resources are needed to develop the vectors for gene therapy.
Additionally, we need to understand the basic elements of the immune components of prostate cancer cells.
Recommended Actions: * Fund projects that will develop vectors for gene therapy.
* Fund projects that will define the immune components of prostate cancer cells.
* Fund projects that will test novel therapeutic approaches in animal models.
PRIORITY TWO * Can models be used to test chemopreventive agents? * Can models be used to test tumor responses to immunotherapies, i.e., therapies that enhance the immune system's ability to recognize and destroy the tumor? * Using xenograft models: How can xenograft models be used to understand the progression of prostate cancer? How can xenograft models be used to understand the effects of treatment modalities? Can human cell lines with specific prostate cancer phenotypes (e.g., androgen responsivity) be developed for introduction into xenograft models? Can human cell lines be developed to mimic the early stages of prostate cancer for use in xenograft models, where their properties can be investigated in vivo? * Using transgenic models: Can oncogenes commonly expressed in human prostate cancer be identified and used to induce prostate cancer in transgenic models? (The oncogene currently used in transgenic models, the SV40 T-antigen, is not found in human prostate cancer and has widespread effects on gene expression that limit its utility.
Can additional prostate-specific promoters be developed to drive oncogene expression in transgenic models? * Can imaging/localization techniques be used to study tumor progression in a variety of models? * Can models be designed to mimic the spontaneous characteristics of human prostate cancer?
PRIORITY THREE * Can the dog model be used to study the expression of oncogenes and tumor suppressor genes in prostate tumors? How does prostate cancer in dogs compare with that in humans in terms of disease progression and other aspects of carcinogenesis? Can the dog model be used to determine the relevance of PIN to prostate cancer? * Can the hormonally-induced rat model be used to understand the mechanism(s) by which hormones affect tumor induction? * Can mathematical models be developed to simulate prostate tumor induction and progression? * Can models be used to develop more effective hormonal therapies? * Can models be designed to display the long dormancy of human prostate cancer cells? * Can the syngraft model be used to study the effects of particular oncogenes and tumor suppressor genes on tumor phenotypes?
Table of Contents
Next Section
Previous Section
NCI Home Page
Comments
Top of Page
Other U.S. Government Resources National Institutes of Health (NIH) Department of Health and Human Services FirstGov
Last updated 11.25.01 (dlb)
