Chapter VII Next Steps Research undertaken to complete this Florida Intracoastal and Inland Waterway Study has been most interesting and challenging.
Information and data has been readily available, but had to be found and assimilated from many sources.
This document represents the first time a consolidated look at the Florida intracoastal and navigable inland waterway system has been undertaken from a holistic view.
3) Strategic Plan development including policies for implementing a successful scheduled container on barge service; 4) Feasibility of enhancing current operations and providing infrastructure to accommodate container on barge operations; 5) Identifying immediate and longer term needs for the waterway system; 6) Strategies for identifying and improving the critical links between key landside and waterside container on barge hub locations;
During the compiling of information and through interviews conducted with stakeholders, owner/ operators, and other interested parties, several themes emerged that begged for additional attention beyond the scope of this effort.
This document is by no means the end of the waterway investigative process, but the beginning.
The following issues will require follow up in some form (in no particular order) to assure a complete picture of the importance that the Florida Intracoastal and Inland Waterway System plays in the State's economy and transportation network:
7) Financing and maintaining the system; 8) Integrating the system into Florida's transportation planning process and Strategic Intermodal System.
For short-sea shipping and coastwise container on barge operations to work successfully in Florida, the State in the future must implement policies that support and nurture the creation of alternative transportation networks beyond conventional land side freight transportation.
It must make policy commitments to support the capital needs for water side shallow-draft systems including a mechanism
1) Land side container and freight congestion mitigation utilizing short-sea and coastal barge operations; 2) Maintenance dredging and spoil disposal for commercially authorized legs of the system;
for cost-sharing in the funding of capital and potentially the operations of such a system.
To get trucks off the highways and to improve the motoring public's safety, extensive analysis must be undertaken to examine rate structures and time sensitivity that will make a coastwise container on barge operation economically palatable to
7-1
participation by the private sector.
Granted, certain areas and legs of the existing intracoastal and inland waterway systems are off-limits to commercial navigation because of environmental concerns or other valid reasons.
That should not preempt the improvement and State support for creating a better system where feasible and economically viable.
complementary
approach
to
current
freight
transportation systems.
Recommended Future Scope of Work Purpose
The Florida Department of Transportation's Strategic Florida's unique opportunity fostered by its 1,300+ mile coast line offers a means in specific high density areas to mitigate landside freight congestion and to take fiscal pressures off the state highway system by requiring it to build costly land constrained capacity.
There is another way.
Intermodal System (SIS) Steering Committee in its Final Report, Section 6: Designation Criteria released in December 2002, identified thresholds and criteria for SIS "Waterway" system definition and emerging criteria and thresholds for other water related shallow draft infrastructure.
The Study Team recommends that further research be undertaken to develop a future "Strategic Plan" for coastwise container on barge operation and shortsea shipping.
The Plan would ultimately become an integrated part of Florida's State Transportation Plan and Strategic Intermodal System (SIS), but would be of limited scope, specifically defined, and funded based on priorities designed for long-term system development that complement and not compete with land side transportation modes.
Strategic Intermodal System Criteria and Thresholds included all "Intracoastal waterways and coastal shipping lanes" this would include the federally authorized Gulf Intracoastal Waterway and the Atlantic Intracoastal Waterway or, "Inland waterways with more than .25% of total U.S. inland waterway freight traffic (1.5 million tons in 2001).
For
"Emerging" or other waterways a criteria of "providing inland inter-regional service that carries more than 0.05% of total U.S. inland waterway freight traffic (300,000 tons per year) or, serves clusters of
The Team believes that the coastwise and short-sea concept is feasible for Florida and recommends that the following long-term scope of work be seriously considered by Florida's Department of Transportation in further pursuing development of an alternative but
waterborne transportation dependent industries located in or adjacent to counties with projected employment growth among the top 25% statewide".
For purposes of near-term future work, the Team
7-2
prioritization for enhanced commercial use of the SIS would propose that the designation for the Strategic Intermodal System for both SIS waterway facilities and emerging waterway facilities be "fine tuned" using the thresholds and criteria proposed by the Steering Committee in its Final Report.
Efforts would focus on identifying and documenting the waterway element scope requirements for SIS Strategic Plan development.
This would assure that all aspects, including facilities and criteria thresholds, are validated for strategic plan inclusion.
The intracoastal and navigable inland waterway element would be closely developed with FDOT including direct contact and input from the Florida Transportation A needs plan, unconstrained by estimates of available revenues, that identifies needs for the SIS waterways and emerging waterways, along with alternatives for addressing these needs would be developed.
A plan that identifies the costs of potential alternatives and determines which alternatives should be given priority for any available funding over a 20 year period would also be developed.
Financing strategies would be explored for both SIS waterways and the emerging waterways to leverage public and private transportation revenues to implement the plan.
coastal and inland waterway system.
Commission, Florida's seaport community key Metropolitan Planning Organizations (MPOs), growth management and environmental interests and other private sector, regional and modal partners.
Policies and statutory language would be reviewed and suggestions made to best implement the SIS waterway element in support of SIS Strategic Plan
Approach The Study Team will conduct an analysis in support of developing the intracoastal and commercially navigable inland waterway element of the SIS Strategic Plan.
The effort would include identification of planned and existing waterway connectors that satisfy the criteria, thresholds and economic connectivity measures between hubs and corridors (GIWW and AIWW) as outlined by the SIS Steering Committee; document and map these linkages based on the thresholds and criteria, and include methodologies for needs assessment and project
development.
From the data, research and
information assimilated for needs and priorities, a strategic corridor plan would be developed that highlights a detailed analysis of needs and priorities within the commercially navigable waterways system over the next 20 years.
Likewise, an "emerging waterway facilities" element would be concurrently developed with near-term, mid-term, and long-term priorities for funding and improvement that complements the corridor plan developed for the Gulf Intracoastal Waterway and Atlantic Intracoastal Waterway.
7-3
Task 1 Study Coordination 1:1 FDOT Coordination: The Study Team will
Task 2 Develop Intracoastal and Commercially Navigable Waterway Needs Plan 2:1 "Kick-off Meeting" and Briefing: A joint "kick-
contact FDOT as required for the purposes of collecting relevant information, reviewing works in progress, and screening/coordinating suggested recommendations or study outcomes.
Coordination will be conducted at the direction, and with the prior approval and concurrence of FDOT management to ensure that study findings and recommendations are responsive to both the Department and operator/ users of the intracoastal and commercially navigable inland waterway system.
off" meeting/briefing with key FDOT management and staff will be conducted to assure that all elements, expected tasks, and outcomes are clearly defined prior to commencement of the study.
FDOT
management will attend this meeting and provide any relevant guidance necessary for conduct of the study.
The objectives for SIS waterway element
development will be discussed at this initial briefing.
2:2 1:2 Ongoing Coordination: The Study Team will
Waterway Corridor and Connector Condition
Assessment and Needs Survey: From primary sources (owner/operator interviews) and secondary sources (Corps of Engineers, Florida Inland Navigation District, West Coast Inland Navigation District, MARAD, Gulf Intracoastal Canal Association, Waterways Users Federation, etc.), the Study Team will perform a corridor and connector condition assessment and needs survey for those facilities meeting the thresholds and criteria outlined for SIS waterway facilities and emerging facilities as outlined by the SIS Steering Committee's Final Report, December 2002.
Deficiencies will be documented and mapped by corridor and by connector for those waterway elements meeting the SIS Steering Committee thresholds and criteria.
maintain ongoing coordination and communications with the FDOT Seaport Office regarding the ongoing work, data collection, and review of initial findings and outcomes.
A "kick-off meeting" will be held at the initiation of the project to assure scope of work and study process understanding, and to discuss expected outcomes of the study.
Additional meetings will be held to review research findings prior to drafting initial recommendations and after submittal of a draft final report to the FDOT Seaport Office Manager.
The study will be coordinated through the FDOT's assigned Project Manager and will include necessary contact with any parties deemed appropriate by FDOT management.
7-4
2:3
Unconstrained and Prioritized Needs Plan The Study Team will prepare a
waterway system.
Primary emphasis will be placed on leveraging available resources to implement all or a portion of the prioritized plan identified in Task 2.
Development:
needs list based on order-of-magnitude estimate of costs by each commercially navigable system and for Florida's waterway system as a whole.
This needs list will be unconstrained with respect to available revenues to finance the deficiencies.
Concurrently, a prioritized needs list will be prepared and recommended.
The needs plan will be developed over a 20 year horizon using current year dollars for estimating purposes.
3:2
Develop Financing Strategies for both SIS
Waterways and Emerging Waterways: Strategies and methodologies for funding the cost feasible plan for intracoastal and commercially navigable waterways will be developed and will include, but not be limited to, grant, bond, and toll financing opportunities.
Innovative financing will be
2:4
Prepare and Recommend a SIS Intracoastal From the
thoroughly investigated and suggested funding strategies will be made as recommendations to the final report.
and Emerging Waterway Corridor Plan:
prioritized needs list, the Study Team will prepare a SIS Intracoastal and Emerging Waterway Corridor Development Plan for near-term, mid-term and 20 year prioritized project development.
The Plan will be submitted to FDOT in draft form prior to publication in any interim draft study documents.
It will be submitted in stand alone form for FDOT internal discussion.
Task 4 Waterway Policy Review 4:1 Recommended Policies for SIS Waterways
and Emerging Waterways: Practical and defendable policy recommendations for supporting a SIS and Emerging Waterways element
Task 3 Identify Funding Sources and Develop Financing Strategies 3:1 Investigate and Document Existing Funding
will be developed and documented.
The Study Team will work very closely with FDOT management and staff and with affected stakeholders to develop this phase of the study effort.
Sources Public and Private: The Study Team will research and document existing public and private funding sources available to Florida for potentially financing intracoastal and commercially navigable
Task 5 Executive Summary of Findings and Final Report
7-5
management, staff, and affected stakeholders.
Fifty 5:1 Summary of Findings: (50) CD copies of the Report will also be prepared and distributed, as well as, one electronic PDF formatted file for easy adaptation to the FDOT website.
An executive summary of the study findings will be prepared either independently or as a chapter of the final report as decided by the FDOT.
The summary at a minimum will include:
Schedule · · · · · · · · 5:2 Introduction Waterway Corridor and Connector Condition Assessment and Survey Unconstrained and Prioritized Needs Plan Summary SIS Intracoastal and Emerging Waterway Corridor Plan Summary Funding Sources Strategies for Financing Improvements Policy Considerations Consultant Recommendations The proposed scope of services for this follow up work effort can be performed according to the following schedule:
Table 7-1 Project Schedule Months to Completion After Notice to Proceed Ongoing 8 months 10 months
Task 1 2 3
Title Study Coordination Continuous Develop Waterway Needs Plan Funding Sources and Financing Strategies
Final Report - "Strategic Intermodal System 4 5
- Intracoastal and Commercially Navigable Waterway Element": The Final Draft Report
Policy Review Executive Summary and Final Report
12 months 15 months
will incorporate and compile all the task elements previously cited in a colorful spiral bound document.
Twenty (20) draft copies will be prepared and distributed to the FDOT Seaport Office for final review.
Upon conclusion of an agreed to review period, the Study Team will make appropriate final revisions to the "Strategic Intermodal SystemIntracoastal and Commercially Navigable Waterway Element".
The Study Team will prepare 50 full color copies of a final report for distribution to FDOT The budget requirements for the discussed proposed scope of services will be the subject of further negotiation between the Study Team and the FDOT.
Budget Requirements
7-6
Conclusion The State of Florida, because of its geography, its freight patterns and logistics, and its extensive and unimpeded coastline, has the potential to better utilize its existing intracoastal and commercially navigable inland waterway system for container and bulk commodity transport.
As stated earlier in this report, information received from stakeholder interviews and secondary sources, suggests that minimal investment would be needed in upfront capital and annual maintenance to construct and operate coastwise barge facilities, and to maintain the entire Gulf Intracoastal and Atlantic Intracoastal Waterway system to its authorized depth of 12 feet mean low water and channel width of 125 feet.
Further market research is needed to determine the proper location for coastwise container hub facilities, but as the limited research of this study attests, many of the facilities are in place and need only be enhanced with the proper infrastructure and financial incentives to entice the private sector to better use the system.
Transit time, limited schedule and frequency of service, port/intermodal facility infrastructure, necessary specialized cargo handling equipment, improved access to dedicated hubs, and breakeven container volumes all play a role in the Certainly, both the Gulf Intracaostal Waterway and the Atlantic Intracoastal Waterway could be classified success of an enhanced container on barge service system.
as trade corridors in and of themselves due to the annual volumes of bulk and neo-bulk commodities transported over them to serve Florida energy needs.
The next research effort requires focus on the feasibility of enhancing the existing system; identifying critical needs, and identifying strategies for effecting improvements that efficiently link the shallow draft system to land side transportation.
Primary emphasis should be placed on land side congestion mitigation through the use of barge transportation where proved practical and economically feasible.
Whatever is proposed must complement the future development of the Florida Department of Transportation's Strategic Intermodal System.
7-7
References 1.
A Five-Year Plan to Accomplish the Mission of Florida Seaports: 2001/2002-2005/2006, Wilbur Smith Associates/J.D.
Sanchez Consulting, Inc., April 2002.
American Journal of Transportation, Issue #164, February 2003.
Developing a Container Feeder Facility at Port Canaveral, Florida: A Business Development Case Study, Lauren Kotas, Canaveral Port Authority, May 2000.
"Feasibility of a Container-on-Barge Network Along the Texas Gulf Coast", Michael S. Bomba and Robert Harrison, Transportation Research Board-Record 1782, Paper No. 024007, 2002.
Federal Department of the Bureau of Transportation Statistics (BTS) and National Transportation Atlas Database (NTAD), 2002.
Florida Inland Navigation District, David K. Roach, Director ­ Personal Interview, February 2003.
Florida West Coast Inland Navigation District, Charles Listowski, Director - Interview, March 2003.
Florida West Coast Inland Navigation District ­ 5 Year Strategic Plan, 2002-2007, University of Florida/Peter A. Robertson 
Gulf Intracoastal Canal Association, Raymond Butler, Director ­ Phone Interview, February 2003.
Gulf Power, Russell Ball, Fuels Manager ­ Phone Interview, April 2003.
High Speed Ferries and Coastwise Vessels: Evaluation of Parameters and Markets for Application, Louisiana State University-National Ports and Waterways Institute, June 2000.
"History of the Gulf Intracoastal Waterway", Lynn M. Alperin, U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, National Waterways Study, January 1983.
Intermodal Access to U.S. Ports: Report on Survey Findings, A. Strauss-Wieder, Inc., United States Maritime Administration, Office of Intermodal Development, August 2002.
Miami River Commission, David Miller, Director, Brett Bibeau, Asst.
Director-Personal Interview ­ February 2003.
"Okeechobee Waterway-Inland Navigation Economic Evaluation", Mobile District Corps of Engineers, U.S. Army Corps of Engineers, May 2002.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
15.
7-8
References Continued 16.
Port Canaveral, Malcolm McLouth-Executive Director, Richard Lombroia-Port Engineer ­ Personal Interview, March 2003.
Port Canaveral, Lauren Kotas-Marketing Director ­ Phone Interviews, February/March, 2003.
Port of Ft. Pierce, Doug Anderson-Managing Director ­ Phone Interview, March 2003.
Port of Key West, Raymond Archer-Managing Director ­ Phone Interview, March 2003.
Port of Panama City, Charles Lewis-Asst.
Director, John W. Ramer-Operations Manager Personal Interview, March 2003.
Port of Pensacola Master Plan, Gee 
Port of Pensacola, Chuck Porter-Director, Leon Walker-Asst.
Director ­ Personal Interview, March 2003.
Port of St. Joe Master Plan, URS/Foster Wheeler/J.D.
Sanchez Consulting, Inc., February 2003.
Port of St. Joe, Tommy Pitts-Director-Personal Interview, March 2003.
Reebie Transearch Database, Reebie and Associates, Inc., 1998.
Stewart Machine Company, Inc., Charles W. DeBardeleben, Executive Vice PresidentGeneral Counsel ­ Phone Interviews, February 2003.
Strategic Intermodal System Steering Committee-Final Report, Cambridge Systematics, Inc., December 2002.
Tri-Rivers Waterway Development Association, Rebecca Martin, Director ­ Phone Interview, February 2003.
U.S. Maritime Administration, Nuns Jain-East Coast Region Director, William Eppersold ­ Chief Statistician ­ Phone Interviews, February 2003.
"U.S. Ports and the Funding of Intermodal Facilities: An Overview of Key Issues", David Luberoff and Jay Walder, Transportation Quarterly, Volume 54, No. 4, 2000.
17.
18.
19.
20.
21.
22.
23.
24.
25.
26.
27.
28.
29.
30.
7-9
Websites Visited 1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
15.
16.
17.
18.
19.
20.
21.
Columbia Coastal Transport, LLC.
Congressman John L. Mica Crowley Maritime Corporation CSX Lines Florida Inland Navigation District Florida Ports Council West Coast Inland Navigation District Gulf Intracoastal Canal Association Horizon Services Group Ingram Barge 
Port Canaveral Ponce Inlet Florida Port of Panama City Port of Pensacola Saint Johns River Sea Star Line, LLC.
The Carlyle Group Tri-Rivers Waterway Dev. Asso.
U.S. Army Corps of Engineers U.S. Coast Guard U.S. Maritime Administration www.columbia-coastal.com www.house.gov/mica/waterways www.crowley.com www.csxlines.com www.aicw.org www.flaports.org www.wcind.net/ www.gicaonline.com www.horizonconsulting www.ingrambarge.com www.portcanaveral.org www.volusia.com/ponce/ www.portpanamacityusa.com www.portofpensacola.com www.bartleby.com www.seastarline.com www.thecarlylegroup.com http://mts.tamug.tamu.edu/tririvers.html www.usace.army.mil www.uscg.mil www.marad.gov
7-10
Acknowledgements and Special Thanks To:
1.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
9.
10.
11.
12.
13.
14.
15.
16.
17.
18.
19.
20.
21.
22.
23.
24.
Bill Eppersold, U.S. Maritime Administration Brett Bibeau, Miami River Commission Charles Debardeleben, Stewart Machine Company, Inc.
Charlie Lewis, Port of Panama City Charles Listowski, Florida West Coast Inland Navigation District Chuck Porter, Port of Pensacola David Miller, Miami River Commission David Roach, Florida Inland Navigation District H.B. Hirt, Chattahoochee Florida Jim Murphy, U.S. Maritime Administration John Carnes, U.S. Maritime Administration John Ramer, Port of Panama City Lauren Kotas, Port Canaveral Leon Walker, Port of Pensacola Larry Phillips, Florida Department of Transportation Lorenzo Alexander, Florida Department of Transportation Mac McLouth, Port Canaveral Nuns Jain, U.S. Maritime Administration Raymond Butler, Gulf Intracoastal Canal Association Rebecca Martin, Tri-Rivers Waterway Development Association Richard Lombroia, Port Canaveral Richard Walker, U.S. Maritime Administration Russell Ball, Gulf Power Tommy Pitts, Port St. Joe
Document Design and Production by James S. McDonald - Wilbur Smith Associates - Tallahassee, Fl.
