APPENDICES 859 Appendix A Task Force Ratings The tables of ratings on the following pages were developed for the U.S. Preventive Services Task Force using the methodology adapted from the Canadian Task Force on the Periodic Health Examinationa and described in Chapter ii.
For this edition of the Guide, the Task Force developed ratings for all of the topics examined.
The Task Force graded the strength of recommendations for or against preventive interventions as follows.
Strength of Recommendations A: There is good evidence to support the recommendation that the condition be specifically considered in a periodic health examination.
B: There is fair evidence to support the recommendation that the condition be specifically considered in a periodic health examination.
C: There is insufficient evidence to recommend for or against the inclusion of the condition in a periodic health examination, but recommendations may be made on other grounds.
D: There is fair evidence to support the recommendation that the condition be excluded from consideration in a periodic health examination.
E: There is good evidence to support the recommendation that the condition be excluded from consideration in a periodic health examination.
Determination of the quality of evidence (i.e., "good," "fair," "insufficient") in the strength of recommendations was based on a systematic consideration of three criteria: the burden of suffering from the target condition, the characteristics of the intervention, and the effectiveness of the intervention as demonstrated in published clinical research.
Effectiveness of the intervention received special emphasis.
In reviewing clinical studies, the Task Force used strict criteria for selecting admissible evidence and placed emphasis on the quality of study designs.
In grading the quality of evidence , the Task Force gave greater weight to those study designs that, for methodologic reasons, are less subject to bias and inferential error.
The following rating system was used.
a Canadian Task Force on the Periodic Health Examination.
The periodic health examination.
Can Med Assoc J 1979;121:1193­1254.
861
862
Appendix A
Quality of Evidence I: Evidence obtained from at least one properly randomized controlled trial.
II-1: Evidence obtained from well-designed controlled trials without randomization.
II-2: Evidence obtained from well-designed cohort or case-control analytic studies, preferably from more than one center or research group.
II-3: Evidence obtained from multiple time series with or without the intervention.
Dramatic results in uncontrolled experiments (such as the results of the introduction of penicillin treatment in the 1940s) could also be regarded as this type of evidence.
III: Opinions of respected authorities, based on clinical experience; descriptive studies and case reports; or reports of expert committees.
Well-designed and well-conducted meta-analyses were also considered, and were graded according to the quality of the studies on which the analyses were based (e.g., Grade I if the meta-analysis pooled properly randomized controlled trials).
An exact correlation does not exist between the strength of the recommendation and the level of evidence, i.e., Level I evidence did not necessarily lead to an "A" grade, nor did an "A" grade require Level I evidence.
For example, there may have been evidence of good quality that did not prove that an intervention is effective (e.g., mammography in women under age 50, which received a "C" recommendation).
On the other hand, an "A" recommendation was given to screening for cervical cancer with Papanicolaou testing, based on burden of suffering and Level II evidence supporting the effectiveness of the intervention.
For many preventive services, there is insufficient evidence to determine whether or not routine intervention will improve clinical outcomes ("C" recommendation).
A variety of different circumstances can result in a "C" recommendation: available studies are not adequate to determine effectiveness (e.g., insufficient statistical power, unrepresentative populations, lack of clinically important endpoints, or other important design flaws); high-quality studies have produced conflicting results; evidence of significant benefits is offset by evidence of important harms from intervention; or studies of effectiveness have not been conducted.
As a result, lack of evidence of effectiveness does not constitute evidence of ineffectiveness.
Chapter ii provides further information about the methodology used to develop the body of this report.
Task Force Ratings
863
Table 1.
Screening for Asymptomatic Coronary Artery Disease Intervention Level of Evidence Strength of Recommendation
Routine resting, ambulatory, or exercise electrocardiography in middle-aged or older persons Routine resting electrocardiography in healthy children, adolescents, or young adults, including those undergoing preparticipation sports physicals
II-2 III
C D
Table 2.
Screening for High Blood Cholesterol and Other Lipid Abnormalities Intervention Level of Evidence Strength of Recommendation
Routine measurement of total serum or blood cholesterol Men aged 35­65 yr Women aged 45­65 yr Persons aged 
I, II-2 II-2 II-2 II-2 II-2, III II-2
B B C C C C
Table 3.
Screening for Hypertension Intervention Level of Evidence Strength of Recommendation
Periodic blood pressure measurement in persons aged 21 yr Measurement of blood pressure in children and adolescents during office visits
I II-2, II-3, III
A B
Table 4.
Screening for Asymptomatic Carotid Artery Stenosis Intervention Level of Evidence Strength of Recommendation
Routine carotid ultrasound or auscultation for carotid bruits in older persons
I, II-2
C
864
Appendix A
Table 5.
Screening for Peripheral Arterial Disease Intervention Level of Evidence Strength of Recommendation
Routine history-taking for classic claudication, palpation of peripheral pulses, ultrasound, or other noninvasive tests in older persons
III
D
Table 6.
Screening for Abdominal Aortic Aneurysm Intervention Level of Evidence Strength of Recommendation
Routine abdominal palpation Routine abdominal ultrasound
II-2 II-2
C C
Table 7.
Screening for Breast Cancer Intervention Level of Evidence Strength of Recommendation
Routine mammogram every 1-2 yr with or without annual clinical breast exam Women aged 40­49 yr 50­69 yr 70­74 yr 75 yr Annual clinical breast exam without periodic mammograms Women aged 40­49 yr 50­59 yr 60 yr Routine breast self-exam
I I, II-2 I, II-3 III III I III I, II-2, III
C A C C C C C C
Table 8.
Screening for Colorectal Cancer Intervention Level of Evidence Strength of Recommendation
Annual fecal occult blood testing of persons aged 50 yr and older Routine sigmoidoscopy in persons aged 50 yr and older Routine digital rectal exam Routine barium enema Routine colonoscopy
I, II-1, II-2 II-2, II-3 III III III
B B C C C
Task Force Ratings
865
Table 9.
Screening for Cervical Cancer Intervention Level of Evidence Strength of Recommendation
Regular Pap testing in women who are or have been sexually active and who have a cervix Discontinuation of regular Pap testing in women aged 
II-2, II-3 III III III
A C C C
Table 10.
Screening for Prostate Cancer Intervention Level of Evidence Strength of Recommendation
Routine Routine serum Routine
digital rectal exam prostate-specific antigen or other tumor markers transrectal ultrasound
II-2 I, II-2, III II-2, III
D D D
Table 11.
Screening for Lung Cancer Intervention Level of Evidence Strength of Recommendation
Routine chest x-ray or sputum cytology
I, II-1, II-2
D
Table 12.
Screening for Skin Cancer---Including Counseling to Prevent Skin Cancer Intervention Level of Evidence Strength of Recommendation
Screening Total body skin exam by primary care clinicians Periodic skin self-exam Sun avoidance or use of protective clothing by high-risk * persons Routine use of sunscreens Clinician counseling to increase the use of sun protection measures II-3, III II-3, III II-2 I, II-2 III C C B C C
Primary Prevention
*See
relevant chapter for definition of high risk.
866
Appendix A
Table 13.
Screening for Testicular Cancer Intervention Level of Evidence Strength of Recommendation
Routine self-exam or physician exam of the testes in men
III
C
Table 14.
Screening for Ovarian Cancer Intervention Level of Evidence Strength of Recommendation
Routine pelvic exam, ultrasound, or serum tumor markers General female population High-risk* women
II-3, III III
D C
Table 15.
Screening for Pancreatic Cancer Intervention Level of Evidence Strength of Recommendation
Routine abdominal palpation, ultrasound, or serum tumor markers
III
D
Table 16.
Screening for Oral Cancer Intervention Level of Evidence Strength of Recommendation
Routine oral exam by primary care clinicians
III
C
Table 17.
Screening for Bladder Cancer Intervention Level of Evidence Strength of Recommendation
Routine urine dipstick or microscopy Routine urine cytology
II-2, III III
D D
*See
relevant chapter for definition of high risk.
Task Force Ratings
867
Table 18.
Screening for Thyroid Cancer Intervention Level of Evidence Strength of Recommendation
Routine neck palpation or ultrasound General population High-risk* adults or children
II-2, III III
D C
Table 19.
Screening for Diabetes Mellitus Intervention Level of Evidence Strength of Recommendation
Non-insulin-dependent Routine measurement of plasma glucose, glycosylated hemoglobin, or urine glucose Gestational Routine oral 1-hr glucose challenge test, glycosolated hemoglobin, fasting or random plasma glucose, or urine glucose Insulin-dependent Routine measurement of serum autoantibodies in the general population
II-2
C
I, II-2
C
III
D
Table 20.
Screening for Thyroid Disease Intervention Level of Evidence Strength of Recommendation
Routine thyroid function tests General population High-risk* persons
III I, II-3
D C
Table 21.
Screening for Obesity Intervention Level of Evidence Strength of Recommendation
Periodic height and weight measurements Routine determination of the waist/hip ratio
I, II-2, II-3 II-2
B C
*See
relevant chapter for definition of high risk.
868
Appendix A
Table 22.
Screening for Iron Deficiency Anemia--Including Iron Prophylaxis Intervention Level of Evidence Strength of Recommendation
Screening Routine hemoglobin/hematocrit Pregnant women at first prenatal visit High-risk* infants High-risk* children General population Repeat hemoglobin/hematocrit in pregnant women or high-risk * infants not anemic at initial testing Breastfeeding and use of ironenriched formula or food for all infants and toddlers Routine use of iron supplements Healthy pregnant women Healthy infants II-1, II-2 I I I, II-1, II-2 III B B C C C
Primary Prevention I, II-1, II-2, II-3 B
I, II-1, II-2 I, III
C C
Table 23.
Screening for Elevated Lead Levels in Childhood and Pregnancy Intervention Level of Evidence Strength of Recommendation
Screening Routine blood lead measurement High-risk* children Pregnant women Routinely counseling families to control lead dust by repeated household cleaning, or to optimize caloric, iron, and calcium intake specifically to reduce lead absorption II-1, II-2, II-3 III B C C
Primary Prevention II-2, III
Table 24.
Screening for Hepatitis B Virus Infection Intervention Level of Evidence Strength of Recommendation
Routine measurement of HBsAg Pregnant women High-risk* persons (to assess eligibility for vaccination) General population
I, II-1, II-2, II-3 III III
A C D
*See
relevant chapter for definition of high risk.
Task Force Ratings
869
Table 25.
Screening for Tuberculous Infection--Including BCG Immunization Intervention Level of Evidence *
Strength of Recommendation
Tuberculin skin testing of high-risk persons BCG vaccination of selected high-risk infants and children
I *
A B
I, II-2
Table 26.
Screening for Syphilis Intervention Level of Evidence Strength of Recommendation
Routine serologic testing High-risk* persons Pregnant women
II-3 II-3
A A
Table 27.
Screening for Gonorrhea--Including Ocular Prophylaxis in Newborns Intervention Level of Evidence Strength of Recommendation
Screening Routine gonorrhea culture or nonculture screening test High-risk* women High-risk* pregnant women Other pregnant women High-risk* men General population Routine ophthalmic antibiotic in newborns II-2, III II-2 III II-3, III III II-3, III B B C C D A
Primary Prevention of Gonococcal Ophthalmia Neonatorum
Table 28.
Screening for Human Immunodeficiency Virus Infection Intervention Level of Evidence Strength of Recommendation
Enzyme immunoassay, with confirmatory test for positive results High-risk* adolescents and adults High-risk* pregnant women High-risk* infants Low-risk pregnant women, adolescents, and adults
I, II-2 I, II-2 II-2 III
A A B C
*See
relevant chapter for definition of high risk.
870
Appendix A
Table 29.
Screening for Chlamydial Infection--Including Ocular Prophylaxis in Newborns Intervention Level of Evidence Strength of Recommendation
Screening Routine culture or nonculture screening test Sexually active female adolescents and other high-risk * women High-risk* pregnant women Other pregnant women High-risk* men General population Routine ophthalmic antibiotic in newborns
I, II-2, III II-2 III II-3, III III I, II-2, III
B B C C D C
Primary Prevention of Chlamydial Ophthalmia Neonatorum
Table 30.
Screening for Genital Herpes Simplex Intervention Level of Evidence Strength of Recommendation
Screening Routine viral culture, serology, or other tests General population Pregnant women Examination of pregnant women in labor for signs of active genital HSV lesions Routine use of systemic acyclovir in pregnant women with recurrent herpes Counseling uninfected women with infected partners to use condoms or abstain from intercourse during pregnancy II-3, III II-2, II-3, III II-2, III D D C
Primary Prevention of Neonatal Herpes Infection III III C C
Table 31.
Screening for Asymptomatic Bacteriuria Intervention Level of Evidence Strength of Recommendation
Routine urine culture in pregnant women at 12-16 weeks' gestation Routine urine dipstick for leukocyte esterase/nitrites Pregnant women Diabetic women Noninstitutionalized elderly women Institutionalized elders School-aged girls Other persons Routine urine microscopy
I
A
II-2 III I, II-1, II-2 I I I, II-2, III II-2
D C C E E D D
*See
relevant chapter for definition of high risk.
Task Force Ratings
871
Table 32.
Screening for Rubella--Including Immunization of Adolescents and Adults Intervention Level of Evidence Strength of Recommendation
Routine rubella serology or vaccination history Women of childbearing age (including pregnant women) Young men in high-risk * settings Other men and postmenopausal women Routine rubella vaccination without screening Children Nonpregnant women of childbearing age Young men in high-risk * settings Other men and postmenopausal women
II-2, II-3, III II-3, III III
B C D
I, II-1, II-2, II-3 II-2, III II-2, III III
A B C D
Table 33.
Screening for Visual Impairment Intervention Level of Evidence Strength of Recommendation
Routine testing for amblyopia and strabismus in preschool children Routine Snellen acuity testing in elderly persons Routine ophthalmoscopy by primary care clinicians in elderly persons Routine vision screening in other children, adolescents, and adults
II-1, II-2 II-3 III III
B B C C
Table 34.
Screening for Glaucoma Intervention Level of Evidence Strength of Recommendation
Routine tonometry Routine ophthalmoscopy by primary care clinicians
I, II-2, III III
C C
*See
relevant chapter for definition of high risk.
872
Appendix A
Table 35.
Screening for Hearing Impairment Intervention Level of Evidence Strength of Recommendation
Periodically questioning older adults about their hearing Routine audiometric testing in older adults Routine hearing testing in adolescents and working-age adults 1 Routine evoked otoacoustic emission testing or auditory brainstem response in newborns Routine hearing testing in children aged 
I, III I, III III II-2, III II-2
B C C C D
Screening of workers for noise-induced hearing loss should be performed in the context of existing work site programs and occupational medicine guidelines.
Table 36.
Screening Ultrasonography in Pregnancy Intervention Level of Evidence Strength of Recommendation
Routine midtrimester ultrasound in pregnant women Routine third-trimester ultrasound in pregnant women
I I
C D
Table 37.
Screening for Preeclampsia Intervention Level of Evidence Strength of Recommendation
Periodic blood pressure measurement during pregnancy, as part of routine prenatal care
II-3, III
B
Task Force Ratings
873
Table 38.
Screening for D (Rh) Incompatibility Intervention Level of Evidence Strength of Recommendation
Routine D (Rh) blood typing and antibody testing of pregnant women at the first visit Repeat antibody testing of all unsensitized D-negative pregnant women at 24-28 weeks' gestation Routine administration of D immunoglobulin to unsensitized D-negative women Postpartum At 24-28 weeks' gestation After amniocentesis or induced abortion After CVS, other high-risk* obstetric procedures or complications
I, II-1, II-3 II-1
A B
I, II-1 II-1 II-1, II-3 I, III
A B B C
Table 39.
Intrapartum Electronic Fetal Monitoring Intervention Level of Evidence Strength of Recommendation
Routine intrapartum electronic fetal monitoring Low-risk pregnancies High-risk* pregnancies
I I
D C
Table 40.
Home Uterine Activity Monitoring Intervention Level of Evidence Strength of Recommendation
Home uterine activity monitoring Normal risk pregnancies High-risk* pregnancies
III I, II-2
D C
*See
relevant chapter for definition of high risk.
874
Appendix A
Table 41.
Screening for Down Syndrome Intervention Level of Evidence Strength of Recommendation
Offering amniocentesis or CVS to high-risk* pregnant women Offering maternal serum multiple-marker testing to all pregnant women Offering maternal serum individual marker testing to pregnant women Offering midtrimester ultrasound to pregnant women
II-2 II-2 II-2 II-2, III
B B C C
Table 42.
Screening for Neural Tube Defects --Including Folate Prophylaxis Intervention Level of Evidence Strength of Recommendation
Screening Offering maternal serum a-fetoprotein measurement to all pregnant women Offering midtrimester ultrasound to all pregnant women Periconceptional folic acid 4.0 mg daily for women with previous affected pregnancy Daily multivitamin or multivitamin/ multimineral containing 0.4­0.8 mg folic acid for women planning pregnancy Daily multivitamin containing 0.4 mg folic acid for women capable of pregnancy Dietary folate intake of 0.4 mg/day for women capable of pregnancy II-2 I, II-2, III B C
Primary Prevention I I, II-2 II-2 II-2 A A B C
Table 43.
Screening for Hemoglobinopathies Intervention Level of Evidence Strength of Recommendation
Testing for hemoglobinopathies in newborns Offering testing for hemoglobinopathies with counseling Pregnant women at first prenatal visit High-risk* adolescents and young adults
I, II-2
A
II-2, II-3, III II-1, III
B C
*See
relevant chapter for definition of high risk.
Task Force Ratings
875
Table 44.
Screening for Phenylketonuria Intervention Level of Evidence Strength of Recommendation
Routine measurement of phenylalanine level on dried-blood spot specimens in newborns Routine measurement of blood phenylalanine level in pregnant women
II-3 II-2, III
A C
Table 45.
Screening for Congenital Hypothyroidism Intervention Level of Evidence Strength of Recommendation
Routine measurement of T 4 and/or TSH on dried-blood spot specimens in newborns
II-3
A
Table 46.
Screening for Postmenopausal Osteoporosis Intervention Level of Evidence Strength of Recommendation
Routine bone densitometry in postmenopausal women
II-2, III
C
Table 47.
Screening for Adolescent Idiopathic Scoliosis Intervention Level of Evidence Strength of Recommendation
Routine forward-bending test, visual inspection of the back, inclinometer, or other tests in adolescents
II-3, III
C
Table 48.
Screening for Dementia Intervention Level of Evidence Strength of Recommendation
Routine use of standardized screening tests in elderly persons
III
C
876
Appendix A
Table 49.
Screening for Depression Intervention Level of Evidence Strength of Recommendation
Routine use of standardized screening tests in primary care patients
I, II-1
C
Table 50.
Screening for Suicide Risk Intervention Level of Evidence Strength of Recommendation
Screening Routine use by primary care clinicians of direct questions or standardized screening tests in the general population Training primary care clinicians to recognize and treat affective disorders I, II-2, II-3 C
Primary Prevention II-3 B
Table 51.
Screening for Family Violence Intervention Level of Evidence Strength of Recommendation
Routine standardized interview or physical exam to detect child abuse Routine standardized interview to detect elder abuse Routine standardized questionnaire to detect domestic violence
III III II-3, III
C C C
Table 52.
Screening for Problem Drinking Intervention Level of Evidence Strength of Recommendation
Routine interview or standardized questionnaire to detect problem drinking Adolescents and adults Pregnant women
I, II-2 II-2
B B
Task Force Ratings
877
Table 53.
Screening for Drug Abuse Intervention Level of Evidence Strength of Recommendation
Routine screening with standardized questionnaires or biologic assays
III
C
Table 54.
Counseling to Prevent Tobacco Use Intervention Level of Evidence Strength of Recommendation
Efficacy of Risk Reduction Avoidance or cessation of tobacco use to reduce the risk of cancer, cardiovascular and respiratory diseases, adverse pregnancy and neonatal outcomes, and effects of passive smoking Clinician counseling of all patients, including pregnant women, who use tobacco to reduce or stop use Nicotine patches or gum as an adjunct to counseling Clonidine as an adjunct to counseling Clinician counseling of school-aged children and adolescents to avoid tobacco use II-2 A
Effectiveness of Counseling and Other Clinical Interventions I I I III1 A A C C
1Controlled trials have demonstrated the ability of school-based intervention programs to delay the initiation of tobacco use in children and adolescents.
Table 55.
Counseling to Promote Physical Activity Intervention Level of Evidence Strength of Recommendation
Efficacy of Risk Reduction Regular physical activity to prevent coronary heart disease, hypertension, obesity, and other diseases Counseling patients to incorporate regular physical activity into their daily routines II-2 A
Effectiveness of Counseling I, II-2 C
878
Appendix A
Table 56.
Counseling to Promote a Healthy Diet Intervention Level of Evidence Strength of Recommendation
Efficacy of Risk Reduction in the General Population Limiting intake of dietary fat (especially saturated fat) Limiting intake of dietary cholesterol Emphasizing fruits, vegetables and grain products containing fiber Maintaining caloric balance through diet and exercise Maintaining adequate intake of dietary calcium in women Reducing intake of dietary sodium Increasing intake of dietary iron Increasing intake of beta-carotene and other antioxidants Breastfeeding infants Counseling to change dietary habits Specially trained educators Primary care clinicians I, II-2, II-3 II-2 II-2, II-3 II-2 I, II-1, II-2, II-3 II-3 II-2, II-3, III II-2, II-3 I, II-2 A B B B B C C C A
Effectiveness of Counseling I1 III B C
1These trials generally involved specially trained educators such as dieticians delivering intensive interventions (e.g., multiple sessions, tailored materials) to selected patients with known risk factors.
Table 57.
Counseling to Prevent Motor Vehicle Injuries Intervention Level of Evidence Strength of Recommendation
Efficacy of Risk Reduction Child safety seats, lap/shoulder belts, and motorcycle helmets Avoidance of driving while impaired by alcohol or other drugs Driver- and passenger-side air bags Alteration of pedestrian behavior Counseling parents to have their children use car safety seats or seat belts as appropriate for age Counseling adolescent and adult patients to use lap/shoulder belts Counseling patients to use motorcycle helmets Counseling problem drinkers to reduce their alcohol consumption (see Ch. 52) Counseling patients to avoid driving while impaired by alcohol or other drugs Counseling patients and parents of child patients on safe pedestrian behavior II-2, II-3 II-2, II-3 II-2 II-1, II-2, II-3 I, II-1, II-2 II-1, II-3 III I III III A A A C B B C B C C
Effectiveness of Counseling
Task Force Ratings
879
Table 58.
Counseling to Prevent Household and Recreational Injuries Intervention Level of Evidence Strength of Recommendation
Efficacy of Risk Reduction Fires and Burns Properly installed/tested smoke detectors Smoking cessation (see Ch. 54) Flame-retardant sleepwear for children Hot water heaters set to 
II-2 II-2 II-3 II-3 II-2 II-2, III
B A A A B B
II-3 II-3 II-1
A A D
II-2, II-3 II-2, III II-2 I, III II-2
A B B C B
II-3
A
I, II-1, II-2 I, II-2 II-1
B B C
III I, II-1, II-2, II-3 I, III I I
C B C B C
Effectiveness of Counseling
relevant chapter for definition of high risk.
880
Appendix A
Table 59.
Counseling to Prevent Youth Violence Intervention Level of Evidence Strength of Recommendation
Efficacy of Risk Reduction Removal or safe storage of firearms in the home Acquisition of interpersonal problem solving skills Reduction of heavy or problem drinking Reduction of illicit drug use or drug trafficking Counseling problem drinkers to reduce alcohol consumption (see Ch. 52) Counseling on measures to reduce violence risk II-2, II-3, III II-2, III II-2, II-3, III II-2, III B C B C
Effectiveness of Counseling I III B C
Table 60.
Counseling to Prevent Low Back Pain Intervention Level of Evidence Strength of Recommendation
Efficacy of Risk Reduction Exercise to strengthen back or abdominal muscles or to improve overall fitness Corsets/back belts Modification of risk factors (smoking, obesity, psychological factors) Back pain prevention education Workplace Pregnant women Primary care patients I, II-1, II-2 I, II-2 II-2, III C C C
Effectiveness of Counseling I, II-1, II-2 II-1 III C C C
Task Force Ratings
881
Table 61.
Counseling to Prevent Dental and Periodontal Disease Intervention Level of Evidence Strength of Recommendation
Efficacy of Risk Reduction Regular visits to dental care provider (for services such as professionally applied topical fluorides, sealants) Toothbrushing with fluoride-containing toothpaste Dental flossing Avoidance of putting infants and children to bed with a bottle Reduced and less frequent intake of sugary foods Fluoride supplementation of persons aged 16 yr, in areas with inadequate water fluoridation Counseling patients (parents) to follow measures to reduce their (their children's) risk of oral disease I I, III II-1 II-2, III II-2 II-1 B B B B C A
Effectiveness of Counseling II-2, II-3 C
Table 62.
Counseling to Prevent HIV Infection and Other Sexually Transmitted Diseases Intervention Level of Evidence Strength of Recommendation
Efficacy of Risk Reduction Sexual abstinence or maintenance of mutually faithful monogamous sexual relationship Regular use of condoms Regular use of female barrier contraceptives and spermicides Avoidance of contaminated injection equipment Counseling by primary care clinicians to reduce high-risk* sexual behavior or injection drug use 1
II-2 II-2, II-3 I1, II-2 II-2
A A B A
Effectiveness of Counseling I, II-2 C
Benefit demonstrated for gonorrhea and chlamydia, but effects on HIV infection uncertain.
*See
relevant chapter for definition of high risk.
882
Appendix A
Table 63.
Counseling to Prevent Unintended Pregnancy Intervention Level of Evidence Strength of Recommendation
Efficacy of Risk Reduction Sexual abstinence or regular use of contraceptives Clinician counseling to improve the effective use of contraceptives Clinician counseling to promote sexual abstinence among adolescents II-2 A
Effectiveness of Counseling II-3 III B C
Table 64.
Counseling to Prevent Gynecologic Cancers Intervention Level of Evidence Strength of Recommendation
Efficacy of Risk Reduction Oral contraceptives to prevent ovarian and endometrial cancer Avoidance of high-risk* sexual activity, use of barrier contraceptives and spermicides to prevent cervical cancer Tubal sterilization to prevent ovarian cancer Counseling about measures to reduce risk of gynecologic cancers II-2 II-2 II-2 B A B
Effectiveness of Counseling III C
*See
relevant chapter for definition of high risk.
Task Force Ratings
883
Table 65.
Childhood Immunizations1 Intervention Level of Evidence Strength of Recommendation
Routine Childhood Immunizations Diphtheria Pertussis Tetanus Poliomyelitis Measles Rubella Mumps H. influenzae type b conjugate Hepatitis B Varicella Hepatitis A (age 2 yr) Influenza (age 6 mo) (see Ch. 66) Pneumococcus (age 2 yr) (see Ch. 66) Immunocompetent Immunocompromised Healthy persons living in epidemic conditions Amantadine/rimantadine for high risk* children (see Ch. 66) 1
I, II-3
A
I, II-1, II-2, II-3 I, II-2, II-3 I, II-3 I, II-3 II-2 I, II-2 I, II-2 I
A A A A B B C A
* Children Immunizations for High-Risk
Chemoprophylaxis Against Influenza A I B
See Ch. 25 for recommendations on the use of BCG vaccine against tuberculosis.
*See
relevant chapter for definition of high risk.
884
Appendix A
Table 66.
Adult Immunizations--Including Chemoprophylaxis Against Influenza A Intervention Level of Evidence Strength of Recommendation
Influenza (age 65 yr) Pneumococcus (age 65 yr) Tetanus-diphtheria Hepatitis B (young adults)
Routine Adult Immunizations I, II-2 II-2 I, II-3 I, II-3 II-2 I, II-2 I, II-2 I I, II-3 I I II-2, II-3 I, II-3 B B A A B B C A A B A B B
* Adults Immunizations for High-Risk
Influenza Pneumococcus Immunocompetent Immunocompromised Healthy young adults living in epidemic conditions Hepatitis B Hepatitis A Measles-mumps-rubella Measles-mumps-rubella (second dose) Varicella (see Ch. 65) Amantadine/rimantadine for high-risk* adults
Chemoprophylaxis Against Influenza A I B
Table 67.
Postexposure Prophylaxis for Selected Infectious Diseases Disease Intervention Level of Evidence Strength of Recommendation
H. influenzae type b Hepatitis A Hepatitis B N. meningitidis Rabies
Tetanus 1Persons 2The
Rifampin Immune globulin Immune globulin/vaccine Rifampin Vaccine1 Ceftriaxone Immune globulin/ postexposure vaccine Preexposure vaccine in high-risk* persons Vaccine/immune globulin
I, II-3 II-1 I I, II-1 I, II-1, II-3 I I, II-3 II-1 II-1, II-2, II-3
A A A A A C2 A A A
3 mo in serogroup A outbreaks; persons 2 yr in serogroup C, Y, and W135 outbreaks.
efficacy of ceftriaxone in eliminating pharyngeal carriage of meningococcus has been confirmed only for serogroup A strains.
*See
relevant chapter for definition of high risk.
Task Force Ratings
885
Table 68.
Postmenopausal Hormone Prophylaxis Intervention Level of Evidence Strength of Recommendation
Routinely counseling peri- and postmenopausal women about the risks and benefits1 of hormone prophylaxis 1Hormone
I, II-2
B
prophylaxis reduces the risk of osteoporosis and coronary heart disease, but may increase the risk of endometrial and breast cancer.
Table 69.
Aspirin Prophylaxis for the Primary Prevention of Myocardial Infarction Intervention Level of Evidence Strength of Recommendation
Routine aspirin prophylaxis Middle-aged or older men Middle-aged women
I II-2
C C
Table 70.
Aspirin Prophylaxis in Pregnancy Intervention Level of Evidence Strength of Recommendation
Routine aspirin prophylaxis to prevent preeclampsia Pregnant women High-risk* pregnant women Routine aspirin prophylaxis to prevent intrauterine growth retardation in high-risk* pregnant women
I I I, II-1
C C C
*See
relevant chapter for definition of high risk.
