About JCOTS Studies Meetings Publications Legislation Links MEETINGS Current 2002-2003 2001-2002 2000-2001 1999-2000 1998-1999 1997-1998 __________________________________________________________________ Search JCOTS __________________ Go __________________________________________________________________ [JCOTS_logo_small.jpg] Home Privacy Advisory Committee Tuesday, August 6, 2002, 10:00 a.m.
House Room D, General Assembly Building Richmond, Virginia
The Privacy Advisory Committee, charged with establishing privacy principles to serve as a guideline for legislative proposals, met on August 6, 2002.
During this meeting, the Committee reviewed bills that the House Committee on Science and Technology carried over from the 2002 Session and referred to the Joint Commission on Technology and Science (JCOTS).
Unsolicited Facsimile Transmissions House Bill No. 1363/Senate Bill No. 612
Delegate Nutter and Congressman Goodlatte presented House Bill No. 1363, a bill that makes the unsolicited transmission of advertising materials by facsimile a prohibited practice under the Consumer Protection Act.
The bill eliminates the requirement that the unsolicited facsimile be advertising goods or services for sale or lease.
The State Corporation Commission would be empowered to block access to any telephone number used in connection with such transmissions.
Enforcement provisions under the Consumer Protection Act (i) permit the Attorney General to issue civil investigative demands and assurances of voluntary compliance, (ii) create an individual action for damages, and (iii) permit aggrieved parties or the Attorney General to seek injunctive relief to prevent further violations.
Senate Bill No. 612 is similar, but it does not contain the provision involving the State Corporation Commission.
Unsolicited facsimile transmissions shift the costs to the recipient by enabling advertisers to use their phone lines, paper, ink, and equipment.
Some of these transmissions are even misleading.
Congressman Goodlatte gave an example of a fax that gave the appearance of a poll with a toll-free number.
In reality, people called a "pay-per-call service" and were charged substantial rates.
The offending company moved to Canada to escape U.S. jurisdiction.
They explained that the current statute lacks the authority for the Commonwealth to block access from the source of these faxes or to stop payments to these sources.
In addition, many cases are too small are for people to fight individually.
This statute gives the Commonwealth the ability to step in and help consumers with all of the enforcement mechanisms of the Consumer Protection Act.
The Committee raised a number of questions about provisions in the bill, including the definition of unsolicited facsimile and the perceived lack of due process.
Other questions concerned the jurisdiction of the State Corporation Commission over interstate telephone calls.
The Committee voted not to recommend the bill at this time with the possibility of discussing it at a later date after its concerns were addressed.
Unsolicited Commercial Electronic Mail House Bill No. 533/Senate Bill No. 567
With the patrons unavailable, Mitchell Goldstein, JCOTS Director, presented House Bill No. 1363 and Senate Bill No. 567 to the Committee.
The bills basically require all commercial electronic mail (e-mail) to have a valid, working e-mail address that enables recipients to opt-out of more solicitations and a truthful subject line.
The bills do not prohibit sending unsolicited e-mail, obscene materials (§ 18.2-372 et seq. of the Code of Virginia prohibit it) or e-mail containing false or forged transmission information (§ 18.2-152.4 of the Computer Crimes Act prohibits it and § 18.2-152.12 offers civil relief).
Specifically, they prohibit sending commercial e-mail to a person if it uses a third party's domain name without permission, contains false or misleading information in the subject line or if the person indicates that he does not wish to receive e-mail from the sender.
The bills require the sender to identify the message as an advertisement or solicitation; provide notice of the right to decline to receive further e-mail messages from the sender, a valid physical address and a valid return e-mail address for receiving requests to not receive further e-mail messages from the sender.
They allow interactive service providers to block e-mail sent in violation of its provisions and provide immunity from liability for such actions taken in good faith.
An injured person can sue for actual damages or the lesser of $10 for each e-mail message or $25,000 per day.
However, the injured person shall not have a cause of action against a provider that merely transmits the e-mail message.
The Attorney General, an attorney for the Commonwealth or an attorney for a locality may bring an action to enforce its provisions.
These damages provisions are similar to the civil damages available for violations of the Computer Crimes Act.
Several members of the Committee were concerned that this bill would punish companies that send e-mail in situations where consumers did not realize that they opted in to receive it, where they had a prior relationship with the company, or where the consumer opted out of all e-mail except specific notices (e.g., warranty-related information).
Members pointed out that market mechanisms are currently available to combat unsolicited e-mail (spam).
For example, software available from ISPs and third parties can filter out e-mail from unfamiliar senders or enable consumers to mark e-mail as spam, which will automatically forward all e-mail from that sender to a separate folder and notify other users.
Trade associations like the Direct Marketing Association have developed mandatory rules regarding spam that its members must follow.
Companies, such as TRUSTe and IronPort Systems, have developed spam seals of approval.
IronPort Systems' seal requires companies to post a cash bond against which recipients could charge a small fee if they were improperly targeted with e-mail.
One company even enables consumers to vote on which senders should be treated as spammers.
The Federal Trade Commission (FTC) and other law enforcement agencies tested whether "remove me" or "unsubscribe" options in spam were being honored.
The agencies discovered that the vast majority of addresses to which they sent the requests were invalid.
Most of the "remove me" requests did not get through.
The FTC has sent more than 75 letters warning spammers that using deceptive "removal" claims in unsolicited e-mail is a deceptive trade practice and is illegal (FTC Act § 5).
The Committee delayed making a recommendation until the patrons were given an opportunity to address the Committee at a later date.
Expectation of Privacy in Electronic Communications House Bill No. 28
With the patron unavailable, Mr. Goldstein presented House Bill No. 28 to the Committee.
This bill prohibits the Department of Human Resource Management (DHRM) from enforcing any policy that has the effect of denying an expectation of privacy in electronic communications to students, faculty and professional staff of those public institutions of higher education in the Commonwealth that have previously adopted acceptable use of computing policies approved by the State Council of Higher Education of Virginia (SCHEV).
The bill tasks SCHEV with the duty, responsibility and authority to review these acceptable use of computing policies to determine whether to approve them.
Under current case law, no one has an expectation of privacy when using systems owned by their employer, including the state and universities, unless they are given an expectation of privacy, either by the employer or by law.
DHRM's policy attempted to reduce this to writing.
Other laws may still offer privacy rights.
Not wanting to develop different policies for every group, the Committee decided not to recommend this bill.
However, it will discuss the issue generally in future meetings.
Privacy Advisory Committee Monday, September 23, 2002, 1:00 p.m. House Room D, General Assembly Building Richmond, Virginia
The Privacy Advisory Committee held its second meeting on September 23, 2002.
During this meeting, the Committee completed its review of House Bill 533 (2002) and Senate Bill 567 (2002) regarding commercial electronic mail and began studying workplace privacy.
Unsolicited Commercial Electronic Mail House Bill 533/Senate Bill 567
Delegate Devolites informed the Committee that she and others decided not to pursue HB 533 in favor of a proposal that would expand the Computer Crimes Act to include criminal penalties for pornographic e-mail.
While the problems still exist, she explained that the most complaints come from constituents who receive unsolicited pornographic e-mail.
The problem with civil penalties is that companies plan for them as a cost of doing business.
Because they have little effect and much controversy, a targeted approach like this should offer at least some relief.
Senator Byrne reminded the Committee that spam is "Internet pollution."
According to one study, unsolicited e-mail ("spam") accounts for 25 percent of all electronic mail today, with projections that it will increase to 40 percent by 2007.
For people who pay a flat fee for access to their e-mail, spam is a nuisance and wastes time.
However, users of wireless devices pay by the minute and must pay for spam.
With limits on other forms of communication, like telephones, Senator Byrne argued that spam should be put on equal footing.
One Committee member was concerned that the 10-day lead-time that companies have to act on a removal request.
He asked how the bill would deal with a situation where the company uses the time to sell their e-mail list or create a new company and start over.
Senator Byrne responded that this action would constitute conspiracy and also is prohibited under her bill.
Another Committee member cautioned that any law regulating spam would offer, at most, an illusion of protection.
While probably illegal, spammers could avoid detection by using false telephone numbers or addresses.
In the end, while doing little to stem the tide of spam, the bill could have severe unintended consequences to legitimate businesses.
After the discussion, the Committee agreed with Delegate Devolites's request and decided to make no recommendations regarding HB 533.
Failing to receive a second, the Committee did not consider a motion to recommend SB 567.
Instead, by a vote of 11 to 2, the Committee took the same action with SB 567.
While the issue was unresolved, the Committee had so many concerns with legislative solutions that it moved on to another privacy issue.
Workplace Privacy
Next, the Committee discussed a proposed bill on workplace privacy.
To find a privacy violation, courts must first determine if a person had an expectation of privacy and then evaluate whether it was reasonable.
If not, there can be no privacy violation.
However, whether an expectation of privacy in the workplace is reasonable depends on the circumstances of a given situation.
Therefore, the Committee's objective was to define the expectations of employers and employees in the workplace and develop an even-handed approach to govern the use of electronic devices to monitor employees' activities and communications.
Mitchell Goldstein, Director, JCOTS, presented the proposal.
The proposal addresses all types of electronic monitoring by every employer, including governments, of every employee.
An employer can only monitor its employees on the employer's premises and only if it provides adequate notice to the employee.
The employee is spared from and protected from the information gathered by covert monitoring and the employer, if it complies with the proposal, receives immunity from liability for privacy violations.
However, the employer is not required to provide notice if it has reasonable grounds to believe that employees are engaged in conduct that violates the law or the legal rights of the employer or the employer's employees, or creates a hostile workplace environment, and the monitoring will produce evidence of the misconduct.
The proposal also limits the employers' ability to disclose the information that they gather, except under certain circumstances.
Some members of the Committee expressed concern about the breadth of the proposal because it covers all forms of electronic monitoring for any purpose.
A proposal that the 2001 Privacy Advisory Committee discussed only applied to employers with less than 15 employees and applied to monitoring electronic communications (i.e., telephone, e-mail, Internet).
The Committee decided to postpone further discussion of this topic until it could review both proposals and the differences between the two.
Privacy Advisory Committee Thursday, November 7, 2002, 10:00 p.m. House Room D, General Assembly Building Richmond, Virginia
The Privacy Advisory Committee held its third meeting on November 7, 2002.
During this meeting, the Committee received a briefing on monitoring in a specific company and continued its review of a model workplace privacy bill.
The Motley Fool, Inc.
Lawrence Greenberg, Chief Legal Officer, The Motley Fool (the "Fool"), presented the committee with a practical outlook on electronic monitoring in the workplace.
Typically companies monitor their systems to maintain quality control, to protect intellectual property, to monitor productivity and for voyeurism.
Companies also monitor to protect their rights and the rights of their employees as well as for public safety reasons.
The ways to monitor include capturing keystrokes from the computer, clickstreams from Internet use, or screen shots; intercepting e-mail; scanning networks and e-mail archives; monitoring telephones; and using video cameras.
The Fool notifies its employees through the employee handbook, on the computer's startup screen, and through computer use and security policies that it conducts electronic monitoring.
The company reminds employees regularly at company meetings.
All employees receive notice of the policy and must sign consent forms.
Where possible, the company uses substitutes to monitoring, like scanning the system and deleting MP3 files to reduce the amount of information stored on its systems and using software and Web filters to block websites.
The Fool also created an open workplace, which affords its employees a lower expectation of privacy and enables everyone to see what is happening.
The company also provides training in proper office protocol.
The Fool's policy is that it has the right to monitor because it owns the equipment and the work.
Its policy recognizes that some personal use of this equipment is inevitable.
Mr. Greenberg alerted the Committee that while electronic monitoring is allowed, it does affect the workplace environment.
All electronic monitoring must be approved by the Chief Legal Officer and, where necessary, other named officials of the company.
The Fool's Security Group carries it out.
Mr. Greenberg questioned the need for legislation, arguing that its policies are just prudent business practice.
He reasoned that posters, similar to the ones required by the Department of Labor, notifying employees of monitoring policies may not be effective because there are already too many notices posted for employees to read.
He also asked whether it was necessary to create a private cause of action given the uncertainty of damages and how to prove them.
In addition, he warned that bad monitoring situations would end up in court regardless of the existence of a statute.
The laws, court-created and statutory, already exist; the important course of action now is education.
Model Workplace Privacy Bill
After the presentation, the Committee turned to discussing the model bill.
The Committee raised a number of issues like whether smaller companies should be exempted and whether damages were appropriate.
The Committee also grappled with whether it should limit which officials could conduct the monitoring and under what circumstances should they be allowed to disclose the information that they gathered.
The Privacy Advisory Committee held its second meeting on September 23, 2002.
During this meeting, the Committee completed its review of House Bill 533 (2002) and Senate Bill 567 (2002) regarding commercial electronic mail and began studying workplace privacy.
PRIVACY IN THE WORKPLACE (As Presented to the Joint Commission on Technology and Science on December 10, 2002)
Section 1.
Definitions
(a) "Electronic Monitoring" means the collection, storage or analysis of information concerning employee activities or communications by any means other than direct observation, including the use of a computer, telephone, wire, radio, camera, electromagnetic, photoelectronic or photo-optical system, but not including the collection of information (i) for security purposes in common areas of the employer's premises which are held out for use by the public, or (ii) which is prohibited under state or federal law.
(b) "Employee" has the same meaning as specified in § 40.1-2.
(c) "Employer" has the same meaning as specified in § 40.1-2 and includes a state agency, statewide system, or political subdivision, but for the purposes of this Act shall include only those persons or organizations with ten or more full-time employees.
Section 2.
Monitoring Restrictions; Use Limitations; Disclosure
(a) An employer may use electronic monitoring to collect any information so long as the information is collected at the employer's premises.
However,
(i) No employer shall engage in electronic monitoring of an employee unless the employer complies with the requirements of section.
The employer shall not be liable to the employee for relief as provided in this statute if the employer has provided the employee notice meeting the requirements of section 3.
(ii) No employer shall engage in audio or visual monitoring of an employee in toilet areas, changing facilities, shower facilities, or other similar private areas, unless agreed to by all interested parties or such monitoring is subject to the exemptions provided in section 3(d).
(b) Information concerning employees that is collected through electronic monitoring may be disclosed only (i) with the prior written consent of the employee; (ii) to officers, employees, or authorized agents of the employer who have a legitimate need for the information in performance of their duties; (iii) to appropriate law enforcement agencies; (iv) as required by other state or federal laws; or (v) to protect the legal rights of the employer or of the employer's employees.
Section 3.
General Notice
(a) An employer who intends to engage in electronic monitoring of its employees shall prepare and post for the review by all employees, at a location accessible to all employees, the employer's workplace privacy and electronic monitoring policies and practices.
The employer must provide a means for the employee to attest to the fact that the employee has read and understands the policy.
(b) The notice must include disclosure of the employer's policies with respect to non-business use of employer-owned or controlled equipment.
At a minimum, the notice must describe (i) the forms of communication or computer usage that will be monitored, (ii) the means by which such monitoring will be accomplished, (iii) the frequency of such monitoring, and (iv) how information will obtained by such monitoring will be stored, used or disclosed.
(c) Before implementing a material change in an electronic monitoring practice described in this act, an employer shall provide notice meeting the requirements of this section to all employees of the employer who are subject to electronic monitoring as a result of the change.
(d) Exception: Where an employer has reasonable grounds to believe that a particular employee of the employer is engaged in conduct which violates the law, the legal rights of the employer or the employer's employees, or creates a hostile workplace environment, and that electronic monitoring will produce evidence of this misconduct, the employer may conduct monitoring without giving notice.
Section 4.
Remedies
(a) An employee has standing to bring an action under this section for injunctive relief requesting the court to enjoin an employer that commits or proposes to commit an act in violation of this statute.
(b) No action may be brought under this section unless such action is begun within 2 years from the date of the act complained of or within one year from the date such act is discovered or by the exercise of due diligence reasonably should have been discovered, whichever is later.
Section 5.
Waiver of Rights
The rights provided by this act may not be waived by contract or otherwise, unless such waiver is part of a written settlement to a pending action or complaint.
© 2003 JCOTS | Privacy Statement | Contact JCOTS | Site Map
