W inter 2001 Wecelebratesmoved in grown! have new space and KCW Historic Downtown Frankfor t After over 20 years, the Kentucky Commission on Women has moved.
Our new location at 404 Ann St. in Historic Downtown Frankfort will provide a new visibility for the Commission.
Our previous office on Shelby Street served us well since June of 1979, and we will miss it--but quite frankly we have outgrown it! We are now in the heart of the Frankfort community, across from the new History Center--not only will Frankfort residents get to know us, but so will the thousands of Kentuckians who visit their state capitol every year! Our new location provides the Kentucky Commission on Women with needed space as we develop upcoming projects and partnerships.
In the Ann St. location, all of our offices are on one floor and for the first time in our history we will be fully wheelchair accessible.
We have a comfortable conference room and convenient off-street parking, as well as offices for interns and our new Office Manager, Donna Lewis.
Next time you're in town, stop in for a visit and see our new facilities!
the Kentucky Commission on Small Business Advocacy.
Donna comes to us from the Office of the State Budget Director where she was Executive Assistant to Dr. James Ramsey, State Budget Director.
Prior to returning to state government Donna spent six years in the private sector as Vice President of Sellers Expositions, a Louisville-based tradeshow production company.
Donna is a Frankfort native.
She attended the University of Louisville where she was the recipient of the first School of Business Management Alumni Scholarship.
Donna graduated with a B.A. in Business Management in 1997.
Donna brings a wealth of experience in state government and small business management to both Commissions.
Please take time to introduce yourself to her when you call or stop by the office.
Kentucky Office of Women's Physical and Mental Health Appoints New Director Gwendolyn Mayes has been appointed Executive Director of the new Office of Women's Physical and Mental Health by Jimmy D. Helton, Secretary of the Cabinet for Health Services.
Mayes, appointed October first, was selected over a large field of candidates because of her experience in clinical care, health policy, and health administration.
"We are very excited that Gwen Mayes is joining the Cabinet for Health Services to head up the new Office of Women's Physical and Mental Health," Helton said.
"She brings exceptional skills, talents and experience to the job,
and I am confident that she will make valuable contributions in positively impacting the health status of Kentucky women."
Mayes graduated from the University of Maryland School of Law in May and has a Masters degree in Medical Science from Emory University.
She began her career as a respiratory therapist.
She has been a physician assistant, a coordinator of organ transplants, Special Assistant to the director of the federal Division of Organ Transplantation in the Department of Health and Human Services, and a public health analyst in that department.
Her latest Federal position was Chief of the Operations and Analysis Branch, Division of Transplantation, Department of Health and Human Services.
During her years at the Department of Health and Human Services, Mayes received several citations and awards.
"I see this position as a very rewarding opportunity to do something beneficial and helpful for the women of Kentucky," said Mayes.
"It is important to increase awareness of the special needs women have at different ages throughout their lives," she said.
Visit their website at http://chs.state.ky.us/womenshealth/
The Kentucky Commission on Women welcomes all new and returning Kentucky legislators.
Inside this issue: * Executive Order calling for Gender Equity on Boards and Commissions * Governor Patton appoints AfricanAmerican woman to judgeship * Victim Protection Program * Status of Women in Kentucky update * Upcoming Events * Our Legacy, Our Future update
KCW staff in front of their new office at 404 Ann St. From left, Donna G. Lewis, Nicole Morgan, Betsy Nowland-Curry, Executive Director, and Ann Ferrell.
KCW welcomes new staff Please join us in welcoming Donna G. Lewis as Office Manager for the Kentucky Commission on Women and
Governor Patton Signs Gender Equity Executive Order
Governor Paul Patton at the signing of his Executive Order creating Gender Equity on Boards and Commissions.
Joining him were KCW chair woman Hannah Baird, KCW board members, staff, Rep. Mary Lou Marzian and Rep. Ruth Ann Palumbo.
Unfortunately, the Senate State and Local Government Committee refused to call up the bill and the bill died in the Senate without even being heard in Committee.
In reality, the bill was a permissive piece of legislation allowing (not requiring) the Governor the ability to appoint an individual of the opposite gender to obtain gender equity on any board or commission.
The bill contains the same nonjudgmental language as a current law allowing the Governor to appoint a minority if the list of nominees is disproportionate to the state population.
The signing of this Executive Order by Governor Patton sends a strong message to the Kentucky Legislature of the importance of the passage of a Gender Equity Bill in Kentucky to ensure the inclusion of gender equity in future administrations.
G OVERNOR APPOINTS FIRST AFRICAN-AMERICAN WOMAN TO CIRCUIT JUDGESHIP Continuing his record of appointing more women and minorities to positions on state boards, commissions, and judgeships than any governor before him, Governor Paul Patton created another first in October 2000 when he appointed the Honorable Denise Clayton to the Office of Circuit Judge for the 30th Judicial Circuit, Division 5.
Judge Clayton became the first AfricanAmerican woman to hold the position of Circuit Judge in Kentucky when she began presiding on November 2, 2000.
Clayton is a Louisville native and 1976 graduate of the University of Louisville Law School who served as a Jefferson Family Court Judge and Jefferson District Court Judge prior to her appointment.
Her past experience also includes work with the Legal Aid Society of Louisville, Neal 
Her honors include the Distinguished Alumni Award, University of Louisville Law School, 1997, and appointments to the Mayor's Task Force on Racial Relationships, the Jefferson County Commission on Domestic Violence, and the Governor's Criminal Justice Response Team.
Regarding this appointment,
Governor Patton said, "I'm proud to name the Honorable Denise Clayton to this important appointment.
Throughout her distinguished service to our justice system she has shown ability, a sense of fairness, and an exceptional aptitude that made her a clear choice for this position.
I am confident that she will serve the citizens of Jefferson County."
G OVERNOR ANNOUNCES VICTIM PROTECTION PROGRAM AT FIRST MEETING OF GOVERNOR'S COUNCIL ON DOMESTIC VIOLENCE AND SEXUAL ASSAULT The First Lady and former Governor John Y. Brown, Jr., convened the inaugural meeting of the Governor's Council on Domestic Violence and Sexual Assault on October 13, 2000.
"No family victimized by violence and no woman harmed by rape should bear the additional burden of being deprived of justice.
This Council is a way to ensure that Kentucky's response to these crimes is the most effective it can be," Mrs. Patton said in opening the meeting.
Governor Patton attended the meeting to give a charge to the Council and to announce that Kentucky will be the first state in the country to implement an automated computer system to ensure that victims are notified when domestic violence offenders try to buy weapons.
"We believe when the court enters a protective order because danger exists and then the offender tries to buy a gun, this is a critical time of danger for a victim and a critical time for them to have this additional protection," Governor Patton said.
In the coming months as this computer program is implemented, when a Kentucky victim seeks a protective order and provides a phone number, she or he will be registered to receive notification if the offender tries to buy a gun.
Established by HB 427, the Governor's Council on Domestic Violence and Sexual Assault is made up of the First Lady and Former Governor Brown as well as 37 members representing criminal justice, victim advocacy, health and mental health providers and community members, and the Kentucky Commission on Women.
On September 27, 2000, in Covington, Governor Paul Patton signed into effect an historic Executive Order that calls for Gender Equity on all administrative boards and commissions of the Commonwealth.
This should come as no surprise to anyone familiar with Governor Patton's record regarding women's issues.
From his first days in office, Governor Patton and First Lady Judi Patton have distinguished themselves as champions for a wide range of issues facing Kentucky women.
With regard to the appointments, the Governor's record is unprecedented! Governor Patton has increased gender participation of women on boards from the previous high of 31% during the previous administration to a current high of 45%, and the number of appointments of women to judicial posts to 41% from a previous high of 17%.
In fact, Governor Patton appointed more women to judicial posts in his first four years in office than all the previous governors combined.
So, with a record this impressive why did the Governor see a need for an Executive Order? Because during the 2000 Legislative Session there was a failed attempt to pass into law a Gender Equity Bill, led by Rep. Mary Lou Marzian.
Every female member of the House of Representatives, Republican and Democrat, cosponsored this bill.
The bill passed the House by a 93-1 vote.
Update: The Status of Women in Kentucky In November 2000 the Institute for Women's Policy Research (IWPR) released The Status of Women in the States 2000, part of an ongoing research project to establish baseline measures of the status of women in all 50 states.
By comparing Kentucky's ranking in 1998 and 2000, we can identify those areas in which work is needed to improve the lives of women in KY, such as the areas of political participation and economic autonomy, where Kentucky ranks near or at the bottom.
According to the IWPR, "women in Kentucky and the United States as a whole are seeing important changes in their lives.
. .
However, they by no means enjoy equality with men, and they still lack many of the legal guarantees that would allow them to achieve that equality."
INDICATOR Composite Political Participation Index Women's Voter Registration, 1992-1996 Women's Voter Turnout, 1992-1996 Women in Elected Office Composite Index, 2000 Women's Institutional Resources, 2000 Composite Employment and Earnings Index Women's Median Annual Earnings, 1997 Ratio of Women's to Men's Earnings, 1997 Women's Labor Force Participation, 1998 Women in Managerial and Professional Occupations, 1998 Composite Economic Autonomy Index Educational Attainment: Percent of Women with Four or More Years of College, 1990 Women's Business Ownership, 1992 Percent of Women Above the Poverty Level, 1997 Composite Reproductive Rights Index 49 48 41 29 49 (1990) 48 (1992) 45 (1995) 41 NATIONAL RANK 2000 NATIONAL RANK 1998 50 35 41 49 31 38 33 21 47 28 48 46 43 (1992-94) 33 (1992-96) 49 (1998) 21 (1998) 44 31 (1995) 33 (1995) 42 (1995) 44 (1995) 48 38 (1994-95)
Percent w/ Health Insurance Among Nonelderly Women, 1997 2 9
These rankings are of a possible 51, including the 50 states and the District of Columbia, except for the Political Participation indicators, which do not include the District of Columbia.
Upcoming Events Please check our new and improved on-line events calendar at http://women.state.ky.us/.
Check it frequently for events in your area and links to information about issues in this Faces 
If your organization is planning an event of interest to Kentucky women, please let us know so that we can add it to our calendar! February 8, Launching Women Lobbyists, Frankfort The Kentucky Commission on Women will be sponsoring Launching Women Lobbyists to educate women on the legislative process in Kentucky and encourage women to become active participants.
For more information, contact Nicole Morgan at (502) 564-6643 or nicole.morgan@mail.state.ky.us.
February 12, The Vagina Monologues , Singletary Center for the Arts, Lexington, 7PM (In Celebration of International V-Day, February 14) Eve Ensler gives voice to a chorus of lusty, outrageous, brave and thoroughly human stories.
This hilarious, groundbreaking play has rocked audiences around the world.
Call the Singletary Center box office for tickets at: (859)257-4929.
Proceeds to benefit the Bluegrass Rape Crisis Center and Actor's Guild of Lexington.
February 28, Violence Against Women: A Public Health Concern, Physical and Mental Health Consequences, Holiday Inn Hurstbourne, Louisville, 9:00 a.m. - 4:00 p.m This conference is intended for those working or interested in public health, mental health, law enforcement, social work, and domestic and sexual violence advocacy.
To request a brochure and registration form contact Emory Regional Training Center, 404/523-1996, ext. 108.
March 2, Unveiling of the 2001 additions to the Kentucky Women Remembered Exhibit, 1:30pm et, Capitol Rotunda, Frankfort Governor Paul Patton and First Lady Judi Patton, joined by KCW board members will unveil the 2001 additions to the Kentucky Women Remembered Exhibit.
March 3, Bluegrass Women's Political Caucus Seminar, 9am-3pm, Holiday Inn, Lexington The seminar will focus on preparing for elective and appointed offices.
March 8, International Women's Day This Day has been celebrated for nearly a century, and provides a time for women around the world to celebrate, on the same day, our common struggle for equality.
For information about the Global Women's Strike taking place on this day, visit http://womenstrike8m.server101.com/
March 23, A Gathering of Women, Madison County Extension Office The goal of this one-day event, A Gathering of Women, is to improve leadership skills of women in the Commonwealth.
For more information or registration contact Nicole Morgan at (502) 564-6643 or nicole.morgan@mail.state.ky.us.
March 22-24 , The Kentucky Women Writers Conference "Claiming Identity Through Writing," Carnegie Center for Literacy and Learning, Lexington This three-day writing conference will be filled with writing workshops, readings, performances, and panel discussions.
For more information call (606)254-4175, or e-mail: kywwc@hotmail.com.
March 22-24, 2001, The Tenth Annual Wilma E. Grote Symposium for the Advancement of Women, Morehead State University, Morehead This year's theme will be Kentucky Women in the Arts, with Keynote Speaker: Kentucky Writer Bobbie Ann Mason.
For more information, call (606) 783-2015, e-mail: s.eacker@morehead-st.edu, or visit http://www.morehead-st.edu/womensymposium/.
Tuesday, April 3, Pay Equity Day Each year, the National Committee on Pay Equity (NCPE) organizes the national observance of Equal Pay Day to raise awareness about unfair pay in America.
For more information, visit http://www.feminist.com/fairpay/epd.htm.
April 6, 7, 
For more information, phone Cathy Auxie at 1-866-633-6954, or e-mail at cathyauxier@aol.com.
Just in time for Women's History Month
Our Le gacy, Our Futur e education packet reaches over 1500 schools and libr aries The Kentucky Commission on Women, in partnership with the Kentucky Department of Education and Kentucky Educational Television and with the support of Governor Paul E. Patton and First Lady Judi Patton, sent over 1500 educational packets to all public schools and libraries around the state in October.
The purpose of this project is to raise awareness about the history of Kentucky women, particularly in the area of public service, in order to encourage young girls to take voting and involvement in public office seriously.
The video is available to for a fee of $10, including a poster and teacher's guide, while supplies last.
We are also making the video available as a fundraiser for non-profit Bookmark the KCW website, http://women.state.ky.us, for information and links of interest to Kentucky women!!! groups.
Contact Ann Ferrell for more information at ann.ferrell@mail.state.ky.us.
BULK RATE U.S. POSTAGE PAID PERMIT #1 LEX., KY
404 Ann Street Frankfort, KY 40601 502-564-6643
KCW Staff Betsy Nowland-Curry, Executive Director Ann Ferrell, Project Management Donna Lewis, Office Manager Nicole Morgan, Communication and Legislation
KCW BOARD MEMBERS First Lady Judi Patton Lt.Gov.
Steve Henry Hannah Baird, Chair Mary Ann Ashworth Nancy Ashley Carla Bass Miller Mary Edna Blackmon Sarah Blanken Cynthia Blevins Doll Elizabeth Brinson Daisy Bryant James Earnestine Christian Susan Coblin Judith Gambill Paul Gold Christine Harris Dot Heeg Judi Jennings Lois Kellogg Gerri Kinder Cindy Krumpelman Faye Liebermann Judi Miller Donna Peden Sara Sidebottom Rick Starks Barbara Thomas Lela Williams
