[top_photo.jpg] [top_vdgif.jpg]
Based on the values identified by the Stakeholder Advisory Committee, the Black Bear Technical Committee established specific objectives to help guide the successful attainment of each goal.
Preferred strategies clarify how each objective should be achieved.
Specific timeframes for objective completion were based on priorities recommended by the Stakeholder Advisory Committee, the Black Bear Technical Committee, and operational practicality.
Fulfillment of all the goals and objectives outlined in the Black Bear Management Plan will depend on adequate funding and allocation of additional resources to the bear program.
The guidance and objective priorities (Appendix V) found in the Black Bear Management Plan will direct bear program budget submissions, spending, and effort, but complete implementation ultimately will be contingent on other VDGIF program needs and priorities related to the Agency mission.
BEAR POPULATIONS AND HABITAT
Goal 1 - Population Viability:
Ensure the long-term viability of the northern Allegheny, southern Allegheny, northern Blue Ridge, southern Blue Ridge, southern Piedmont, and southeastern Tidewater black bear populations in Virginia through a comprehensive research, monitoring, management, education, and protection program.
The VDGIF mission of managing "wildlife...to maintain optimum populations..." depends on ensuring the viability and sustainability of suitable ecosystems across Virginia.
Although bear populations are expanding across the Commonwealth today (especially in the western parts of the state), the long-term population viability of bears in Virginia should continue to be guaranteed.
In simple terms, a minimally viable population is the smallest isolated number of individuals that are able to reproduce and maintain the population from one generation to another.
Approximating general physiographic province boundaries (or portions thereof), 8 broad regions where considered for population viability objectives (Figure 15).
Primarily based on human population levels and land use (both current conditions and anticipated future development), the northern Piedmont and northern Tidewater regions were deemed unsuitable areas for viable bear populations.
Minimum viability standards will be established in the remaining 6 regions of Virginia.
Biologically sound ecosystem management approaches should be the basis of maintaining viable bear populations.
Because ecosystems (and bears) do not recognize artificial administrative boundaries, coordinated monitoring and management approaches among Virginia's viability regions and neighboring states will be necessary.
Objectives: a.
To determine status of the northern Allegheny, southern Allegheny, northern Blue Ridge, southern Blue Ridge, southern Piedmont, and southeastern Tidewater black bear populations by 12/31/03.
The process of establishing population viability starts by specifically delineating the management units and describing the bear population status within each unit.
Information should be collected regarding population size, historical changes in populations, population trends, and demographic characteristics (birth rates, death rates) within each unit.
Because accurate estimates of these data are difficult and expensive to obtain across all areas, bear population status information will rely heavily on indices and other site-specific research results.
Accurate interpretation of these indices will hinge on a practical understanding of their relationships to population characteristics.
Strategy #1: Identify boundaries that define the geographic scale of the northern Allegheny, southern Allegheny, northern Blue Ridge, southern Blue Ridge, southern Piedmont, and southeastern Tidewater black bear populations
Strategy #2: Describe the status of the northern Allegheny, southern Allegheny, northern Blue Ridge, southern Blue Ridge, southern Piedmont, and southeastern Tidewater black bear populations in terms of population size, distribution, population trends, and demographic characteristics (e.g., birth rates, mortality rates).
Strategy #3: Because unbiased estimates of population size, distribution, population trends, and demographic characteristics will usually be unavailable, develop indices of these parameters from hunter harvests, field observations, nuisance complaints, and other field monitoring.
Strategy #4: Unhunted bear populations will require implementation of monitoring indices that are not based on harvests in some areas (e.g., sardine station surveys, archery deer hunter observations, nuisance trends).
Strategy #5: Assess the relationships between the population monitoring indices and the actual population size, distribution, population trends, and demographic characteristics.
Research may involve investigating the relationship between harvest and associated sustained yields.
Strategy #6: To help interpret variations in population monitoring indices, monitoring also will include monitoring additional environmental, habitat, and sociological factors (e.g., mast production, habitat and land-use changes, hunting effort).
Strategy #7: Recognizing the large-scale monitoring and management needs for black bears through the continued cooperation with regional bear management organizations such as the Southern Appalachian Bear Study Group and the Mid-Appalachian Bear Study Group.
b.
To establish minimum population and habitat criteria required for achievement of long-term viability of the northern Allegheny, southern Allegheny, northern Blue Ridge, southern Blue Ridge, southern Piedmont, and southeastern Tidewater black bear populations by 12/31/05.
Habitat and population requirements need to be established to ensure long-term population viability for black bears in Virginia.
The description of these area-specific thresholds should be based on the best information that is cost-effectively obtainable.
Because accurate estimates of population size and characteristics are difficult and expensive to obtain across all areas, these minimum criteria will be based heavily on indices of bear habitat and populations
Strategy #1: Use a combination of approaches (including literature review, expert opinion, site-specific information, and population/habitat modeling) to establish minimum viability criteria for the northern Allegheny, southern Allegheny, northern Blue Ridge, southern Blue Ridge, southern Piedmont, and southeastern Tidewater black bear populations.
Strategy #2: Conduct site-specific research to improve the assessments of minimum viability criteria for the northern Allegheny, southern Allegheny, northern Blue Ridge, southern Blue Ridge, southern Piedmont, and southeastern Tidewater black bear populations.
Strategy #3: Evaluate the relationship between the population monitoring indices and minimum viability criteria for the northern Allegheny, southern Allegheny, northern Blue Ridge, southern Blue Ridge, southern Piedmont, and southeastern Tidewater black bear populations.
c.
To determine the most important risk factors that may prevent attainment and/or maintenance of the long-term viability of the northern Allegheny, southern Allegheny, northern Blue Ridge, southern Blue Ridge, southern Piedmont, and southeastern Tidewater black bear populations by 12/31/04.
In the future, bears across Virginia may be exposed to factors that negatively affect population viability.
These potentially limiting risk factors may include changes in population demographics, genetics, environmental influences, human impacts, and habitat concerns.
Describing, evaluating, and prioritizing these area-specific risks will be essential to designing management programs that address population viability goals.
Strategy #1: For each of the northern Allegheny, southern Allegheny, northern Blue Ridge, southern Blue Ridge, southern Piedmont, and southeastern Tidewater black bear populations, evaluate risk factors that might prevent the attainment and/or maintenance of population viability.
Potential risk factors should consider population demographics (e.g., changes in births, deaths, and population growth), genetics (e.g., inbreeding concerns), environmental influences (e.g., disease, competitors, pollutants, natural catastrophes), human impacts (e.g., roads, urbanization, poaching, illegal trade), and habitat concerns (e.g., corridors, forest composition, roadless areas). d.
To implement management programs that achieve or maintain the long-term viability of the northern Allegheny, southern Allegheny, northern Blue Ridge, southern Blue Ridge, southern Piedmont, and southeastern Tidewater black bear populations by 12/31/06.
Population status (objective 1), viability requirements (objective 2), and risk assessments (objective 3) should determine the design and implementation of management programs for long-term viability.
Implementation might focus on education, coordination among management and resource organizations, habitat connectivity, and other identified limiting factors.
Management program effects should be monitored and modified as necessary.
Strategy #1: Programs should place priority on addressing the most important risk factors for the geographic bear populations that fail to meet minimum viability criteria.
Strategy #2: Programs should have an educational component that informs the public about population viability objectives and management approaches.
Strategy #3: Addressing the specific limiting factors in each viability region, use a combination of appropriate approaches (e.g., interagency coordination, regulations, education, habitat management, establishment of sanctuaries) to implement management programs.
Strategy #4: Through research and monitoring activities, determine the efficacy of implemented management programs to achieve or maintain the long-term viability of the northern Allegheny, southern Allegheny, northern Blue Ridge, southern Blue Ridge, southern Piedmont, and southeastern Tidewater black bear populations.
Strategy #5: Modify programs to improve efficacy in achieving and/or maintaining the long-term viability of the northern Allegheny, southern Allegheny, northern Blue Ridge, southern Blue Ridge, southern Piedmont, and southeastern Tidewater black bear populations.
Goal 2 - Desirable Population Levels:
Maintain black bear populations throughout Virginia at levels compatible with land use, property concerns, and recreational opportunities; i.e., at cultural carrying capacity.
The goal of maintaining or achieving long-term population viability in the northern Alleghenies, southern Alleghenies, northern Blue Ridge, southern Blue Ridge, southern Piedmont, and southeastern Tidewater should be of higher priority even when cultural carrying capacity is exceeded.
The VDGIF mission of managing "wildlife...to maintain optimum populations...to serve the needs of the Commonwealth" requires knowledge about public values for Virginia's black bears.
These public values are usually expressed in terms of cultural carrying capacity (CCC).
CCC is the maximum number of bears in an area that is acceptable to the human population.
The CCC is a function of the human tolerance to bears and the benefits people derive from bears.
It is different for each constituency, location, and point in time.
Development of bear population management objectives to meet the CCC are subjective and involve a combination of social, economic, political, and biological perspectives.
Bear populations should be managed to meet both population viability and CCC goals.
However, a viable population should be present somewhere in each of the following 6 units: northern Alleghenies, southern Alleghenies, northern Blue Ridge, southern Blue Ridge, southern Piedmont, and southeastern Tidewater.
Objectives: a.
To meet bear cultural carrying capacity population objectives that are consistent with population viability objectives in each zone by 12/31/10.
As of June 1, 2001, the specific cultural carrying capacity population objective for each zone in Virginia is:
[image002.gif]
Management of black bear populations to achieve CCC should be done over the smallest area that is practical.
Although it may be, in theory, desirable to manage black bears differently in every county (and in some cases within counties), wildlife managers must balance that desire with practical considerations based on black bear biology and resources available to manage bears.
After considering such factors as physiography, current black bear populations, land use patterns, human population densities and land ownership, the Department of Game and Inland Fisheries established 22 black bear management zones.
To achieve the CCC for bears, population objectives in each management zone should meet 1 of 3 practical options.
These options are to (1) increase the current bear population, (2) stabilize the bear population at the current level, or (3) decrease the current bear population.
These objective options are not necessarily related to the current population trends (which may already have an increasing, decreasing, or stable population growth).
For example a CCC objective for increasing bear populations in a zone might mean: (1) continuing the increase in a population that is already increasing, (2) promoting an increase in a population that has been stable, or (3) reversing a declining population trend to the point that it is increasing.
Population management objectives to achieve CCC in each zone were based on input from a cross-section of bear stakeholders.
Population management objectives were based on input received from various constituent surveys (e.g., all hunters, Virginia Bear Hunter Association, The Nature Conservancy, Virginia State Beekeepers Association), regional meetings attended by a wide variety of stakeholders, other public input (written and oral comments to the advertised plan), and the statewide Stakeholder Advisory Committee discussions.
By zone, the general rationale for the specific population objectives are: Zones 1, 2, 3, and 6 (Increase): o Bear populations in these heavily forested zones are relatively low compared to other areas of Virginia and can accommodate higher population levels.
o A significant proportion of the forested lands is in public ownership (USFS). o Significant restoration (trap 
o Human population, development, and agriculture are relatively limited.
o Additional non-hunting and hunting recreational demands in these zones may be realized with an increase in bear populations.
Zones 4 and 5 (Stabilize): o Bear populations in these heavily forested zones are already relatively high compared to other areas of Virginia - among the highest in the state.
o While human population and development are relatively limited, agriculture damage concerns have increased with the growing bear population.
o Non-hunting and hunting recreational demands in these zones may continue to be satisfactory with the current bear population.
Zones 8 and 9 (Stabilize): o Bear populations in these zones are already relatively high compared to other areas of Virginia - probably the highest in the state (especially in and around Shenandoah National Park). o While the human population is not large, the majority of agricultural bear damage in the state occurs in these zones.
o Non-hunting and hunting recreational demands in these zones may continue to be satisfactory with the current bear population.
Zones 7 and 11 (Stabilize): o Bear populations are currently relatively low compared to other areas of Virginia.
o Human population is moderate, agriculture (with row crops) may be particularly susceptible to bear damage, and developmental growth increase the likelihood of bear problems (e.g., urban, agricultural). o Stable bear populations at relatively low levels may be most compatible with existing and projected land use.
Zones 15 and 21 (Stabilize): o Only an occasional animal represents bear populations in these zones.
o Intense development and high human populations have already occurred in these zones.
o Human tolerance in these urban zones is near zero. o Only infrequent occurrences of bears in these urbanized zones can be compatible with the limited habitat availability and public tolerances.
Zones 10, 13, 14, and 17 (Stabilize): o Bear populations are currently very low (with only infrequent occurrences) compared to other areas of Virginia.
o Human population is moderate to high with the prospect for rapid future growth.
o No growth of the very low bear population may be most compatible with the current human population levels and projected development in these zones.
Zones 18 and 19 (Stabilize): o Bear populations are currently negligible.
o Human population is low to moderate with substantial agricultural and forested areas.
o For bears to populate these zones naturally, they would need to pass through zones where human development pressures are greatest.
o Until natural restoration prospects improve, no effort is recommended to increase bear populations in these zones.
Zones 12 and 16 (Increase): o Bear populations are currently relatively low compared to other areas of Virginia.
o Natural and cultivated forests provide sufficient habitat for larger bear populations.
o Human population, development, and agriculture are relatively limited.
o Increasing bear populations in these zones may provide a link between the mountains and the Great Dismal Swamp populations.
o Additional non-hunting and hunting recreational demands in these zones may be realized with an increase in bear populations.
Zone 20 (Stabilize): o Bear populations associated with the Great Dismal Swamp National Wildlife Refuge (GDSNWR) are currently moderate to high compared to other areas of Virginia.
o Human population is moderate to high and development around the GDSNWR is increasing.
o Significant agricultural damage occurs in the area with increasing urban/vehicle collision problems.
o Stabilizing bear populations will help curb the increasing human-bear problems while providing continued non-hunting and hunting recreation.
Zone 22 (Stabilize- remain unoccupied by bears): o Bear populations are currently non-existent on the unoccupied Virginia's Eastern Shore.
o Human population is low to moderate, but there is substantial agriculture.
o For bears to populate the Eastern Shore naturally, they would need to travel from the mainland in Maryland and travel down the Delmarva Peninsula.
o Until natural restoration prospects improve (which is unlikely), no effort is recommended to increase bear populations in this zone.
Appropriate population management options will be selected based on the CCC objectives and current population trends (Figure 10).
Hunting, where appropriate, will be the primary population control option for bears due to its efficacy, cost- effectiveness, tradition, and recreational value.
While regulated hunting is highly effective for controlling bear populations (e.g., stabilizing or decreasing), conservative hunting seasons also are compatible with increasing population management objectives.
As an example, Virginia's hunted bear populations have increased due to regulation changes that reduced harvest impacts.
Slow growth through natural increases will be the preferred option to increase bear populations.
Education and cooperation with large public landowners should be important strategies toward meeting CCC population management objectives.
Attainment of zone-wide CCC objectives will be based on population indices from across the entire zone.
This does not necessarily mean that the zone objective will be uniformly met in all areas of the zone.
For example, implementation of site-specific management options for unique damage management concerns (see Goal 8, Objective d) might result in a locally different population level/trend compared to the rest of the zone.
However, attainment of the zone-wide objective will still determine the general population management program.
Strategy #1: Where it is necessary to control or reduce bear population numbers, regulated hunting will be the primary population management option.
Strategy #2: Where hunting is inappropriate, other management options will be used to control bear populations (e.g., trapping and removal, euthanasia) and/or raise CCC (e.g., education, nuisance management).
Strategy #3: To foster an understanding of how to coexist with bears and foster acceptance of growing bear populations, public education should accompany/precede attainment of population growth objectives.
Strategy #4: Population growth objectives will be attained through a natural increase in bear populations.
Trap and transfer of bears for population enhancement should only be considered for mountainous areas of SW Virginia and with the endorsement of local officials.
Strategy #5: Cooperate with Shenandoah National Park and the Great Dismal Swamp National Wildlife Refuge to meet the CCC objectives of adjacent land ownerships through implementation of appropriate population management programs (e.g., habitat management, hunting, other options).
Strategy #6: Through research and monitoring activities, determine the efficacy of implemented management programs to achieve zone-specific CCC objectives for increasing, decreasing, or stabilizing bear populations.
Strategy #7: Where CCC objectives conflict with minimum population viability objectives, implement programs that raise CCC objectives for the public (e.g., educational programs, increase nuisance management assistance). b.
To determine the relationships between population viability and CCC by 12/31/09.
Minimum viable bear population levels may exceed CCC objectives, especially in areas with high human densities.
In these situations, long-term viability of bears may depend on recognizing potential human-bear problems.
Increased knowledge and better understanding of black bears could lead to increased public tolerance of bears (i.e., raise CCC nearer to the minimum viable population level).
Strategy #1: Conduct research that identifies how public tolerance (CCC) conflicts and interacts with bear population viability criteria.
Research considerations should include land use, human density and distribution, bear density and distribution, nuisance management responses, and level of public education.
Strategy #2: Research may involve field components to understand bear behavior in proximity to humans, assessment of public demands and satisfactions, and surveys of areas with frequent bear/human interactions.
c.
To determine updated CCC objectives in each zone by 12/31/10.
As bear populations, land use, human populations, and recreational values change, so will the public acceptance of bears.
The CCC may be constantly changing over time within any management zone.
Therefore, the CCC objectives need to be updated periodically to ensure that population management programs respond to changes in public demands for bears.
Strategy #1: Based on social, economic, political, and biological perspectives, develop methods to determine CCC in all zones.
Use a variety of public involvement techniques (e.g., focus groups, surveys, task forces, public meetings, local government coordination) to include input from all segments of Virginia's population.
Goal 3 - Habitat Conservation and Management:
Conserve black bear habitat in Virginia, consistent with bear population objectives and with emphasis on areas of special significance (e.g., areas with source populations and habitat linkages).
Conservation may consist of habitat management or protection.
Because habitat provides the essential requirements for life, availability of suitable habitat is key to managing black bears to meet specific population viability and CCC objectives.
Habitat management practices that affect habitat diversity, forest succession, land use, and habitat connectivity will have major influences on bear population levels and human-bear problems.
To the extent that habitat management promotes habitat diversity and productivity, bears should benefit.
However, management practices that limit diversity or productivity are generally considered detrimental to bears.
Objectives: a.
To ensure habitat requirements meet minimum population viability criteria (200,000 acres of connected forested areas or 80,000 acres of connected forested wetlands) in each of the 6 population areas and cultural carrying capacity objectives for black bear populations by 12/31/05.
Studies of viable black bear populations within the Southeast suggest that the minimum area needed to support a bear population is about 80,000 acres for forested wetlands or 200,000 acres for forested uplands.
Conservation of corridors and habitat linkages may be important for some bear populations where fragmentation is a concern (e.g., Great Dismal Swamp).
Monitoring the status of bear habitat and working with a diversity of land ownerships and organizations to manage habitats will be important to meeting population objectives.
Strategy #1: Modify minimum viability criteria as minimum habitat needs are refined.
Strategy #2: Determine where habitats fail to meet minimum population viability criteria and cultural carrying capacity objectives.
Strategy #3: Monitor changes in bear habitats (size and quality) for the northern Allegheny, southern Allegheny, northern Blue Ridge, southern Blue Ridge, southern Piedmont, and southeastern Tidewater geographic areas.
Monitoring habitat changes may include use of Landsat Imagery, aerial photography, existing GIS information, Continuous Forest Inventory data, forest stand information, and specific field data.
Strategy #4: Consistent with population viability priorities and CCC objectives, maintain and/or establish connectivity and corridors among forested habitats in all areas of Virginia (with special emphasis around the Dismal Swamp) through acquisitions, easements, municipal planning coordination, etc.
Strategy #5: Actively promote and implement habitat management practices on all lands (public 
Strategy #6: Support public land habitat management that manipulates vegetation to meet bear management objectives.
These lands include U.S. Forest Service, Virginia Department of Game 
Strategy #7: Work with governmental (e.g., county, state, federal) and non-governmental (e.g., The Nature Conservancy, National Wild Turkey Federation) organizations to preserve forest habitat integrity in areas associated with human population growth/development and in other areas where habitat minimums are not met.
Strategy #8: Within each viability region, evaluate the feasibility, costs, and benefits of establishing sanctuaries, especially in areas of Virginia with little public land. b. b.
To refine specific bear habitat quality and associated habitat needs (e.g., amount, composition, linkages, diversity) that meet minimum population viability criteria and cultural carrying capacity objectives for black bear populations by 12/31/06.
The estimated minimum area needed to support a bear population (about 80,000 acres for forested wetlands or 200,000 acres for forested uplands) is a generalization for the Southeast and only based on observational infomation.
These estimates may not be representative of habitat conditions across Virginia's diverse physiographic provinces.
Therefore, physiographic differences in habitat quality need to be recognized to refine the regional habitat requirements that achieve minimum population viability criteria and CCC objectives.
Strategy #1: Determine geographic differences in habitat across Virginia (related to BCC and minimum population size).
Strategy #2: Determine when habitat becomes a limiting factor in suburban areas.
Strategy #3: Determine impact of habitat changes (e.g., loss of corridors, expanding human population) on bear populations.
Are linkages needed? c.
To determine the relationships between population dynamics of bears in Virginia and the dynamics of suitable habitat by 12/31/09.
Beyond the minimum habitat requirements to meet population management objectives, habitat features will have important impacts on bear population dynamics and human-bear problems.
A better understanding of these habitat considerations (e.g., land ownership, corridor values, roads and other barriers, human density) on bear population dynamics will improve management capabilities to meet public demands.
Strategy #1: Determine the importance of source populations (in particular the public-land habitats in National Forests, Shenandoah National Park, Great Dismal Swamp National Wildlife Refuge) to viable bear populations and CCC objectives.
Strategy #2: Determine if habitat found within large public land ownerships (e.g., Shenandoah National Park, National Forests, and the Great Dismal Swamp National Wildlife Refuge) provides an adequate resources to support viable bear populations.
Strategy #3: Determine corridor characteristics (e.g., cover types, length, width) that facilitate bear movements among populations.
Strategy #4: Evaluate impact of barriers (e.g., roads, lack of corridors) to bear movements and habitat utilization.
BEAR-RELATED RECREATION Goal 4 - Hunting Seasons And Demands:
Provide a diversity of black bear hunting opportunities in Virginia as a management tool and recreational experience, while discouraging or prohibiting activities that prevent attainment of black bear population objectives.
Carefully managed hunting of black bears provides a variety of recreational experiences, maintains time-honored traditions, and is compatible with maintaining viable bear populations.
Popular hunting approaches involve seasons for archery equipment, firearms without dogs, firearms with dogs, and bear-dog training (a non-harvest season).
As a major source of black bear mortality, hunting can be a limiting factor for black bear populations.
Even so, regulated hunting may provide recreational benefits under all population management objectives (e.g., increase, stabilize, decrease).
The impacts of hunting on bear populations are controlled by manipulating the magnitude, sex composition, and age composition of the harvest through the regulation of season length, season timing, and legal methods of take.
Objectives: a.
Consistent with black bear population objectives, to maintain an annual average of at least 32,500 hunter-days for archery, 32,500 hunter-days for firearms hunters who do not use dogs, 60,000 hunter-days for hunters who do use dogs, and 40,000 hunter-days of bear-dog training through 12/31/10.
Following the downward trend of all hunting participation in Virginia, the number of bear hunters and hunting effort has declined since the 1970s.
Declining hunter participation is the result of a complex array of factors involving changes in societal values, demographics, economics, leisure time, and other recreational opportunities.
The effect that recreational hunting and bear management programs can have on this trend is unknown (i.e., sociological conditions may have the greatest influence on hunting trends).
Even so, the objective is to stop this decline and maintain the 1994-95 levels of bear hunter recreation as benchmarks for the future.
According to the 1994-95 hunter survey, the only recent information about user-specific bear hunting effort, bear hunters spent about 32,500 hunter-days for archery, 32,500 hunter-days for firearms hunters who do not use dogs, and 60,000 hunter-days for hunters who do use dogs.
Hunter-days are defined as the total sum of all days hunted by all bear hunters (i.e., 4 sportsmen hunting for 2 days each and 8 sportsmen hunting for 1 day generates 16 hunter-days of bear hunting effort).
No information is available for bear-dog training effort.
The objective also defines some minimum participation levels for the diverse approaches to hunting recreation.
Since 1995, archery hunters, gun hunters without dogs, and gun hunters with dogs have accounted for 17%, 44%, and 39% of the annual bear harvest, respectively.
Strategy #1: Monitor hunting effort in Virginia by developing and implementing accurate measures of effort by different black bear hunting methods.
Strategy #2: If the average annual number of hunter-days falls below desired levels, implement programs designed to overcome constraints and promote black bear hunting opportunities.
b. Consistent with black bear population objectives, to open new areas for additional recreational black bear hunting opportunities during the biennial regulation considerations.
Black bears in Virginia have expanded their range well beyond the areas that have been traditionally hunted.
This growing bear population provides new opportunities for hunting recreation that are consistent with all population objectives.
Bear populations may continue to increase as recreational hunting is carefully implemented.
Additional recreational hunting programs in parts of the state with expanding populations will generate more information on population status and may provide some necessary relief to growing nuisance concerns.
When population control eventually becomes necessary, established hunting programs will already be in place as a population management option.
Strategy #1: Establish population criteria (based on indices of population size, distribution, population trends, and demographic characteristics) for initiating bear hunting seasons that will be consistent with black bear population objectives.
Strategy #2: Ensure that hunting is not impacting the attainment of population objectives by monitoring the harvest and status of black bear populations (e.g., population size, distribution, population trends, demographic characteristics).
Strategy #3: Implement black bear monitoring systems, in counties currently closed to bear hunting, designed to collect population criteria required for initiating recreational hunting opportunities.
Strategy #4: Consistent with population management objectives, propose to open new bear hunting opportunities during the wildlife regulation process in eligible counties based on established population criteria.
c.
To determine black bear hunter satisfactions and constraints to participation in Virginia by 12/31/09.
Individuals hunt for many reasons (e.g., for companionship, being close to nature, to test their skills, for the challenge, to obtain meat, to work with dogs), but specific information on bear hunter satisfactions is limited, especially for Virginia.
A recent Virginia survey indicated that more than 20% of bear hunters were dissatisfied with their hunting experience.
Recreational benefits would be enhanced by a better understanding of hunter satisfactions and tailoring hunting opportunities to focus on those satisfactions.
A better understanding of constraints (e.g., access, free time, cost) could explain declines in hunter effort.
Surveys results would be used to design hunting programs that maximize recreational satisfactions, minimize constraints to hunting participation, and achieve participation objectives.
Strategy #1: Conduct a survey bear hunters regarding bear hunting satisfactions for recreational values.
Strategy #2: Survey bear hunters regarding constraints to bear hunting participation and enjoyment.
Potential constraints should include considerations for access on public and private land, season frameworks, interference with other hunters, and other sociological and economic factors.
Strategy #3: Evaluate landowner (public and private) constraints to allowing access to bear hunters on their properties.
Strategy #4: Based on survey results, implement programs that that maximize recreational satisfactions, minimize constraints to hunting participation, and achieve participation objectives.
Goal 5 - Ethics of Bear Hunting Methods:
Ensure that black bear hunting methods in Virginia, including chase and take, are fair and sportsmanlike.
Hunting of black bears has become a controversial issue.
Perhaps the most contentious issues involve public concerns about fair chase and the ethics of certain methods (e.g., the use of technology, hounds, archery equipment, high-powered rifles).
These issues are concerns for both hunters (non-bear hunters) and the non-hunting public alike.
The future of bear hunting will be affected significantly by public perception of bear hunters.
Therefore, guidelines and regulations of bear hunting should address concerns for ethics and fair chase.
Objectives: a.
To describe fair and sportsmanlike black bear hunting methods that also preserves the value of hunting as source of recreation and a population management tool by 12/31/03.
Based on a variety of input, fair and sportsmanlike hunting methods need to be clearly described.
Management that addresses fair and sportsmanlike hunting methods should not unnecessarily limit the value of regulated hunting as a source of recreation and a population management tool.
Strategy #1: Consider a variety of sources about the assessment of fair and sportsmanlike bear hunting methods.
Strategy #2: Use a variety of techniques (e.g. focus groups, surveys, task forces, public meetings) to balance fair and sportsmanlike values with the population management values associated with bear hunting.
Strategy #3: Develop standards that define specific criteria and guidelines for fair and sportsmanlike bear hunting.
b. Implement programs that ensure bear hunter compliance with fair and sportsmanlike behavior criteria and protect hunting activities that conform to these standards by 12/31/04.
Programs should be designed to educate bear hunters and concerned citizens about fair and sportsmanlike bear hunting standards.
Efforts should be made to ensure hunter compliance with these standards and to protect the hunting activities that conform to these standards.
Strategy #1: Using a variety of techniques (e.g., workshops, brochures, popular articles, videos) inform and educate bear hunters, other hunters, and the general public about fair and sportsmanlike bear hunting standards.
Strategy #2: Develop programs that encourage voluntary compliance by hunters to behave according to fair and sportsmanlike standards.
Programs may involve incentives through special recognition as "master" sportsmen and memberships with sportsmen groups.
Strategy #3: As necessary, make regulation and law changes to ensure the future of bear hunting in Virginia that follows fair and sportsmanlike methods.
Strategy #4: Enforce laws that govern bear hunting activities (e.g., trespass, bag limits, methods).
Strategy #5: Monitor hunter compliance with fair and sportsmanlike bear hunting standards using surveys and the incidence of law enforcement citations.
Goal 6 - Landowner and Citizen Conflicts with Bear Hunting:
Ensure that bear hunting activities are consistent with and respect the rights of private property owners and other Virginia citizens.
Under some circumstances, recreational bear hunting activities (especially those involving the use of dogs) may create conflicts with landowners, other hunters, and other outdoor recreationists.
Further, regulated hunting may not be acceptable near urban areas due to concerns for human safety.
The future of bear hunting for population management, damage control, and recreational benefits depends on its compatibility with Virginia's citizens.
Therefore, it is important that bear hunting activities be conducted in a manner that respects the values and concerns of landowners and other Virginia citizens.
Objectives: a.
To identify and describe bear hunting activities (e.g., when, where, type of hunting) that result in conflicts with landowners and other Virginia citizens by 12/31/04.
A thorough understanding of the bear hunting practices that infringe on the rights of others is an important first step toward resolving conflicts.
Surveys should focus on when, where, and the type of hunting that creates problems.
From this information, possible solutions may be identified.
Strategy #1: Survey landowners, outdoor recreationists, resource professionals (e.g., law enforcement officers, biologists), and other potentially affected citizens about negative aspects of bear hunting and bear hunter behaviors.
Strategy #2: Identify the bear hunting practices that create the greatest infringement on the rights of others.
Negative bear hunting practices should be based on the impact to landowners, outdoor recreationists, and other citizens.
Strategy #3: Identify potential solutions to areas of greatest conflict.
b. Implement programs to reduce conflicts between bear hunting activities and other Virginia citizens (especially landowners) by 25% by 12/31/06.
Programs should be designed to educate bear hunters and concerned citizens about conflict resolutions.
Potential solutions should consider both bear hunter recreation satisfactions and other citizen issues.
Solutions should foster communication among bear hunters and concerned citizens as well as proffer appropriate regulations.
A monitoring program for bear hunting conflicts will need to be developed.
Strategy #1: Using a variety of techniques (e.g., workshops, brochures, popular articles, videos) inform and educate bear hunters, landowners, and other affected citizens about solutions to the most significant conflicts (e.g., what causes conflicts, where they occur, how to avoid them).
Strategy #2: Foster communication about concerns and solutions between bear hunters, landowners, and other affected citizens through conflict resolution strategies (e.g., workshops, focus groups).
These strategies could be implemented at local, regional, and statewide levels.
Strategy #3: As necessary, make regulation changes and enforce laws to ensure bear hunting does not infringe on the rights of landowners, and other affected citizens.
Strategy #4: Monitor changes in bear hunter conflicts with landowners and other affected citizens through landowner/citizen surveys.
Goal 7 - Non-Hunting Recreation:
Provide opportunities for non-hunting recreation associated with black bears in Virginia with a focus on information and education designed to minimize negative human-bear interactions.
Bears capture human interest like few other wildlife species.
Wildlife watching activities (e.g., observing, feeding, photographing) provide recreational opportunities to Virginia citizens.
Over 2,600,000 people participated in some type of wildlife watching activity in Virginia during 1996.
Black bears are second only to eagles and hawks as the animals Virginians are most interested in taking a trip to see.
Visitors in the Great Smoky Mountains National Park wanted to see a bear more than any other wildlife species.
Non-hunting recreational opportunities to enjoy bears in their natural habitats, under conditions that foster education about bears, should be available to all of Virginia's citizens.
Recreational opportunities should not create negative human-bear situations (e.g., viewing of bears at garbage dumps).
Objectives: a.
To determine non-hunting demands and satisfactions for bear recreation by 12/31/09.
Non-hunting recreational demands for bears are poorly understood.
While the demand to view bear is high, satisfactory approaches to these viewing opportunities are unknown.
A better understanding of satisfactions and tailoring opportunities to focus on those satisfactions would enhance non-hunting recreational benefits.
Strategy #1: Survey Virginia citizens regarding non-hunting recreational satisfactions and demands.
Considered recreational demands should include watching opportunities, access to information and education, existence values, and photography.
Obtain further details about results from existing surveys.
For example, determine the type of bear watching opportunities that are preferred by the public.
Strategy #2: Evaluate constraints to participation in nonhunting recreation.
b. Provide non-hunting recreational opportunities for Virginia citizens by 12/31/10.
Programs should address the non-hunting recreational demands of Virginia's citizens.
These programs should minimize negative human-bear interactions while concentrating on bear recreation in natural habitats and educational messages.
Surveys to monitor changing levels of satisfactions and awareness about bears will need to be developed.
Strategy #1: Prioritize programs based on demands expressed by Virginia citizens.
Strategy #2: Develop and/or promote educational programs on black bear biology, management, and human-bear interactions in Virginia.
Educational approaches may involve coordination with other organizations, public dissemination of information through brochures, videotapes, slide programs, computer programs, web page devoted to black bears, and school programs consistent with the Standards Of Learning.
Strategy #3: Identify areas for photographic and bear watching opportunities where people can enjoy bears in their natural habitats.
These opportunities should focus on safety and maintaining wild bear behaviors.
Programs might focus on information about where to find bears, identification of bear sign, and bear behavior.
Strategy #4: Utilize surveys to monitor changing levels of nonhunting recreation satisfactions, awareness about black bears, and impact of nonhunting recreational programs.
c.
To determine the effectiveness of exhibition permit holders as a source of bear-related recreation and public education tool for black bears by 12/31/10.
Numerous exhibition permit holders throughout Virginia (from roadside zoos to large zoological parks) have captive bears, ostensibly to promote public education about bears.
These facilities probably vary in their success at providing "opportunities for non-hunting recreation ... with a focus on information and education".
An understanding of the effectiveness of these facilities will help promote their mission and VDGIF permit considerations.
Strategy #1: Conduct research on the effectiveness of exhibition permits with respect to the quality of education and recreation provided by different exhibition settings.
Strategy #2: Effect regulation changes to ensure exhibition permit holders promote a high quality recreational and educational experience.
HUMAN-BEAR PROBLEMS
Goal 8 - Human-Bear Problems:
Promote human safety and protect personal income and property in attaining black bear population and recreation objectives in Virginia.
Bear management goals are not limited to providing hunting and non-hunting recreation for Virginia's citizens.
Damage caused by black bears is diverse including destruction of beehives, killing of livestock, foraging at garbage dumps, destroying crops (sweet corn, fruit trees), feeding on grain at livestock feeders, damage to trees, and harassing campers.
In developed areas, problems often center on damage to wooden structures and bird feeders, scavenged garbage cans and pet food, automobile accidents, and concerns over simple public sightings.
With the combination of rural and urban environments in close proximity to bear habitat, any of these problems can occur almost anywhere in Virginia.
Human-bear problems in Virginia have increased with growing populations of both bears and humans.
In conjunction with objectives to increase populations, even more human-bear problems can be expected in the future.
Nuisance concerns need to be considered in conjunction with other population and recreation objectives.
Objectives: a.
To implement explicit and cost-effective response protocols that utilize both non-lethal and lethal options for managing nuisance bear complaints by 04/30/02.
Standard, but flexible, nuisance response protocols are necessary to clarify public and agency responsibilities for specific human-bear problems.
The public usually prefers non-lethal options for managing nuisance bears.
However, relocation of most nuisance bears has become an impractical management option with expanding bear populations throughout the state.
Not only is relocation a costly approach, citizens in other localities are not interested in somebody else's nuisance bears.
Therefore, nuisance management options generally should be restricted to managing bears in place (i.e., at the nuisance site).
Non-lethal options should be encouraged, but lethal solutions may be necessary as well.
Education should be an important component of human-bear problem management.
Strategy #1: Develop, revise and adopt cost-effective response protocols to address nuisance bear complaints.
Development should include input from affected individuals, municipalities, and government organizations.
Protocol should define circumstances for lethal and non-lethal management applications.
Strategy #2: Nuisance bears should be managed at the nuisance site.
Except to support circumstances where relocation of bears is a desirable management strategy for population enhancement, relocation of bears generally should not be used to manage nuisance situations.
However, relocation of bears should remain an option for some special circumstances (e.g., some urban problems).
Strategy #3: While non-lethal approaches are preferred (e.g., aversive conditioning, electric fencing, garbage management), both lethal and non-lethal options should be available for managing nuisance bear problems.
Lethal options may be necessary when non-lethal options are ineffective or impractical.
Strategy #4: Protocols should be flexible to allow affected individuals, landowners, and municipalities a range of choices in resolving nuisance situations.
Strategy #5: Protocols should provide explicit capture, treatment, and disposition guidelines for black bears that need to be handled.
Strategy #6: Communicate and educate the public, municipalities, and state agencies about these protocols.
Strategy #7: Protocols should identify and correct citizen actions that encourage nuisance bear problems (e.g., intentional feeding that habituates bears to people, poor garbage management). b.
To evaluate the effectiveness of different nuisance bear management options by 12/31/06.
The efficacy of the options to manage human-bear problems is poorly understood.
Only limited research has been conducted to evaluate the effectiveness of various nuisance management options under a variety of conditions.
Citizen satisfactions with nuisance response protocol outcomes will help assess the practical application of management options.
Strategy #1: Conduct specific research on the efficacy of different nuisance management options in different nuisance situations.
Strategy #2: Via surveys, monitor satisfactions and changes in satisfactions with protocol outcomes by affected individuals, landowners, and municipalities.
Strategy #3: Keep records on nuisance bear complaints, recommendations, and outcomes for analyses of methods.
Strategy #4: Communicate with other states for information about successful nuisance bear management procedures.
Strategy #5: Determine public satisfactions with methods used to manage damage concerns.
c.
To achieve a 25% reduction in bear damage by 12/31/08.
The significance of bear-related damage is related to the monetary value of losses and the public tolerance for these losses.
Bear damage has not been quantitatively documented in Virginia, but may be measured via specific damage assessments (e.g., field measurements, surveys) and the incidence of complaints.
A reduction in economic losses due to human-bear problems and/or an increase in the public tolerance for deleterious bear activities would result in fewer concerns about the damage inflicted by bears.
Public concerns about bear damage should be reduced primarily via educational and population management approaches.
Monitoring changes in nuisance activity (e.g., economic losses, public complaints) will require the development of reliable estimates of nuisance problems by type of complaint throughout Virginia.
Strategy #1: Develop and implement methods to determine bear damage (or indices of bear damage) by type of damage.
Strategy #2: Monitor and evaluate trends in annual bear damage by type.
Strategy #3: To prevent potential nuisance situations from occurring, develop educational materials and outreach programs designed to inform the general public, landowners, and local governments about how to prevent and minimize negative human-bear interactions.
Strategy #4: Use recreational hunting to reduce human-bear problems.
d.
To identify, develop, and implement site-specific management options for unique bear management units through 04/30/02.
To be as simple and as consistent as possible, bear hunting regulations are uniformly established over large areas.
While achieving population management objectives over a large area, area-wide hunting regulations sometimes may be too conservative, too liberal, or ineffective for some specific sites with unique management concerns.
These specific sites may still require additional management strategies.
Some of these unique situations may include human-bear problems in urban/suburban areas (e.g., Roanoke valley, Suffolk) and agricultural crops associated with large refuges (e.g., Shenandoah National Park, Great Dismal Swamp National Wildlife Refuge).
Additional management strategies may include special hunting, kill permit, compensation, and education programs.
To be successful, these unique management approaches will need additional proactive support (e.g., education, mediation assistance, endorsement) to mitigate other public concerns.
Strategy #1: Develop special hunting regulations or programs to address damage concerns for specific bear management concerns.
Strategy #2: Evaluate the feasibility and desirability of other options such as compensation programs, education, and kill permits that might be utilized for site-specific concerns.
Strategy #3: Actively support site-specific bear management options through educational programs, conflict resolution techniques, and coordination among affected parties (e.g., neighboring landowners, recreational users).
[sidebar_foot.jpg]
 2002 VDGIF.
Please view our privacy policy.
Contact dgifweb@dgif.state.va.us with any comments or questions.
