Frequently Asked Questions Learning about obesity: * What is obesity? * What causes obesity? * What are the symptoms of obesity? * Who is affected by obesity? * When should I see a doctor? Getting treatment: * How is obesity treated? * Will I need any medications? * Should I use medications? * Will I need surgery? * Are there other forms of treatment? Ongoing concerns: * What are the complications of obesity? * Can I prevent obesity? Living with obesity: * What can I do at home? * What increases your risk? What is obesity? Obesity is a long-term (chronic), complex disease in which having too much body fat (adipose tissue) increases your risk for developing other health problems.
Obesity generally is measured by body mass index (BMI).
A BMI of 30 or more is considered obese in adults.
If your BMI is between 25 and 30, you are overweight.
See the topic Healthy Weight for information on maintaining a healthy weight.
What causes obesity?
Obesity is a result of many factors.
Although it was once thought that a lack of will power--eating too much--and a lack of physical activity caused obesity, it is now recognized that family influence, genetics (including your basal metabolic rate, or BMR), and cultural and psychological factors all contribute to becoming obese.
To fit the medical definition of obesity, your extra weight must come from having too much body fat.
Not everyone with a BMI over 30 is obese.
For example, athletes may have a BMI over 30, but because their weight is due to muscle, not fat, they are not considered obese.
The main factor in obesity is an energy imbalance.
People gain weight when they take in more energy (measured in calories) from food than they use through their BMR and physical activity.
The excess energy is stored as fat.
Diet
If you eat more calories than you use, you will gain weight.
You do not have to eat a large number of extra calories to gain weight.
Eating an extra 30 to 40 calories per day (less than half a sandwich) can lead to a gain of nearly 5 lb (2.27 kg) in a year.
Lack of physical activity
Physical activity uses energy.
If you get too little physical activity for the amount of food you eat, you will gain weight.
Physical activity includes not only exercise--such as jogging, swimming, or aerobics--but also activities such as gardening, walking up stairs, and washing the car.
Genetics
The tendency to gain weight often runs in families.
Studies of adopted twins raised apart show that they tend to have the body mass index (BMI) of their biological parents (not their adoptive parents).
It is estimated that 25% to 70% of the difference in weight between individuals is due to heredity.
Genes could also influence behaviors such as food choices, eating, and physical activity, although little attention has been given to this aspect of the role of heredity in obesity.
However, it is important to remember that heredity only determines the tendency to become obese, and that factors such as your culture, your activity level, and your diet determine whether you develop obesity.
What are the symptoms of obesity? If you are obese, you are more likely to develop type 2 diabetes, high blood pressure, heart disease or stroke, high cholesterol, breathing problems, sleep apnea, cancer, gallstones, arthritis, blood vessel problems, skin infections and rashes, sex hormone problems (including a decreased ability to have children), gout, heartburn, gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD), liver problems, colon or kidney cancer, and endometrial cancer.
If you lose weight, your risk for these conditions is reduced.
Often overlooked are the psychological and cultural problems associated with being obese.
Stereotypes of obese people--such as that they are lazy--and the emphasis our society places on thinness may result in low self-esteem, a poor body image, depression, and eating disorders.
Stereotypes also may make it more difficult for an obese person to find a job or to progress in one.
Although a high BMI does indicate an overall greater risk of health problems, the distribution of body fat is also important.
If fat accumulates mostly around the abdomen (central obesity, sometimes called apple-shaped), you are more likely to develop heart disease, stroke, high blood pressure, and/or type 2 diabetes than people who are lean or people with fat around the hips (peripheral obesity, gynecoid or gluteofemoral obesity, or pear-shaped).
The apple shape is more common in men, while the pear shape is more common in women.
Who is affected by obesity?
Most health professionals say that obesity is an epidemic.
In the United States, 26% of the population are obese, and 61% are overweight or obese.
Obesity in the adult population has doubled since 1980.^1
Certain groups are affected more than others: * Among women, overweight and obesity are more prevalent in racial and ethnic minorities than in non-Hispanic white women.
* Among men, overweight and obesity are more prevalent in Mexican-Americans than in non-Hispanic whites or blacks.
* More non-Hispanic black women are overweight or obese than non-Hispanic black men.
* More non-Hispanic white men are overweight or obese than non-Hispanic white women.
* Women of lower socioeconomic status are approximately 50% more likely to be obese than those of higher socioeconomic status.
When to Call a Doctor
Call 911 immediately if you are obese and experience: * Chest pain.
* Signs of a stroke.
If you are obese and want to try losing weight or controlling your weight, call your doctor to discuss: * Why you are obese.
There are many factors involved, and identifying them will help you lose weight.
* Any medication, especially antidepressants, you may be using.
Medications may contribute to weight gain.
* Safe ways to lose or control weight.
* How much weight you should try to lose to benefit your health.
Often a loss of only a few pounds or kilograms can greatly reduce your risk of developing certain diseases.
Your doctor will take your medical and family history and do a physical examination.
He or she will use your BMI to determine whether you are obese.
Your doctor may measure your waist or determine your waist-to-hip ratio (WHR) to determine how excess fat is distributed on your body.
This helps determine your risk for other health problems.
If your weight or family history suggests you have an increased risk for developing health problems, your doctor may want to do more tests to check for those problems.
The most common tests are blood tests to check for type 2 diabetes, thyroid problems, and excess cholesterol or triglycerides (fats) in your blood.
How is obesity treated?
Because obesity is a chronic disease, it requires long-term management.
The focus is often on reducing the risk for developing health problems as much as on losing weight.
The U.S. National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute (NHLBI) recommends that treatment be based on the degree of obesity and overall health risk status.
If you are obese, you should try to initially lose about 10% of your current weight, at a rate of 1 lb (0.45 kg) to 2 lb (0.91 kg) per week using diet, physical activity, and self-monitoring.
Approved weight-loss medication may be used, and in extreme cases surgery is used to reduce the size of the stomach.
Treatment also covers the psychological and social components of obesity.
Stress management and counseling may be helpful.
Getting family support and creating community contacts help you deal with the stereotypes and other social issues that are associated with obesity.
Treatment Overview
Treatment is necessary for anyone who is obese (has a body mass index [BMI]
For these people, the U.S. National Heart, Lung, and Blood Institute (NHLBI) of the National Institutes of Health (NIH) recommends: * Losing 10% of their current weight.
* Losing 1 lb (0.45 kg) to 2 lb (0.91 kg) a week.
* After 6 months, reevaluating to determine whether they need to lose more weight.
Because you lose weight when you expend more energy (calories) than you take in, all weight-loss treatment plans include diet and physical activity.
It is also important to identify obstacles to weight loss and receive counseling for the psychological and social aspects related to obesity.
* Diet.
For most adults, a total calorie intake of 1,000 to 1,200 calories per day for women and 1,200 to 1,500 calories per day for men is recommended for weight loss.
This low-calorie diet should include reduced fat.
In some cases, a very low-calorie diet may be considered, but it generally is not recommended.
* Physical activity.
Physical activity increases the amount of energy you use.
Begin with moderate activity, 30 to 40 minutes a day, 3 to 5 days a week.
The long-term goal should be moderate activity, 30 minutes a day, every day.
See physical activity for weight loss.
* Identify obstacles to losing weight.
Identifying obstacles to losing weight helps you monitor your progress, identify triggers that may lead you to overeat, and identify and change irrational thoughts about eating.
* Psychological and social aspects.
Individual or group counseling is an important part of treatment if you have psychological and social problems that lead you to eat too much or exercise too little.
In addition, dieting or exercising with a support system of friends may lead to greater motivation and self-acceptance.
Treatment for any emotional illnesses, such as depression or anxiety disorder, or for an alcohol or drug problem or sexual or physical abuse can help you be more successful at weight loss.
Doctors recommend that any bone or joint (orthopedic) problem that limits your ability to exercise be treated before starting a weight-loss program.
These problems make it difficult to stay on a weight-loss program if you cannot get at least mild physical activity.
Medications
Weight-loss medications, either prescription or nonprescription, are sometimes used.
They should only be used along with a weight-loss diet and exercise.
Use of medication without lifestyle changes is unlikely to have long-term success.
Surgery
Surgery is rarely used to treat obesity.
Many doctors will consider it only for people who have not been able to lose weight with other treatments and who are at high risk for developing other health problems because of their weight.
If your BMI is more than 40 or is 35 or more and you have a serious medical problem that is made worse by your weight, surgery may be considered.
Medications
Most weight-loss medications for obesity work by making you feel less hungry (suppressing your appetite) or making you feel full sooner (satiety).
They generally are meant to be used together with diet and exercise; they do not allow you to eat without regard to calories.
Medication Choices
Sibutramine (Meridia) is a prescription medication that makes you feel full sooner and was once thought to be somewhat safer and more effective than medications that suppress appetite.
However, it is currently under investigation in Europe for causing side effects such as high blood pressure and a rapid heart rate, and death.
Orlistat (Xenical) is a prescription medication that prevents some of the fat calories you eat from being absorbed by your intestines.
It has no effect on weight if you eat meals that do not contain fat.
Phendimetrazine, mazindol, phentermine, and other prescription appetite suppressants are also available.
What to Think About
Sibutramine currently is under investigation in Europe and the U.S for causing side effects such as high blood pressure and a rapid heart rate, and death.
People talking sibutramine and orlistat had weight loss greater than that lost with a placebo only as long as they took the medicine.
Studies report that when medication is stopped, weight is usually regained.
Although current weight-loss medications appear to be safer than previous medications, neither their safety (and effectiveness) beyond two years nor their long-term effect on complications or death due to obesity has been established.
Side effects still occur.
Doctors are still deciding how best to use prescription weight-loss medications.
Some doctors have prescribed these medications without lifestyle changes, but most doctors now feel they work best when used along with dietary changes and exercise.
Nonprescription weight-loss products often contain ephedrine and caffeine, which may cause life-threatening heart problems such as increased heart rate and increased blood pressure.
Should I use medications to treat obesity? This information will help you understand your choices, whether you share in the decision-making process, or rely on your doctor's recommendation.
Key points
Many people seek medical help in dealing with obesity.
While medications often promote weight loss, they may have side effects and weight loss may temporary.
Consider the following when making your decision: * If you are losing weight, even as little as 0.5 lb (0.23 kg) a week, you may not get enough additional benefit from medication to outweigh the cost and side effects.
* You will likely gain weight back after you stop using medication.
* Weight-loss medications generally are used only if you have tried a weight management program that includes diet and exercise for at least 6 months and your body mass index (BMI) is 30 or more.
Talk to your doctor if your BMI is 27 to 30 and you have conditions (such as diabetes or sleep apnea) that are made worse by being overweight.
* If you are under severe stress, have an emotional illness such as anxiety or depression, or if you have an alcohol or drug problem, you need treatment for this condition before using medication.
If you don't treat it, it will make losing weight more difficult.
* It is not known whether it is safe to take any of these medications for longer than 2 years.
* Take medications that suppress your appetite, such as phentermine (Dipex or Fastin), mazindol (Mazanor or Sanorex), or diethylpropion hydrochloride (Tenuate).
* Take medications that make you feel full sooner, such as sibutramine (Meridia).
* Take medications that prevent fat from being absorbed, such as orlistat (Xenical).
* Not take medications to treat obesity.
The decision whether to take medication for obesity takes into account your personal feelings and the medical facts.
General reasons to take medications General reasons not to take medications * Medications generally help people lose weight for up to 1 year and possibly for 2 years.
* Increased self-esteem due to weight loss * Reduced risk for health conditions often seen with obesity
Are there other reasons you might want to use medications? * Losing as little as 0.5 lb (0.23 kg) a week means you may not get enough additional benefit from medication to outweigh the cost and side effects.
* Unknown whether it is safe to take any of these medications for longer than 2 years * Weight gain usually occurs after you stop using these medications, especially if you have not made any lifestyle changes.
* Expensive if insurance does not pay
Are there other reasons you might not want to use medications?
Medication Reasons to take medications for obesity Reasons not to take medications for obesity Appetite suppressants * Research on effectiveness shows 14.1 lb (6.4 kg) to 26.9 lb (12.2 kg) weight loss over 3 to 12 months.
* Research shows side effects of nervousness, irritability, sweating, nausea, headache, dry mouth, constipation, sleep problems.
* Not all studies say they are effective.
Sibutramine * Research on effectiveness shows 9.7 lb (4.4 kg) to 17.2 lb (7.8 kg) weight loss over 8 weeks to 1 year.
* Currently under investigation in Europe for dangerous side effects and death * Research shows side effects of increased blood pressure and heart rate, headache, dry mouth, constipation, and sleep problems.
Orlistat * Research on effectiveness shows orlistat blocks about 33% of fat from being absorbed and results in 13.4 lb (6.1 kg) weight loss over 1 to 2 years.
* Research shows side effects of oily spotting, flatulence, and urgent need to go to the bathroom; oily or fatty stools; increased number of bowel movements and inability to control bowel movements; potential loss of fat-soluble vitamins (may need to take vitamin supplement).
* If no fat in meals, no weight loss
Use this worksheet to help you make your decision.
After completing it, you should have a better idea of how you feel about taking medication for obesity.
Discuss the worksheet with your doctor.
Circle the answer that best applies to you.
I have a family history of heart disease, type 2 diabetes, or high blood pressure.
Yes No Unsure My body mass index (BMI) is 30 or more.
Yes No Unsure My BMI is 27 or more and I am at risk for a condition that my weight makes worse.
Yes No Unsure Medication that I'm currently taking does not interfere with medication for obesity.
Yes No Unsure I have the finances and/or insurance to pay for medication.
Yes No Unsure I don't mind taking medication.
Yes No Unsure I believe that medication can help me.
Yes No Unsure I don't worry about the side effects of weight-loss medication.
Yes No Unsure Diet and exercise are difficult for me.
Yes No Unsure
Surgery Surgery is rarely used to treat obesity.
Many doctors will consider it only for people who have not been able to lose weight with other treatments and who are at high risk for developing other health problems because of their weight.
The goal of surgery is to lose about 50% of excess body weight--the weight above what is considered a healthy weight for you.
This should reduce or eliminate the risk of diseases related to obesity, such as diabetes and high blood pressure.
It is important to remember that you may still be obese or overweight after the surgery.
Surgery can be considered if: * Your body mass index (BMI) is more than 40.
* Your BMI is 35 or more and you have a serious medical problem that is made worse by your weight.
* You have been obese for more than 5 years.
* You do not abuse alcohol.
* You do not have depression or another major psychiatric disorder.
* You are at least 18 years old.
There are two types of surgery, both done on the stomach and intestine, that may be used to treat obesity: restrictive operations (such as stomach stapling or adjustable gastric banding) and gastric bypass.
Other types of surgery (including intestinal bypass, jaw wiring, and liposuction) have been used to treat obesity.
None have been found to have long-term benefit in the treatment of obesity.
Surgery Choices
Restrictive operations (stomach stapling or gastric banding) Gastric bypass
What to Think About
A gastric bypass is performed more often than a restrictive operation.
This is likely because it provides better long-term weight loss.
Most people who have surgery to treat obesity quickly begin to lose weight.
Weight loss usually continues for about 2 years.
All surgeries have risk, and surgeries to treat obesity often have limited success.
It is important for you and your doctor to discuss your treatment options to decide what is best for your situation.
Are there other forms of treatment?
The keys to treating obesity are reducing the amount of calories you eat (eating habits) and increasing the amount of calories your body uses (physical activity).
Commercial weight-loss programs, such as Weight Watchers or LifeSteps, or self-help or support groups, such as Overeaters Anonymous, can help you lose weight.
However, talk with your health professional before beginning a weight-loss program.
Consider these tips for choosing a commercial weight-loss program and be aware of the advertising strategies of some programs and weight-loss products.
Identifying obstacles to losing weight helps you monitor your progress, identify triggers that may lead you to overeat, and identify and change irrational thoughts about eating.
What are the complications of obesity?
Being obese (and overweight) often begins in childhood; studies note that 30% of adult obesity begins at this time.
Without treatment, most people who are obese will either continue to slowly gain weight or remain at their current weight.
With treatment, most people who are obese will be able to lose some weight or stop gaining weight.
Most of those who lose weight do gain some back.
Medical conditions that may develop
If you are obese, you are more likely to develop type 2 diabetes, high blood pressure, heart disease or stroke, high cholesterol, breathing problems, sleep apnea, cancer, gallstones, arthritis, blood vessel problems, skin infections and rashes, sex hormone problems (including a decreased ability to have children), gout, heartburn, gastroesophageal reflux disease (GERD), liver problems, colon or kidney cancer, and endometrial cancer.
If you lose weight, your risk for these conditions is reduced.
More information on health problems related to obesity
Premature death
People who are obese are at risk for an early death.
* Compared to people with a healthy weight, people with a body mass index (BMI) over 30 have 50% to 100% increased risk of premature death from all causes.
* The risk of death rises with increasing weight gain.
* In the United States, about 300,000 deaths per year are attributed to obesity.
Emotional and social impacts
Being obese may lead to emotional problems.
Stereotypes of obese people--such that they are lazy--and the emphasis our society places on thinness may result in low self-esteem, a poor body image, depression, and eating disorders.
Stereotypes may make it more difficult for an obese person to find a job or to progress in one.
Prevention
Obesity can be prevented.
Even if obesity runs in your family, remember that it is the tendency to be obese, not actually becoming obese, that is inherited.
Most experts believe that obesity often begins during the childhood or teen years.
Developing healthy eating and exercise habits during these years may be the best way to prevent adult obesity for people who have a family history of excess weight.
The following are general prevention guidelines suitable for people of all ages.
* Match the amount of food (how many calories you eat) to your activity level (how many calories you use).
If you are uncertain how to do this, a registered dietitian can help.
Your doctor or local health department can help you find a dietitian.
* Avoid a high-fat diet.
A high-fat diet not only provides more calories but also may increase your risk of heart disease.
For more information on fat and heart disease, see the topic High Cholesterol.
* Develop healthy eating habits, avoid excessive snacking, and do not depend on food to make you feel good or to reward yourself.
* Get regular, moderate exercise.
* Ask your doctor or pharmacist whether medications you are taking make you more likely to gain weight.
If so, ask your doctor whether there is another medication you can take that is less likely to result in weight gain.
Losing weight reduces the risk for health problems
Studies have noted that: * A modest weight loss of 4.4 lb (2 kg) to 9.7 lb (4.4 kg) resulted in a significant lowering of blood pressure.
* People with asthma who lost an average of 31.3 lb (14.2 kg) over one year showed improved lung function and overall health, and with weight loss the number of severe asthma episodes (exacerbations) and oral corticosteroid courses can be reduced.
* Weight loss improved how well the body used blood sugar (glucose tolerance) and reduced the progression of impaired glucose tolerance (a blood sugar level that is slightly elevated but is not high enough to be diagnostic of diabetes) to type 2 diabetes
Home Treatment
Treatment for obesity always includes diet and exercise: things you can do at home.
Here are some tips to help with your weight-loss program: * Set realistic goals.
Many obese people expect to lose much more weight than is realistic.
When they do not achieve these goals, it can have a negative effect on self-perception.
See questions to consider when setting weight management goals to help you set clear, healthy goals.
* Get family and friends involved.
Losing weight is not always easy and the support of those around you is important.
Talk to them about why you are changing your diet and activities and how important it is to you.
Ask them to help by participating in exercises and having meals with you, even if they may be eating something different.
* If you feel you have "failed your diet," talk to a family member or friend about it.
* Follow a low-calorie diet and practice meal planning.
* Maintain your diet.
* Get enough physical activity.
* Identify obstacles to losing weight.
* Follow tips to cut fat from your diet.
* Use lean meats and meat alternatives.
Commercial weight-loss programs
There are many commercial weight-loss program (such as Weight Watchers or LifeSteps) or self-help or support groups (such as Overeaters Anonymous).
The quality and effectiveness of these programs vary widely, from reputable obesity clinics associated with hospitals to quick weight-loss schemes that may even harm your health with untested "miracle" products.
According to the Council on Size and Weight Discrimination, quick weight-loss schemes are among the most common consumer frauds, and diet programs have the highest consumer dissatisfaction of any service industry.
Consider these tips for choosing a commercial weight-loss program and be aware of the advertising strategies for weight-loss programs and products.
What Increases Your Risk?
Risk factors you cannot control
If you have a family history of obesity, you may have inherited one or more genetic factors that lead you to gain weight.
Studies of adopted twins raised apart show that they tend to have the BMI of their biological parents (not their adoptive parents).
It is estimated that 25% to 70% of the difference in weight between individuals is due to heredity.^1 However, it is important to remember that heredity only determines the tendency to become obese, and that factors such as your culture, your activity level, and your diet determine whether you develop obesity
.
Risk factors you can control
The basic cause of obesity is an energy imbalance.
People gain weight when they take in more energy (measured in calories) from food than they use.
The excess energy is stored as fat.
You can control your energy balance through your diet and physical activity.
* Overeating provides too many calories.
* A high-fat diet may provide too many calories even if you eat reasonable portions.
* Little physical activity means fewer calories are used.
Risk factors you may be able to treat
Some people with emotional or psychological problems may be at increased risk for gaining too much weight.
These problems may include: * Low self-esteem.
Dissatisfaction with your body decreases your self-esteem, which may lead to eating as a way to feel better about yourself.
Repeated failure at dieting also can affect your self-esteem and make it even more difficult to lose weight.
* Emotional concerns.
Emotional stress, such as worry or anxiety, or emotional illnesses, such as depression, can lead to overeating.
Some people eat to calm themselves, to avoid dealing with unpleasant tasks or situations, or to dampen negative emotions.
* Eating disorders.
Some people may control their eating a large part of the time but have periods when they cannot stop from eating large amounts of food (binge eating).
* Trauma.
Distressing events can contribute to overeating, such as childhood sexual or nonsexual abuse, loss of a parent during childhood, or marital or family problems.
* Alcohol.
Some forms of alcohol (beer and mixed drinks) are very high in calories.
Weight gain from alcohol is associated with greater abdominal fat.
* Medications or other medical conditions.
Other conditions, such as hypothyroidism and Cushing's syndrome, and medications, such as antidepressants and cortico steroids, may cause weight gain.
Watchful Waiting
Watchful waiting is not an option if your body mass index (BMI) is 30 or higher.
Your risk for having health problems because of your weight is greatly increased and you should discuss your situation with a health professional.
This is even more important if you or a family member has high blood pressure, high cholesterol or triglycerides (fats) in the blood, or diabetes.
Who to See
Your family doctor can usually diagnose and treat obesity.
However, some doctors are better prepared to treat obesity than others.
Talk with your doctor about his or her interest and training in treating this disease.
Your doctor may refer you to other health professionals, such as: * A registered dietitian, to help you determine how many calories you need and how best to get them.
* An exercise specialist, to help you develop a safe and effective exercise program.
* A counselor or psychiatrist if you have an emotional problem such as depression, anxiety, sexual or physical abuse, family problems, or drug or alcohol abuse.
* A surgeon, if you and your doctor think that surgery is an option.
