[sub_about_boardodirbt.gif] [sub_about_advisecounbt.gif]
The normal heart is a strong, muscular pump a little larger than a fist.
It pumps blood continuously through the circulatory system.
Each day the average heart beats 100,000 times and pumps about 2,000 gallons of blood.
In a 70-year lifetime, an average human heart beats more than 2.5 billion times.
The American Heart Association has identified several risk factors for coronary heart disease.
The major risk factors are:
- Increasing age - about 4 out of 5 people who die of coronary heart disease are age 65 or older.
- Male sex - men have a greater risk of heart attack than women, and they have attacks earlier in life.
- Heredity - children of parents with heart disease are more likely to develop it themselves.
- Tobacco smoke - smokers' risk of heart attack is more than twice that of nonsmokers.
- High blood cholesterol - the risk of heart disease rises as blood cholesterol levels increase.
- High blood pressure - this increases the heart's workload, causing the heart to enlarge and weaken over time.
- Physical inactivity - regular, moderate-to-vigorous exercise is important in preventing heart and blood vessel disease.
- Obesity and overweight - excess weight increases the strain on the heart.
The more risk factors a person has, the greater the chance of developing a disease.
EXERCISE EXERCISE EXERCISE!!!
Regular aerobic physical activity increases a person's capacity for exercise.
It also plays a role in both primary and secondary prevention of cardiovascular disease.
Physical inactivity and cardiovascular mortality are linked.
Exercise can help control blood lipid abnormalities, diabetes and obesity.
Aerobic exercise also has an independent, modest blood-pressure-lowering effect for certain groups of people with high blood pressure.
The results of pooled studies show that people who modify their behavior after heart attack to include regular exercise have better rates of survival.
Healthy people - as well as many patients with cardiovascular disease can improve their exercise performance with training.
For health benefits to the heart, lungs and circulation, you should perform any vigorous activity for at least 30-60 minutes, 3-4 days each week at 50-75% of your maximum heart rate.
Moderate-intensity physical activities for 30 minutes or longer on most days provide some benefits.
Physical activity need not be strenuous to bring health benefits.
What's important is to include activity as part of a regular routine.
KNOW YOUR NUMBERS
Is your blood pressure below 140/90?
Is your LDL cholesterol (bad cholesterol) less than 160 mg/dl?
Is your HDL cholesterol (good cholesterol) greater than 35 mg/dl?
Are your triglycerides less than 200 mg/dl?
Quote:
I'd rather be a Could-Be if I cannot be an Are, because a Could-Be is a May-Be who is reaching for a star.
I'd rather be a Has-Been than a Might-Have-Been by far, for a Might-Have-Been has never been, but a Has was once an Are.
Milton Berle
[pxl_trans.gif] [pxl_trans.gif]
Tank Times
Worksite Wellness Seminars
Monthly Health 
Healthy Recipes
Walking Club
Contact Us: H.E.L.P.
Health 
All content Copyright 2001 [healthchoicelogo4.gif] All Rights Reserved.
- HOME PAGE -
