Arizona Game 
Exotic Newcastle Disease Forces Ban on Bird Events: Including Field Trials PHOENIX All bird events are prohibited due to a recent disease outbreak including all field trial, field trial training and shooting preserve activities under licenses issued by the Arizona Game and Fish Department.
The Arizona Department of Agriculture has issued a directors administrative order to assist in preventing the spread of Exotic Newcastle Disease within Arizona.
One element of this administrative order prohibits all poultry and bird events, such as exhibits, shows, auctions, competitions or other public displays of birds of any types.
Furthermore, the Arizona state veterinarian has concluded that this event ban includes any movement of all birds under Arizona Game and Fish Department field trial, field trial training, and shooting preserve licenses: effective March 3.
Exotic Newcastle Disease is an extremely contagious viral disease, says Jim deVos of the Arizona Game and Fish Departments research branch, It affects many species of birds from poultry to wild birds.
This viral disease is one of the most infectious avian diseases of poultry in the world, with a death rate of almost 100 percent in unvaccinated poultry stocks.
Newcastle Disease spreads rapidly among confined birds, such as chickens but it can also be spread by virus-bearing material picked up on shoes and clothing and carried to other areas.
Newcastle Disease does not pose a serious threat to humans or food but it is a foreign animal disease that is deadly to almost all birds.
This avian viral disease was most likely initially introduced into the United States through Southern California by illegal importations of infected birds.
This disease affects the respiratory, nervous and digestive systems of birds and has an incubation period ranging from two to 15 days.
Infected birds may exhibit the following signs: - Respiratory: sneezing, gasping for air, nasal discharge, coughing; - Digestive: greenish, watery diarrhea; - Nervous: muscular tremors, droopy wings, twisting head or neck, circling, paralysis; - Partial or complete reduction in egg production or production of very thin-shelled eggs; - Swelling of tissues around eyes and neck; - Very sudden death or a high increase in the number of deaths in a flock.
For additional information or an update of restrictions in the movement of birds in Arizona, contact the Arizona Department of Agriculture hotline at 1-888-742-5334 or the ADOA Web site www.agriculture.state.az.us.
Specific questions are being handled through e-mail at statevet@agric.state.az.us.
back to top Condor Update: Lots of Good News Recently Three more California condors were successfully released Monday, March 3, bringing the Arizona population to 36 birds.
According to Andi Rogers, Arizona Game and Fish Department's condor project biologist, "These three have proven to be exceptional birds - typically, it can take several hours for new recruits to access the open gate and get out onto the cliffs.
These three condors took flight out of the release pen within five minutes of its initial opening."
Supported by the Game and Fish Department's Heritage Fund, this program is a growing success story in providing future generations of Arizonans with the opportunity to see these magnificent birds.
There is more good news on the condor front.
Rogers says that the breeding season is in high gear.
"This year, Arizona has 16 birds involved in courtship and eight birds of these are involved as well-established pairs.
As of this week, we are beginning to speculate that two pairs of condors have once again selected nests at the South Rim of the Grand Canyon.
These are the same pairs that nested in this area last year.
We hope that their experience from the previous year will help them successfully raise a chick in the wild."
It's egg laying season as well in the captive breeding realm, with fertile eggs already documented for this year.
The primary cooperators in the condor project in Arizona along with the department - The Peregrine Fund, the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, the Bureau of Land Management, and The National Park Service - have great reasons for optimism.
back to top Yuma Regional Fishing Outlook Man with crappies Arizona Game and Fish Department biologists expect Alamo Lake to be the hot spot this spring for bass, crappie and catfish in the western part of the state, but Havasu is a good bet as well.
Brad Jacobson, Yuma regional fisheries program manager, says his top pick for this spring is Alamo for all-around fishing, while Lake Havasu should be excellent for striped bass.
However, if you are looking for giant flathead catfish, he says, try the lower Colorado River between Laguna and Morelos dams this spring and summer: hot weather is best.
Alamo Lake: As the water starts warming up to the high 50s and higher, the largemouth bass bite is expected to be good with lots of fish around the 2-pound size.
Channel catfish are expected to excellent this spring.
The good crappie fishing has already started this year and should continue into the spring.
Bluegill will start picking up as the water temperatures exceed 65 F. Lake Havasu 
The size will range from 13 inches and more with an occasional fish greater than 4 pounds.
Striped bass will continue to be excellent for fish less than 16 inches and an occasional fish more than 10 pounds.
Channel catfish and bluegill will be fair to good.
If you want to catch flathead catfish, try the lower end of the lake (Bill Williams River arm) from late May through the summer.
Flathead sizes can reach 60 pounds.
Colorado River (Parker Strip Area): There is an increasing population of smallmouth bass in this section of river.
Smallmouth fishing is expected to be good to excellent with fish over a pound this spring.
In addition, redear sunfish and bluegill should also be good to excellent in the pound-plus size.
Channel and flathead catfish are always fair to good in this section of the Colorado River.
Colorado River (between Palo Verde Weir 
Channel and flathead catfish are always fair to good in this section of the Colorado River.
Most flathead catfish will be in the 2 to 5-pound range with an occasional 20-plus-pound fish.
The time for fishing for both catfish species is late spring throughout the summer: the hotter the better.
Colorado River (between Walter's Camp 
Fishing is expected to be good to excellent for flathead catfish with sizes approaching 70 pounds.
The best time is late spring and summer: the hotter the better.
The various backwaters will be good for largemouth bass and other sunfish (bluegill 
Other species available in the main river channel are smallmouth bass and striped bass.
Colorado River (between Picacho State Park and Imperial Dam): This area is expected to be good to excellent for largemouth bass, channel catfish and flathead catfish.
Bass and channel catfish in excess of 5 pounds are present along with flathead catfish as large as 40 pounds.
Bluegills are also present in the various backwaters and an occasional striped bass can be caught in the main river channel.
Colorado River (between Laguna and Morelos dams): This area will be good for largemouth bass and flathead catfish.
Bass in excess of 5 pounds are common and flathead catfish over 20 pounds are a good bet.
River accessibility is dependent on the amount of water being released.
Usually shallow draft boats work the best.
The lower end has had some dredging work and larger boats will be able to get on the river there.
back to top Did You Know? (Anecdotes from the Arizona Game and Fish Department) 1.
Deer antlers are one of the fastest growing animal tissues in the animal kingdom.
2.
There is an old wives tale that when robins cock their heads from side to side, they are listening for worms.
That is not so.
Because their eyes are placed far back on the sides of their heads, robins must turn their heads from side to side to look at things.
3.
Javelina are relative newcomers to Arizona.
It is believed that javelina (collared peccary) migrated from the tropics into Arizona about 200 years ago.
They are continuing to expand their range in North America.
4.
Hummingbirds can beat their wings up to 45 times per second.
5.
Quail reproduction is tied to the amount of rain received between October and March.
In late winter birds pair off and each pair will form a new covey.
Males play a significant role in caring for young.
6.
Arizona is the only state in North America where four deserts are found: the Mohave, Great Basin, Chihuahuan and Sonoran.
back to top
Note: The Arizona Game and Fish Department prohibits discrimination on the basis of race, color, sex, national origin, age, disability in its programs and activities.
If anyone believes they have been discriminated against in any Game and Fish program or activity, including its employment practices, the individual may file a complaint alleging discrimination directly with the Game and Fish Deputy Director, 2221 W. Greenway Rd., Phx., AZ 85023, (602) 942-3000 or U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, 4040 N. Fairfax Dr., Ste. 130, Arlington, VA 22203.
If you require this document in an alternative format, please contact the Game and Fish Deputy Director as listed above or by calling TTY at 1-800 367-8939.
back to top
