Mammals List for Carlsbad Caverns National Park There are 64 mammal species that have been recorded since 1924 that may still be present in the park (not including humans or domesticated animals like cats, sheep, etc.).
Some are rarely seen (e.g., black bear, spotted skunk).
Two are non-native introductions or escapees (Rocky Mountain elk and Barbary sheep).
Others are native animals that have been restored through reintroduction programs in the area (e.g., javelina and pronghorn antelope).
Merriam's elk became extinct around the turn of the century, and desert bighorn sheep were extirpated from the park in the 1960s.
Up to six other species may have become extirpated since European settlement.
There is the potential to eventually record eight more species in the park.
Most information for this list comes from checklists compiled by Dr. Ken Geluso and Steve West.
Selected references for more reading on the distributions and habitats of these mammals are listed below.
Family INSECTIVORA (n=1) Soricidae CHIROPTERA (n=16) Vespertilionidae Vespertilionidae Vespertilionidae Vespertilionidae Vespertilionidae Vespertilionidae Vespertilionidae Vespertilionidae Vespertilionidae Vespertilionidae Vespertilionidae Vespertilionidae Vespertilionidae Molossidae Molossidae Molossidae CARNIVORA (n=13) Canidae Canidae Canidae Ursidae Procyonidae Procyonidae Mustelidae Mustelidae Mustelidae Mustelidae Mustelidae Felidae Felidae ARTIODACTYLA (n=5) Tayassuidae Cervidae Cervidae Bovidae Bovidae RODENTIA (n=27) Sciuridae Sciuridae Sciuridae Sciuridae Sciuridae Geomyidae Geomyidae Scientific Name Notiosorex crawfordi Antrozous pallidus Eptesicus fuscus Lasionycteris noctivagans Lasiurus borealis Lasiurus cinereus Myotis californicus Myotis ciliolabrum Myotis thysanodes Myotis velifer Myotis volans Myotis yumanensis Pipistrellus hesperus Corynorhinus townsendii Nyctinomops femorosaccus Nyctinomops macrotis Tadarida brasiliensis Canis latrans Urocyon cinereoargenteus Vulpes macrotis Ursus americanus Bassariscus astutus Procyon lotor Mustela frenata Taxidea taxus Conepatus mesoleucus Mephitis mephitis Spilogale putorius Puma concolor Lynx rufus Tayassu tajacu Cervus elaphus nelsoni Odocoileus hemionus Antilocapra americana Ammotragus lervia Ammospermophilus interpres Spermophilus mexicanus Spermophilus spilosoma Spermophilus variegatus Tamias canipes Pappogeomys castanops Thomomys bottae Common Name Desert shrew Pallid bat Big brown bat Silver-haired bat Red bat Hoary bat California myotis Small-footed myotis Fringed myotis Cave myotis Long-legged myotis Yuma myotis (known only from skeletal material in park) Western pipistrelle Townsend's big-eared bat Pocketed free-tailed bat Big free-tailed bat Brazilian free-tailed bat Coyote Gray fox Kit fox Black bear Ringtail Raccoon Long-tailed weasel Badger Hog-nosed skunk Striped skunk Spotted skunk Mountain lion Bobcat Collared peccary Rocky Mountain Elk (introduced subspecies) Mule deer Pronghorn Barbary sheep (non-native) Texas antelope squirrel Mexican ground squirrel Spotted ground squirrel Rock squirrel Gray-footed chipmunk Yellow-faced pocket gopher Botta's pocket gopher
Heteromyidae Heteromyidae Heteromyidae Heteromyidae Heteromyidae Muridae Muridae Muridae Muridae Muridae Muridae Muridae Muridae Muridae Muridae Muridae Muridae Muridae Muridae Erethizontidae LAGOMORPHA (n=2) Leporidae Leporidae Extripated Species: Ovis canadensis Canis lupus Ursus arctos Bos bison Cynomys ludovicianus Ondatra zibethicus Castor canadensis Extinct Species: Cervus elaphus merriamii
Dipodomys merriami Dipodomys spectabilis Perognathus flavus Chaetodipus hispidus Chaetodipus nelsoni Neotoma albigula Neotoma mexicana Neotoma micropus Onychomys arenicola Peromyscus boylii Peromyscus nasutus Peromyscus eremicus Peromyscus leucopus Peromyscus maniculatus Peromyscus pectoralis Reithrodontomys megalotis Reithrodontomys montanus Sigmodon hispidus Mus musculus Erethizon dorsatum Lepus californicus Sylvilagus audubonii
Merriam's kangaroo rat Banner-tailed kangaroo rat Silky pocket mouse Hispid pocket mouse Nelson's pocket mouse White-throated woodrat Mexican woodrat Southern plains woodrat Mearns' grasshopper mouse Brush mouse Northern rock mouse Cactus mouse White-footed mouse Deer mouse White-ankled mouse Western harvest mouse Plains harvest mouse Hispid cotton rat House mouse (non-native) Porcupine Black-tailed jack rabbit Desert cottontail
Bighorn sheep Gray wolf (no park records) Grizzly bear (no park records) American bison (no park records) Black-tailed prairie dog (no park records) Muskrat (no park records) American beaver (no park records) Merriam's Elk
Possible Species (not confirmed in park): Euderma maculatum Spotted bat Peromyscus truei Pinon mouse Perognathus intermedius Rock pocket mouse Perognathus pencillatus Desert pocket mouse Dipodomys ordii Ord's kangaroo rat Didelphis virginiana Virginia oppossum Microtus mogollonensis Mogollon vole Sylvilagus floridanus Eastern cottontail
Selected References Bailey, V. 1928.
Animal life of the Carlsbad Cavern.
Monograph No. 3 of the American Society of Mammalogists.
195pp.
Bailey, V. 1932.
Mammals of New Mexico.
North American Fauna 53:1-412.
Findley, J.S., A.H. Harris.
D.E. Wilson, and C. Jones.
1975.
Mammals of New Mexico.
University of New Mexico Press, Albuquerque.
360pp.
Geluso, K.N., J.S. Altenbach, and D.E. Wilson.
1987.
Bats of Carlsbad Caverns National Park.
Carslbad Caverns Natural History Association.
33pp.
Geluso, K.N. 1992.
Rodents of Carlsbad Caverns National Park.
Final Report.
141pp.
Geluso, K.N. 1993.
Mammals of Carlsbad Caverns National Park: An annotated checklist.
Final Report.
77pp.
Genoways, H.H., R.J. Baker, and J.E. Cornely.
1979.
Mammals of the Guadalupe Mountains National Park, Texas.
Pages 217-332 in Biological investigations in the Guadalupe Mountains National Park, Texas.
Genoways, H.H. and R.J. Baker (eds.).
Proceedings and Transactions No. 4.
National Park Service.
442pp.
Schmidly, D.J. 1977.
The mammals of Trans-Pecos Texas.
Texas A
225pp.
West, S. 1985.
Mammals: An annotated checklist for Carlsbad Caverns National Park.
Carslbad Caverns Natural History Association.
14pp.
