go next go next Massachusetts Attorney General Seal The Office of Massachusetts Attorney General Tom Reilly Our Privacy Policy ____________________ Submit Search Text Only | Site Map | Employment | Contact Us go next About Tom Reilly About the Office Public Events Legislative 
John Garceau, 49, of Fall River, Horman Carcamo, 29, of Chelsea and William Woolf, 37, of North Carolina, were indicted by a Suffolk County grand jury on one count each of workers' compensation fraud and larceny over $250.
All three defendants are scheduled to be summonsed to court for arraignment February 4 in Suffolk Superior Court.
Workers who are injured on the Central Artery Project are paid through the insurance company that administers an "insurance fund" which is 85% funded by the federal government and 15% funded by the Commonwealth of Massachusetts.
Today's indictments allege that Garceau, Carcamo and Woolf separately, allegedly worked while collecting a total of $114,440 in workers' compensation benefits after claiming to be injured on the job at the Big Dig/Central Artery Project.
On August 28, 2000, Garceau allegedly injured his back while working as a laborer on the Central Artery Tunnel Project for Modern Continental Construction Company.
Shortly after his alleged accident, Garceau filed a workers' compensation claim, and Modern Continental's insurance company, National Union Insurance, a subsidiary of the American International Group, Inc., was ordered to pay Garceau total disability benefits of more than $64,000.
The indictments allege that while Garceau reported to be disabled and collecting benefits from November 2000 through April 2003, he worked for at least 17 other companies as a laborer.
Carcamo allegedly injured his back, chest, legs and arms in an accident on July 9, 2002 when he was working on the Central Artery Tunnel as a laborer for G 
Like Garceau, shortly after Carcamo's alleged accident, he filed a workers' compensation claim with G 
The Attorney General's investigation alleges that Carcamo was collecting these benefits while simultaneously earning a living as a private contractor renovating homes.
On November 2, 2002, Woolf, an electrician working on the Central Artery Tunnel for Massachusetts Electric and Construction Company, allegedly injured his back, neck, shoulder and arm when he fell from a scissor lift.
Woolf allegedly filed a workers' compensation claim and received more than $8,000 in total disability benefits from November 2002 through February 2003.
Further investigation revealed that Woolf had returned to North Carolina where he allegedly worked regularly as a tattoo artist.
All defendants are presumed innocent until proven guilty.
The case is being prosecuted by Assistant Attorney General Tracey A. Turner of AG Reilly's Insurance and Unemployment Fraud Division and was jointly investigated by the Attorney General's Office and the Insurance Fraud Bureau of Massachusetts.
Top of the Page Alternative Links go next go next
