Shrink Wrap Recycling Longer days, milder temperatures and that unmistakable promise of spring in the air can mean only one thing: it is time to recycle shrink wrap! The Marine Trades Association of Anne Arundel County, in partnership with Manner Resins and Giant Foods, is sponsoring four shrink wrap recycling locations within Anne Arundel County.
Shrink wrap is being collected at Pasadena Boatel and Beach Club (Pasadena), Port Annapolis Marina (Annapolis), Herrington Harbour North (Tracys Landing), and one more site to be determined.
Drop-offs may be made starting mid-March.
For more details, contact Beth Kahr, director of the Marine Trades Association of Maryland, at 410-269-0741.
Baltimore County residents or businesses may bring their shrink wrap to Eastern Landfill on Days Cove Road in Whitemarsh or to the State Highway Administration lot on Peninsula Expressway in Dundalk between March 15 and approximately July 15.
There will be three drop-off sites in Cecil County for the first time this year.
Contact Ronda Bolinger for details at 410-275-2141.
Kent County will be collecting shrink wrap at the transfer site on Nicholson Road in Chestertown.
Contact Marty Holden at 410-778-7448 for more information.
There is a possibility that Talbot County will also collect shrink wrap for recycling .
Details were not finalized as of press time.
For information, contact James Wood at 410-758-6605.
Before dropping off any shrink wrap for recycling , be sure to remove strings and doors.
Consider saving the doors for reuse next winter.
Mar yland Clean Marinas Under way is a quarterly newsletter published by the Waterway and Greenways Division of the Chesapeake and Coastal Watershed Service, Maryland Department of Natural Resources (DNR).
The Maryland Clean Marina Initiative promotes and celebrates voluntary adoption of measures to reduce pollution from marinas and recreational boats.
The Initiative is coordinated by DNR in partnership with the marine industry.
For additional information, contact: Maryland Clean Marina Initiative 580 Taylor Avenue, E-2 Annapolis, MD 21401 Toll Free: 877-620-8DNR, x8770 or: 410-260-8770 Fax: 410-260-8779 E-mail: bvalentine@dnr.state.md.us Web Site: www.dnr.state.md.us/boating The facilities and the services of the Department of Natural Resources are available to all without regard to race, color, religion, sex, age, national origin, physical or mental ability.
Graphics from ClickArt Deluxe Image Pack 97.
Printed on recycled paper with low VOC ink.
Parris N. Glendening , Governor Kathleen Kennedy Townsend, Lt. Governor Sarah Taylor-Rogers, Secretary Elizabeth Fuller Valentine, Editor Donna Morrow, Layout UNDERW MARCH 2001 Maryland Clean Marinas AY SPCC Plan Assistance Available Do you have a single tank that holds more than 660 gallons of petroleum? How about an aggregate aboveground petroleum storage capacity greater than 1,320 gallons? O r total underground storage capacity greater than 42,000 gallons? If you answered yes to any of these questions, federal regulations (40 CFR 112) require that you take steps to prevent fuel spills, e.g ., containment dikes, oil absorbents, booms, etc.
The law also requires that you describe your oil control measures in a Spill Prevention, Control and Countermeasure (SPCC ) plan.
Any marina operator can draft an SPCC plan.
The plan must be certified by a professional engineer, however.
To alleviate the financial hardship that plan certification poses for some marinas, the Clean Marina Initiative has hired an engineering firm to review and certify SPCC plans at no cost to marinas.
The firm of Purdum and Jeschke is preparing a template of an SPCC plan.
Marina operators are encouraged to use the template to prepare their own plans.
Then, once a marina has been authorized to proceed by the Clean Marina Office, the marina operator will contact Purdum and Jeschke to schedule a site visit and plan review.
Assuming the plan is adequate, the engineer will certify the SPCC plan.
To be eligible for this service, facility operators must submit a Clean Marina Pledge and a completed self-assessment.
Priority will be given to facilities that meet the Clean Marina Award Criteria in all aspects except the SPCC requirement.
The SPCC plan template and complete instructions will be available by the end of March on-line at www.dnr.state.md.us/ boating/cleanmarina or by calling 410-260-8770.
] Real Marina Solutions: Lessons from Clean Marina Operators 4 Maryland Clean Marina Initiative 580 Taylor Avenue, E-2 Annapolis, MD 21401 I NSIDE T HIS ISSUE...
SPCC Assistance Available 1 Lessons from Clean Marina Operators 1 Partners Help to Protect Marylands Waterways A Family Day with the Coast Guard 2 Three New Clean Marinas 3 Shrink Wrap Recycling 4 2 Staff training .
Catchment devices.
Recycling .
These are some of the common themes discussed during a series of seminars hosted by the Clean Marina Initiative during January, 2001.
At each of the four seminars, owners and managers of certified Clean Marinas described why they sought C lean Marina status, what changes they made to their operations, and what benefits they have realized as a result of achieving Clean Marina certification.
Jon Sheller, owner o f Rockhold Creek Marina in Deale, gave three reasons for pursuing Clean Marina designation.
H e wanted to be a good neighbor, he wanted to take advantage of free At the Clean Marina seminar advertising , and he wanted t o in Baltimore, the audience listens closely to Tom Wilhelm.
challenge customers to get with it.
That is, he uses the Clean Marina program as justification for enforcing marina rules intended to minimize pollution.
Stated another way by Trevor Richards, general manager of Spring Cove Marina in Solomons, Clean Marina status gives us the authority to yell at customers, Hey, we are a clean marinayou cannot do that here.
Mr. Richards went on to say that as more marinas practice pollution prevention, everybody s job will become easier because boaters will get used to it.
Until pollution prevention becomes common place at marinas, however, staff training is essential.
Take a fuel dock for example.
Customers are often significantly older than the typical teenage dock hand.
The dock hand needs to be coached so that he or she can confidently instruct an adult how to fuel in an environmentally-responsible manner.
Victoria Shiroky, president of Magothy Marina in Severna Park, has her staff hand an oil absorbent pad to each fuel customer.
The pad tells customers immediately that there is a chance of a spill and that they should use caution.
At Spring Cove Marina, every diesel customer must use a plastic jug to catch vent overflow (unless they are not filling completely or the vent is inboard).
Because of its flammable nature, Richards does not use catchment jugs for gasoline.
He uses oil absorbent pads instead and allows the fumes to evaporate.
He captures spills from vents on the far continued on page 2 1 Clean Marina Partners: Helping to Protect Marylands Waterways The Clean Marina Partner designation was created to recognize boating facilitiesother than marinas, boatyards, and yacht clubsthat minimize their own boating-related pollution and actively promote clean boating habits.
Clean Marina Partners may be public boat ramps, private community piers, Owners of charter boat liveries, or even smaller boating maritime museums.
Becoming a Partner is easy.
facilities are Because of the nature of their encouraged to businesses, Clean Marina Partners generally have minimal waste to participate as contain.
Additionally, the Clean Clean Marina Marina Initiative can provide boater education materials, such Partners.
as clean boating tip sheets and posters, at no cost.
To become recognized as certified Clean Marina Partners, facility operators follow the same steps as have been established for marina operators: Obtain program materials Sign a Clean Marina Pledge Conduct a self-assessment Call upon a mentor for assistance if needed Schedule a confirmation visit Enjoy the rewards Maintain Clean Marina Partner status Clean Marina Partners are not true marinas, yet they promote the pollution prevention goals of the Clean Marina Initiative.
JENNINGS RANDOLPH LAKE BOAT RAMP, OAKLAND HERRINGTON MANOR STATE PARK BOAT RAMP, OAKLAND QUEENSTOWN HARBOR COMMUNITY PIER, QUEENSTOWN Solutions continued from page 1 side of vessels with an oil absorbent pad he has wrapped around a boat hook.
I do this because it is my home and because I respect the water, said Gill.
The goal of the Clean Marina Initiative is to certify 25 percent of Marylands 600 boating facilities as Clean Marinas or Clean Marina Partners by 2004.
To date, 114 boating facilities have taken the first step and signed the Clean Marina Pledge.
Of these, 25 have been certified as Clean Marinas and 3 have been certified as Clean Marina Partners.
For more information about either Clean Marina or Clean Marina Partner certification, contact program staff at 410-260-8770.
]HERRINGTON HARBOUR NORTH, TRACYS LANDING HERRINGTON HARBOUR SOUTH, FRIENDSHIP LIPPINCOTT MARINE, GRASONVILLE LOCUST POINT MARINA, ELKTON MAGOTHY MARINA, SEVERNA PARK MEARS YACHT HAVEN, OXFORD OCEAN CITY FISHING CENTER, OCEAN CITY OSPREY POINT YACHT CLUB, ROCK HALL Saturday, May 12, from 9 a.m.5 p.m., the United States Coast Guard and the Coast Guard Auxilliary will host a fun-filled day of demonstrations and training .
The event will be held at USCG Station Annapolis, on Thomas Point Road.
All ages are encouraged to attend.
A Natural Resources Police boat, a county fire engine, CG Sea Cadets, Clean Marina staff, and Chesapeake Bay Foundation staff are expected to be on hand.
A safetyoriented personal watercraft demonstration and Courtesy Vessel Examinations will also be offered.
Parking and refreshments will be available on site.
For more information, please call Harold Cramer at 410-263-2944.
A Family Day with the Coast Guard C M PL A 2 3 Hammock Island Marina, Pasadena Harbor Island Marina, Inc., Solomons Harbor North Marina, Chesapeake City Harbor View Marina 
There are opportunities to minimize pollution away from the fuel dock, as well.
Tom Wilhelm, owner of Ferry Point Marina in Arnold, insists that all work be conducted over filter fabric tarps.
Another option is to capture maintenance debris with vacuum sanders.
Pollution prevention can be financially rewarding .
Dave Gohsman, former general manager of Port Annapolis Marina, made money on tarp sales and the rental of vacuum sanders to do-it-yourself customers.
He also saved money on trash pickups by recycling solid waste such as plastic shrink wrap, aluminum cans, and glass bottles.
Mark Mattiucci, owner of Point Lookout Marina in Ridge, sells recovered zinc anodes to a scrap dealer.
Positive publicity is another advantage of Clean Marina certification.
The Clean Marina Initiative displays an exhibit at boat shows and runs advertisements in boating publications encouraging boaters to patronize certified Clean Marinas.
A potential customer visited Brandt Rodey, manager of Shipwright Harbor in Deale, after checking the list of certified Clean Marinas on DNRs web site ( w w w.dnr.state.md.us/boating/ cleanmarina).
There are also less tangible benefits associated with Clean Marina status.
For example, Mr. Mattiuccis customers are impressed with the positive changes in the appearance of Point Lookout Marina brought about, in part, by his pursuit of Clean Marina status.
His customers also feel more confident about repair work because the general orderliness of the yard conveys a sense of efficiency.
] Certified Clean Marina Partners Coltons Point, Fishing Creek Landings, and Zanhisers Certified! To date, 26 boating facilities have met the rigorous pollution prevention standards established by the Clean Marina Initiative.
The latest marinas to join this list of elite facilities are Coltons Point Marina (Coltons Point), F ishing Creek Landings Marina (Chesapeake Beach), and Zanhiser s Yachting Center (Solomons).
To minimize the chance of a fuel spill at Coltons Point Marina, the owners have installed double -walled aboveground fuel tanks equipped with emergency shut-off valves at the tanks, fuel dock, and in the office.
To prevent even small spills, manager Clark Lutz Pam Sisson, Fishing Creek keeps a specially-designed plastic jug Landings Marina, (top) and at the fuel dock to catch overflows from Coltons Point Marina vessel vent fittings.
And if there is ever owners and manager a fuel spill at Coltons Point Marina or accept their awards.
any neighboring facility, Lutz is ready: he maintains a roomful of response equipment including booms and oil absorbent pads.
We have been working toward Clean Marina certification since we have had new owners: about two years, said Mr. Lutz.
For example, in the past we didnt give a second thought to how we pressure washed boats.
Now, all ANCHOR BAY EAST MARINA, DUNDALK BALTIMORE YACHT CLUB, BALTIMORE BERT JABINS YACHT YARD, ANNAPOLIS COLTONS POINT MARINA, COLTONS PT. CROCKETT BROS.
BOATYARD, INC., OXFORD FERRY POINT MARINA 
BEACH FT. WASHINGTON MARINA, FT. WASHINGTON HAVEN HARBOUR MARINA, ROCK HALL Anchor Yacht Basin, Edgewater Anchorage Marina, Baltimore Annapolis City Dock, Annapolis Bay Boat Works, NorthEast Bay Ridge Community Association Marina, Annapolis Beacon Light Marina, Baltimore Bills Boats, Baltimore Breezy Point Marina, Inc, Chesapeake Beach Casa Rio Marina, Mayo Campbells Bachelor Point Yacht Co., Oxford Campbells Town Creek Boat Ya rd, Oxford Cedar Hill Harbor Marina, Bivalve Chesapeake Bay Bridge Marina, Stevensville Chesapeake Bay Maritime Museum, St. Michaels Chesapeake Harbour, Annapolis Chesapeake Yacht Club, Shady Side Chesapeake Yachting Center, Baltimore Coastal Properties Management Inc., Annapolis Cutter Marine Yacht Basin, Essex Deep Creek Lake Recreation Area, Swanton Dennis Po int Marina, I nc., Drayden Drury s Marina, Ridge Duffy Creek Marina, Georgetown Elk Point Marina, Elkton Frontier Town Campground, Ocean City Gateway Marina, Trappe Gratitude Marina, Rock Hall Great Oak Landing , Chestertown Green Point Marina, Worton power washing is done over filter cloths and we turn down the pressure when we are cleaning a hull painted with soft paint to prevent washing excess copper into the creek.
Dave and Pam Sisson, owners of Fishing Creek Landings Marina, control pollution from all areas of the marina, including the fuel dock.
Their staff routinely place a square of oil absorbent material around the fuel nozzle before handing the hose to customers.
The pad catches any fuel that backs up in the fill pipe.
Most of our customers enjoy fishing , said Dave Sisson.
By making improvements to the marina, we are protecting the habitat that supports the fish and crabs.
Environmental protection is good for our business and for the Chesapeake Bay.
Zahnisers Yachting Center is a full-service boatyard that offers the amenities of a fine resort.
Manager Jim Sharkey insists that negative environmental consequences from all aspects of marina operations be minimized.
For example, workers use high-volume low-pressure spray guns.
Environmental protection also has a fun side at Zahnisers.
Patrons are invited to adopt an oyster.
In exchange for a $2 donation which is forwarded to the Chesapeake Bay Foundation (CBF), they are given a birth certificate, a paper oyster to color, and information about the important role oysters play in the Chesapeake Bay ecosystem.
The colored oysters are prominently displayed in the marina store.
Real oysters are grown in floats attached to one of the marinas piers as part of CBFs oyster restoration program.]PARKSIDE MARINA, BALTIMORE POINT LOOKOUT MARINA, RIDGE PORT ANNAPOLIS MARINA, ANNAPOLIS ROCKHOLD CREEK MARINA, DEALE SHIPWRIGHT HARBOR, DEALE SOMERS COV
The Cove, Elkton Ti dewater Marina, Havre de Grace Tidewater Yacht Service Center, Baltimore Triton Marina, Elkton Tu rkey Po int Marina, Edgewater Washburns Boat Yard, Inc., Solomons Weaver s Marine Service, Baltimore Wikander s Marine Services, I nc., Eden Yacht Basin Company, Annapolis Certified Clean Marinas Queenstown Harbor Community Pier in Queenstown is the first private pier to be named a Maryland Clean Marina Partner.
Resident and pier manager Edgar Gill will be distributing clean boating tip cards to each of his 15 pier-mates this spring .
The tip cards describe simple things boaters can do to protect our natural resources.
A boater may place an oil absorbent pad under his or her engine, for instance.
As part of his own commendable efforts to protect Edgar Gill accepts the Clean the environment and maintain the Marina Partner certificate for aesthetics of his neighborhood, Mr. Queenstown Hrbr.
Cmty.
Pier.
Gill dons waders once a month to retrieve trash that has drifted into the marsh behind the pier.
I do this because it is my home and because I respect the water, said Gill.
The goal of the Clean Marina Initiative is to certify 25 percent of Marylands 600 boating facilities as Clean Marinas or Clean Marina Partners by 2004.
To date, 114 boating facilities have taken the first step and signed the Clean Marina Pledge.
Of these, 25 have been certified as Clean Marinas and 3 have been certified as Clean Marina Partners.
For more information about either Clean Marina or Clean Marina Partner certification, contact program staff at 410-260-8770.
]HERRINGTON HARBOUR NORTH, TRACYS LANDING HERRINGTON HARBOUR SOUTH, FRIENDSHIP LIPPINCOTT MARINE, GRASONVILLE LOCUST POINT MARINA, ELKTON MAGOTHY MARINA, SEVERNA PARK MEARS YACHT HAVEN, OXFORD OCEAN CITY FISHING CENTER, OCEAN CITY OSPREY POINT YACHT CLUB, ROCK HALL Saturday, May 12, from 9 a.m.5 p.m., the United States Coast Guard and the Coast Guard Auxilliary will host a fun-filled day of demonstrations and training .
The event will be held at USCG Station Annapolis, on Thomas Point Road.
All ages are encouraged to attend.
A Natural Resources Police boat, a county fire engine, CG Sea Cadets, Clean Marina staff, and Chesapeake Bay Foundation staff are expected to be on hand.
A safetyoriented personal watercraft demonstration and Courtesy Vessel Examinations will also be offered.
Parking and refreshments will be available on site.
For more information, please call Harold Cramer at 410-263-2944.
A Family Day with the Coast Guard C M PL A 2 3 Hammock Island Marina, Pasadena Harbor Island Marina, Inc., Solomons Harbor North Marina, Chesapeake City Harbor View Marina 
