Back to News Center The Norwich Bulletin Simmons Vows to Fight for Workers' Rights By Andrew Horton November 4, 2003 NORWICH -- U.S. Rep. Rob Simmons, R-2nd District, said he will do whatever he can to end corporate outsourcing for foreign employees and cheap labor.
At a public awareness presentation of The Organization for the Rights of American Workers, Simmons said he supported the new group's issues and stances on outsourcing foreign workers for American jobs.
The group believes that outsourcing helps create higher taxes and a larger unemployment rate nationwide.
With a large number of American information technology jobs going overseas to India and other Asian countries, group president John A. Bauman of Meriden said that federal loopholes and visa laws are to blame for a 27.4 percent unemployment rate for Connecticut's information technology work force.
Bauman said many of these positions are going abroad where corporations take advantage of affordable labor from developing countries.
"Through these loopholes, companies are allowed to use an enormous source of cheap labor," Bauman said.
While much of Monday's discussion pertained to the loss of the state's information technology labor force, Simmons used the opportunity to talk about the lack of enforcement of labor laws and global free trade agreements.
"We have to narrow this problem and close the loop holes, but it will take time," Simmons said.
"This is not a Republican of Democrat issue, it's a family issue, and we cannot allow these employment inequities to continue."
The congressman's interest in the group grew after he first saw the group's advertisement in a local newspaper.
Rather than wait for the group to contact him, Simmons immediately told the group of his interest.
Since contacting the group, Simmons has co-authored and co-sponsored a majority of American job protection bills in Congress this year.
Simmons said he co-authored the USA Jobs Protection Act of 2003, which was introduced by U.S. Sen. Christopher Dodd, D-Conn., in the Senate and U.S. Rep. Nancy Johnson, R-5th District.
The bill places a reduction cap on H-1B type visa workers immigrating to the United States from 195,000 workers each year to 65,000 workers.
Simmons said he advocates a reduction of foreign workers with visas, but the congressman also said he would not vote to eliminate work visas completely.
"Maybe what we learn as the process goes forward, we might be able to reduce that number down to 50,000 visas each year, or maybe even 40,000," Simmons said.
"I wouldn't be a representative if I didn't think we could correct this problem like this one."
Home | Contact Me | Biography | Services | Press Room | Legislation The District | Photo Gallery | Kids' Page | Questions | Search Page
