Judiciary Committee Democratic Press Releases From the Office of Congressman John Conyers, Jr. (14th District, Michigan) Ranking Member, House Judiciary Committee Dean of the Congressional Black Caucus
FOR IMMEDIATE RELEASE: July 9, 1996 (Contact: Rodney Walker at 202/225-5126)
KKK Linked to Church Arson
Washington, D.C.-- As federal officials continue their expansive investigation into the rash of church arsons sweeping the nation, Rep. John Conyers, Jr.
(D-MI) said "racial hatred has clearly been the spark to ignite many of the fires."
Conyers applauded the Justice
Department for the progress it is making in an investigation more than a year old, the burning of the Mount Zion A.M.E. church in Greeleyville, South Carolina.
Justice announced yesterday that two members of the "Christian Knights of the Ku Klux Klan" were being charged with the June 1995 burning of the predominantly African American church
.
"We have to catch and punish the perpetrators, but we also need to look underneath the violence for the cultural motivations that have divided us," Conyers said.
"We need to use the tragedy of the church fires as an opportunity to take a long, careful look into the heart of this nation.
It is time for a national dialogue on the state of race relations."
Conyers is the sponsor of legislation recently unanimously approved by Congress and that President Clinton will make a major address on tomorrow in a ceremonial signing at the White House.
The legislation broadens federal authority to prosecute crimes of religious destruction, doubles the maximum prison sentence for damage to religious property that causes bodily harm, authorizes $10 million in HUD private loans to help rebuild churches, and increases the number of officials to investigate, prevent, and respond to the attacks.
The investigation into the Greeleyville fire is still ongoing, but the two KKK suspects are a promising development in the case and the Justice Department is investigating if they were involved in other fires.
If convicted, Gary Christopher Cox, 23, and Timothy Anderson Welch, 24, could face up to 20 years in prison.
According to affidavits, Cox allegedly admits that he attempted to set Mount Zion's carpet on fire, but that Welch set fire to wicker collection baskets and then fueled the flames with Bibles.
Conyers traveled with the President to Greeleyville last month to attend a dedication ceremony for a new church under construction and said that the community of Greeleyville has recovered from the loss of its church.
"While the congregations and communities who have suffered the loss of their churches are shaken, they are not defeated."
Conyers praised President Clinton's leadership throughout the church arson tragedy and called the bipartisan support for the legislation "a hopeful sign."
After requesting Judiciary hearings on the church burnings, Conyers joined Judiciary Chairman Henry Hyde (R-IL) in co-sponsoring the Church Arson Prevention Act of 1996, which passed 422-0.
Conyers also chaired a Congressional Black Caucus hearing that explored the nation's racial climate and addressed rebuilding efforts.
The legislation, which the President is expected to receive and sign Wednesday, July 10, strengthens the U.S. Code (Title 18 247) by eliminating a $10,000 damage minimum before damage to religious property is considered a federal crime and simplifies current interstate commerce requirements that have made investigations difficult.
Additionally:
o The bill reauthorizes the Hate Crime Statistics Act for 6 years.
o The bill ensures that any attack on a church for racial or ethnic reasons is a federal crime.
o The bill allows the Dept. of Housing and Urban Development to make guaranteed loans to assist rebuilding.
o The bill allows victims who suffer injuries or death from these crimes to collect from the Victim's of Crime Fund.
o The bill authorizes Justice and Treasury to hire additional personnel, investigators, and technical support.
o The bill includes a Congressional commendation to the private sector for its response to the fires.
On May 13, Conyers and Rev. Jesse Jackson visited Effingham Baptist Church in South Carolina, and joined the President in Greeleyville June 12, just two of the more than 60 African American churches to be burned since January 1995 alone.
"People all over the country are helping in the rebuilding efforts, and the nation has begun an important dialogue.
In Detroit, Project Restoration is collecting donations to help rebuild churches, and there are still more efforts underway.
Conyers added, "This summer we'll be holding hearings in Detroit and around the country to begin a national dialogue.
There will be meetings with religious leaders, community leaders, people in the civil rights community, and everyone of goodwill.
We are going to come up with strategies and programs to begin the healing and work toward the elimination of racism."
###
[justice.gif] Return to Judiciary Committee Democratic Home Page
