Energy Information Administration Forecast Channel.
If having trouble viewing this page, please contact the National Energy Information Center at (202) 586-8800.
International Energy Outlook 2002
Nuclear Power
Nuclear power is projected to represent a growing share of the developing world's electricity consumption from 1999 through 2020.
New plant construction and license extensions for existing plants are expected to produce a net increase in world nuclear capacity.
World nuclear power capacity is projected to increase slightly over the forecast period, from 350 gigawatts in 2000 to 359 gigawatts in 2020.
Most of the growth is expected in developing Asia, particularly China, where 17 new power plants are expected to be operational over the forecast period.
In the industrialized nations, with few additional nuclear plants being built and a significant number of plant retirements expected, nuclear power capacity is projected to fall considerably, despite the fact that the projections include expected future life extensions for some of the nuclear power plants currently operating in the United States and other industrialized nations.
Nuclear power plants generated electricity in 30 countries in 2000.
A total of 438 nuclear power plants were in operation around the world, including 104 in the United States, 59 in France, and 53 in Japan (Figure 62).
Six new reactors came online in 2000, and two were shut down.
The new reactors included Angra 2 (in Brazil), Temelin 1 (Czech Republic), Rajasthan 3 and 4 and Kaiga 1 (India), and Chasnupp 1 (Pakistan) for a total of 3,056 megawatts of capacity [1].
The country with the largest share of electricity generated by nuclear power was France, at 76 percent (Figure 63).
Belgium, Bulgaria, France, Hungary, Lithuania, Slovakia, South Korea, and Ukraine depended on nuclear power for at least 40 percent of their electricity generation.
Nuclear power accounted for 16 percent of the world's total electricity supply in 1999.
That share is projected to fall to 12 percent by 2020, primarily because the industrialized nations are expected to eschew the construction of new units while continuing to retire plants built in the 1970s and 1980s, during nuclear power's heyday.
Nuclear power plant operating license extensions or the equivalent, which were first issued in the United States in 2000, are expected to be granted in other industrialized nations.
In many countries, extending the operational life of a nuclear plant is a less formal procedure than in the United States, where the U.S. Nuclear Regulatory Commission (NRC) must approve license extensions.
In some countries, extending a plant's operating life is a decision that is left primarily to the owner.
In developing Asia, 32 gigawatts of capacity is projected to be added by 2020 to the region's 23 gigawatts of nuclear capacity operating in 2000.
China is expected to account for 14 gigawatts of net capacity additions (Table 17).
There are currently 33 reactors under construction around the globe (Figure 64), half of which are being built in developing Asia.
China accounts for 8 of the new units, South Korea 4, and India and Taiwan 2 each.
There are no new plants currently under construction or on order in North America, South America, or Western Europe.
The International Energy Outlook 2002 (IEO2002) reference case forecasts world net capacity at 359 gigawatts in 2020, or 9 gigawatts more than projected in the International Energy Outlook 2001 (IEO2001) reference case.
Projected U.S. nuclear capacity in 2020 is 16 gigawatts higher in the IEO2002 forecast as a result of an expectation that the owners of most of the nuclear power plants now operating in the United States will seek relicensing and will continue operating the plants.
The IEO2002 forecast projects 3 gigawatts fewer retirements in 2020 overseas but also projects fewer new builds overseas than did the IEO2001 forecast.
In many countries the decision to build a nuclear power plant is fraught with uncertainty.
In many cases, nuclear power plants have been announced but their construction has been delayed or abandoned altogether.
Some nuclear power plants have taken as little as 4 years to build; others have taken well over a decade.
This chapter includes two examples illustrating the difficulties of forecasting nuclear capacity growth and how contemporary events necessitate frequent revisions of earlier forecasts.
The information on "United Kingdom Waxes and Wanes on Nuclear Power" discusses the issues (largely political) that are likely to determine the future of nuclear power in the United Kingdom, and the discussion on "Can Ukraine Finance Nuclear Power?" describes financial issues that cast doubt on the future of Ukraine's nuclear option.
The September 11, 2001, terrorist attacks on New York City and Washington, DC, gave rise to new concerns over the safety of the nuclear power plants now operating in the United States.
Uncertainties about whether nuclear power plants and nuclear fuel storage facilities were at risk from a similar terrorist attack resulted in heightened security measures at all nuclear facilities around the country.
Although a containment tower had in the past survived a head-on test crash of a military jet without major damage [2]
Containment vessels typically have 4 feet of steel-reinforced concrete along with a steel liner.
Fuel storage facilities may be more prone to damage in the event of a head-on crash, in that they are not nearly so well protected.
After the September 11 attacks, the Federal Aviation Administration banned commercial airplanes from flying within 10 nautical miles of any nuclear facility.
In many States, National Guard troops were deployed to protect power plants from possible terrorist attacks.
It is uncertain what lasting impact these recent developments will have on the prospects for nuclear power either in the United States or overseas; the IEO2002 forecast has not been adjusted to take into account any policy changes resulting from the events of September 11, 2001.
One argument that may favor nuclear power is that continued or increased use of nuclear power for electricity generation would lessen U.S. dependence on energy imports and thus provide greater national security.
The "improved national security" argument can be taken only so far, however, given that the only imported fuel that competes significantly with nuclear power is natural gas, and almost all U.S. natural gas imports come from Canada.
In other countries, nuclear power may well be considered a more secure form of electricity production, particularly by those nations heavily dependent on energy imports for electricity production.
For instance, Japan relies on imported oil and natural gas for 38 percent of its electricity production, and 79 percent of its oil imports and 20 percent of its natural gas imports come from the Middle East [3].
Nuclear power first became a major source of electricity production in the 1970s.
Nuclear power consumption worldwide grew from 188 billion kilowatthours in 1973 to 1,843 billion kilowatthours in 1989 [4].
By the 1990s, however, the growth of nuclear power consumption had begun to slow, and it is expected to level off by 2010.
No lasting orders for new plants have occurred in Austria, Hungary, Italy, Mexico, the Netherlands, Switzerland, or the United States since 1973 [5].
Thus far, however, only Germany, Lithuania, Sweden, and Ukraine have committed to the early retirement of some if not all of their nuclear power plants.
All other nations seeking to reduce their reliance on nuclear power intend to do so through attrition and by not building any new nuclear power plants.
Still, many nations may find that viable alternatives to nuclear power are more difficult to develop than anticipated.
Sweden, for instance, after committing to the closure of its Barsebäck nuclear power units by 2001, has delayed the closure of Barsebäck 2 until 2003.
The Economics of Nuclear Power
There has been a significant improvement in the economics of nuclear power over the past several years.
Capacity factors in the United States, for instance, which averaged 56.3 percent in 1980, grew to 89.1 percent in 2001 (Figure 65).
Since the 1970s and 1980s, the average interval between refuelings for U.S. nuclear units has increased to 18 months from 12 months, resulting in less frequent outages [6], and since 1990 the average refueling cycle has fallen from 100 days to 80 days [7]
Overseas, capacity factors have also improved measurably.
For those developed nations with nuclear power units in operation in both 1980 and 1999 (including the United States), the average capacity factor rose from 59 percent to 77 percent (Figure 66).
One of the ways to increase the capacity factor of a nuclear unit is to have fewer scheduled and unscheduled shutdowns; and improved operational safety has been an important factor in reducing shutdowns.
Another means of increasing the output of nuclear power plants is to implement a power uprate, which can be viewed as increasing the absolute capacity of a plant rather than its utilization rate.
Since the 1970s, the NRC has approved 62 uprates of U.S. nuclear plants, adding the equivalent of two large nuclear units [8].
Power uprates are typically achieved through plant upgrades, including investments in such items as pipes, heat exchangers, pumps, transformers, and generators.
Recently, the U.S. nuclear power industry has witnessed an unprecedented merger and acquisition spree, seeing roughly one-fourth of the industry change ownership and resulting in a much more concentrated industry.
One possible motivation for consolidation is the belief on the part of the acquisition companies that a company with several power plants can operate them more efficiently than a company operating only one or a few plants.
This also may lead to future efficiency improvements.
Although increased capacity utilization and uprates have improved the economics of nuclear power, for most nations and under most economic assumptions, nuclear power currently is a relatively expensive option for electricity generation when compared with natural gas or coal.
A recent study by the International Energy Agency (IEA) on the relative competitiveness of natural gas, nuclear power, and coal among members of the Organization for Economic Cooperation and development (OECD) [9] examined various operating costs, capital costs, plant decommissioning costs, and the costs of waste disposal (see discussion on "Nuclear Waste Disposal").
The study compared existing technologies and not future technologies.
Expectations are that future nuclear power plants will see significant efficiency gains, although gains are also expected for natural gas, coal, and renewables.
In terms of operating costs, the IEA study concluded that nuclear power plants were competitive against coal and natural-gas-fired generation units.
Natural-gas-fired units averaged 2.2 to 4.1 cents per kilowatt hour, coal plants between 1.9 and 3.3 cents per kilowatthour, and nuclear between 0.8 and 3.2 cents per kilowatthour (Table 18).16 The fuel costs (per kilowatthour of generation) for a nuclear power plant are significantly lower than those for coal or natural gas plants.
Capital costs, however, are another matter.
The IEA study looked at different plants operating in various member countries (Table 19).
In capital-intensive industries like electricity generation, interest rates play a key role in determining the relative economics of different generation fuel sources.
The capital costs of a new nuclear unit are substantially higher than those for new natural gas and coal units.
Interest rates vary across countries, as do other factors that affect the relative costs of nuclear power, including labor costs, material and equipment costs, regulation, and infrastructure.
The IEA study assumed three discount rates, 0 percent (i.e., the overnight capital cost), 5 percent, and 10 percent.
(As a point of comparison, the U.S. prime rate has averaged 9.30 percent since 1970 [10].)
Due to their higher construction costs, the relative cost of nuclear power plants is much more sensitive to changes in interest rates than are the costs of coal or natural gas plants.
For a French-built pressurized-water reactor, capital costs averaged $1,636 per kilowatt at 0 percent, $1,988 per kilowatt at 5-percent interest, and $2,280 per kilowatt at 10-percent interest.
It should be noted that the length of time to build a nuclear plant sometimes far exceeds the average.
Although nuclear power plants can theoretically be built (and have been built) in 4 years [11], the IEA study notes that in the aftermath of the Three Mile Island accident in Pennsylvania, the average length of time to construct a U.S. power plant was 12 years.
The IEA study concluded that, depending on the price of various operations and maintenance costs (which are heavily dependent on fuel costs, particularly for coal and natural gas) and the cost of capital (which affects nuclear disproportionately), the economics of natural gas, coal, and nuclear plants differ considerably.
Assuming a 5-percent discount rate, nuclear power plants are estimated to be more efficient than coal or natural gas plants in 5 of 9 countries for which data on all three fuels were available.
These countries are typically those with high natural gas prices.
At a 10-percent discount rate, nuclear power is less efficient in every country.
The IEA has also conducted case studies on countries such as China, India, South Korea, Pakistan, and Vietnam and has concluded that nuclear power in those countries was never the cheapest form of electricity production [12].
Although currently nuclear power plants are in general not competitive with other sources of electricity, future gains in their efficiency are expected.
According to a publication sponsored by the U.S. Department of Energy, A Roadmap To Deploy New Nuclear Power Plants in the United States by 2010, which included data from the U.S. nuclear industry on nuclear power plant designs that could be deployed by 2010, "new nuclear power plants can be deployed in the U.S. in this decade, provided that there is sufficient and timely private-sector financial investment."
The report also noted that "although conditions are currently more favorable for new nuclear plants than in many years, economic competitiveness in a deregulated electricity supply structure remains a key area of uncertainty with respect to near term deployment potential . . . .
[T]here are excellent new nuclear plant candidates that build on the experiences of existing reactors in the U.S. and around the world . . . .
[T]hose that are most advanced in terms of design completion and approval status appear to be economically competitive in some scenarios, but not all" [13]
Regional Developments
Western Europe
Western Europe relied on nuclear power for 35 percent of its electricity in 1999.
Nuclear's share of the Western European electricity market is expected to fall to 24 percent by 2020.
Currently, among European countries, only France and Finland have shown any intent to expand their nuclear power industries.
Most of the other nations of Western Europe have decided either to curtail further development of nuclear power or to abandon it entirely.
Belgium, Germany, the Netherlands, Spain, Sweden, and Switzerland have made past commitments to gradual phaseouts of their nuclear power programs, although those commitments have been difficult to carry through, as described below.
Sweden and Germany have adopted the most aggressive plans to end their nuclear power programs.
In 1980, Sweden committed to a scheduled 40-year phaseout of nuclear power, and in November 1997 the Swedish parliament approved a plan to shut down two of the nation's twelve nuclear reactors, Barsebäck 1 and Barsebäck 2, which accounted for 12 percent of Sweden's nuclear generation capacity.
Barsebäck 1, a 615-megawatt reactor that began commercial operation in 1975, was shut down in November 1999, more than a year after the scheduled closing date of July 1998.
Barsebäck 2, completed in 1977, was initially scheduled to be closed in July 2001, but in August 2000 the Swedish government announced that the Barsebäck 2 closure would also be delayed until 2003, and then only if secure sources of electricity could be obtained [14].
After closing Barsebäck 1, Sweden replaced the lost electricity generation with imported power from a coal-fired plant in Denmark, causing an increase in Western Europe's total carbon dioxide emissions.
In June 2000, Germany's electricity industry agreed to phase out its nuclear power plants ahead of schedule [15].
The plan calls for the shutdown of all of Germany's reactors after they have operated for 32 years.
Accordingly, the final plant closure would occur in the mid-2020s.
Germany's ruling government minority coalition partner, the environmentalist Green party, had favored a 10-year phaseout.
The Social Democratic German Chancellor, Gerhard Schroeder, initially favored a 20-year phaseout but reached a compromise with the electric utility industry.
The German government also decided eventually to stop the foreign reprocessing of its spent nuclear fuels, but that decision was rescinded in early 2001, ending a 3-year moratorium on spent fuel shipments to foreign reprocessing plants.
There has been some recent apparent backtracking on the move away from dependence on nuclear power as a source of electricity.
In Italy, the interim head of the nation's Environmental Protection Agency (Anpa) stated that there was "wide support within the country's scientific community for review of a possible reemergence of nuclear energy in Italy" [16].
Similarly, the European director general for energy, Francois Lamoureux, stated that the use of nuclear is "unavoidable in aiding security of supply and tackling climate change" [17].
Martin Villa, the chairman of the Spanish Electricity Company Endesa, called for a reopening of the debate on new plant construction [18].
The Tony Blair government in the UK initially stated that it did not want an expansion of nuclear power; however, for some time the Blair government has left open the possibility that it would reverse that stance.
Japan
The Japanese government and electricity industry remain committed to building new commercial nuclear power reactors in the future, despite some public concern over operational safety.
The IEO2002 reference case projects that the nuclear share of Japan's total electricity generation will remain stable at about one-third through 2020.
Developing Asia
Alone among world regions, developing Asia is expected to see rapid growth in nuclear power.
Nuclear power plants are currently in operation in China, India, Pakistan, South Korea, and Taiwan, and in the IEO2002 reference case developing Asia is expected to more than double its nuclear capacity by 2020.
Consumption of energy from nuclear power plants in developing Asia is projected to increase from 160 billion kilowatthours in 1999 to 425 billion kilowatthours in 2020.
Increases in nuclear generating capacity are expected for all the developing Asian nations that currently have nuclear power plants in operation.
By 2020, developing Asia is projected to account for 15 percent of the world's nuclear power capacity, up from 6 percent in 1999.
China and India are expected to show the most rapid growth in nuclear power capacity over the forecast period.
China, which had 2,177 megawatts of capacity in 2000, is expected to increase its capacity to 16,607 megawatts by 2020.
India is also expected to show a marked increase in nuclear power capacity.
India, which currently has 2 nuclear power plants under construction, is expected to increase its capacity from 2,301 megawatts in 2000 to 6,451 megawatts by 2020.
IEO2002 expects substantial additional nuclear capacity to be added to the South Korean nuclear power sector over the forecast period.
The additions projected are only slightly less than those forecast by the South Korean government or the state-owned national utility, KEPCO.
In 1999, the South Korean nuclear power industry had 12,990 megawatts of capacity.
By 2020, South Korea's nuclear power capacity is expected to rise to 22,125 megawatts.
North America
United States
The United States is expected to reduce its reliance on nuclear power significantly over the forecast period, from 20 percent of total electricity generation in 1999 to less than 15 percent in 2020.
Only a few years ago it seemed likely that there would be numerous early closures of nuclear power plants in the United States; however, several companies have recently applied to the NRC for extensions of reactor operating licenses, and as many as 90 percent of all operating plants could eventually be relicensed [19].
Reductions in operating costs over the past decade have made nuclear plants more competitive, even as electricity markets are increasingly being deregulated.
The Bush Administration's National Energy Policy favors expanding the role of nuclear power by, as stated in the report of the National Energy Policy Development Group, "encouraging the Nuclear Regulatory Commission to facilitate efforts by utilities to expand nuclear energy in the United States by uprating existing power plants safely . . ." and by encouraging "the NRC to relicense existing nuclear plants . . ." by directing the DOE and EPA to "assess the potential of nuclear to improve air quality . . . to increase resources as necessary for the nuclear safety enforcement in light of the potential increase in generation . . . to use the best science to provide a deep geologic repository for nuclear waste . . . to support legislation clarifying that qualified funds set aside by plant owners for eventual decommission will not be taxed as part of the transaction . . . to support legislation to extend the Price Anderson Act" [20], which limits a nuclear power plants liability in the case of an accident.
In 2001, the Department of Energy's Office of Nuclear Energy, Science and Technology solicited proposals from the civilian nuclear electricity industry to conduct scoping studies "of potential sites for the deployment of new nuclear power plants" [21].
In the United States, some utilities have come out in favor of building new units and perhaps resurrecting units already shut down.
In March 2001, the Tennessee Valley Authority (TVA) began reconsidering the restarting of Browns Ferry nuclear plant, which was shut down in 1985.
In December 2001, the TVA announced that a "preferred option" is to extend the operation of all three Browns Ferry units [22].
Exelon Corp, the largest producer of nuclear power in the United States, has been discussing with the NRC the construction of new nuclear plants and announced that it is considering restarting one or both nuclear reactors at its Zion site (in Illinois), which was shut down in 1998.
Recently, the NRC has approved three new versions of reactors that are deemed both safer and more economical.17 To date, however, no firm plans for either constructing a new unit or restarting a mothballed unit have been announced.
Canada
Nuclear power accounted for 14 percent of Canada's electricity generation in 1999, but its share is expected to drop slightly, to 13 percent, by the end of the forecast period.
In late 1997 and early 1998, Ontario Power Generation (formerly Ontario Hydro) shut down seven of its older nuclear power plants, or 17 percent (4,300 megawatts) of its operating capacity.
Canada still has 14 nuclear power plants currently in operation.
In July 2000, Ontario Power Generation announced its planned lease of the operation of eight of its Bruce reactors, four of which were shut down in 1998, to British Energy.
In January 2001, Canada's nuclear safety commission scheduled two hearings for licenses to resume operation of three of the closed units.
On October 2, 2001, the Canadian Nuclear Power Safety Commission approved an environmental review procedure that is expected to result in the reopening of Ontario's Bruce 3 and 4 nuclear power plants, with a total of 1,500 megawatts of capacity, by 2003 and 2004, respectively [23].
In November 2001, the Commission gave provisional approval for the restart of the Pickering A power plant [24].
Africa
Among African nations, South Africa is currently the only country with nuclear electricity generation capacity and the only nation expected to produce electricity from nuclear power over the forecast period.
South Africa has two 921-megawatt reactors, Koeberg 1 and 2, now in operation, and nuclear power accounted for 7 percent of its electricity generation in 1999.
South Africa's state-owned utility, Eskom, has been experimenting with pebble bed modular reactor technology since 1993 and had proposed the construction of a 110-megawatt demonstration reactor beginning in mid-2001, although the most recent phase calls for units in the 120 to 130 megawatt range.
In November 2001, the proposed construction start time for the pebble bed modular reactor was delayed for up to 12 months upon completion of a feasibility study [25].
The IEO2002 forecast does not expect the reactor to come online until late in the forecast period.
Eastern European and the Former Soviet Union
Nuclear power capacity in Eastern Europe and the former Soviet Union (EE/FSU) is expected to decline over the forecast period, primarily as a result of the retirement of plants in the FSU that have been the subject of safety concerns.
By 2020, the region is expected to have 37,000 megawatts of capacity, compared with 44,000 megawatts in 1999.
The EE/FSU region has 59 reactors operating at 18 nuclear energy sites.
Twenty-five are considered to be operating at standards below those acceptable in the West.
A major goal of Western efforts has been to shut down the least safe nuclear reactors operating in the EE/FSU countries.
In 1992, the International Atomic Energy Agency began a review of safety practices at Soviet-designed RBMK-type reactors.
RBMKs are graphite-moderated channel reactors.
Six of the 15 RBMK plants currently in operation are "first generation," because they were built in the early to mid-1970s.
They are considered less safe than those built later.
In total, the Soviets built 17 RBMK units (including the 4 units at Chernobyl), of which 13 are still active.
Eleven RBMK reactors are operating in Russia and two in Lithuania, and one is currently under construction.
Lithuania was promised 200 million euros (about $180 million) from the European Commission and twelve other nations in grants to help ease the financial burden of shutting down its RBMK Ignalina 2 nuclear power plant before 2005.
Similar efforts are being undertaken to close down Bulgaria's Kozloduy plants and Slovakia's Bohunice plants.
Bulgaria intends to close Kozloduy units 1 and 2 in 2002 or 2003.
Bulgaria has agreed to close Kozloduy units 1-4 "at the earliest possible date."
The European Union (EU) committed 200 million euros to help Bulgaria close Kozloduy units 1 and 2, and in February 2001 Westinghouse announced that it will modernize Kozloduy units 5 and 6 .
Both Lithuania's and Slovakia's future entry into the EU has been jeopardized by the concerns associated with their nuclear power industries.
In December 1995, the Group of Seven and Ukraine reached an agreement to shut down all units at Chernobyl by 2000.
The Chernobyl accident in 1986 destroyed unit 4, and unit 2 was shut down in 1991.
Under the agreement, unit 1 was shut down in 1996, and Ukraine shut down the last of the four reactors, Chernobyl 3, in December 2000.
In October 2000, the first of the Czech Republic's two Temelin nuclear power reactors was brought online after a long-running dispute with Austria and Germany.
Construction on Temelin, which began in 1987, was delayed for financial and technical reasons [26].
Unlike the RBMKs discussed above, Temelin is a pressurized-water reactor.
Westinghouse was brought in to upgrade the Temelin plant to Western standards.18 British Energy has indicated a willingness to purchase both the Temelin plant and the Czech Republic's Dukovany reactors, adding to a portfolio of nuclear assets that includes plants in the United States and Canada.
horizonal line image
Contact Us
Contact Authors
URL: http://www.eia.doe.gov/oiaf/ieo/nuclear.html
(Report#:DOE/EIA-0484(2002) March 26, 2002 (Next Release: March 2003)
Appendixes
Report Contents
Download Report by Chapters or the Entire Report in PDF Format
Feedback
E-Mail Subscription Lists _____________________________________________________
Related Links
International Forecast Home Page
Forecasts Home Page
