City of Tucson Home Page [clearpixel.gif] Home Voting Elections Campaign Finance Mayor 
Those elected will take office at 10:00 a.m. on Monday, December 1, 2003 and will serve for four years.
The Mayor receives a salary of $3,500 per month and each Council Member receives a salary of $2,000 per month.
Candidates and political committees should immediately contact the City Clerks Office with any questions regarding the information contained on this site.
Because this material is subject to change, individuals are urged to stay in contact with the City Clerks Office to ensure they are following the most up-to-date regulations.
The City Clerk also has available numerous publications that focus on specific election-related issues and activities.
These include the Candidate Information Phamphlet, Independent Expenditures, Political Election Sign Regulations and Campaign Finance Reporting.
PRIMARY ELECTION Tuesday, September 9 Held to nominate and place on the General Election ballot candidates from qualified political parties for the office of Mayor and Council Members in Ward 1, Ward 2, and Ward 4.
The Democratic, Republican, Libertarian and Greenparties are qualified as of the posting of this document.
Other political parties may participate in the citys September 9 Primary Election upon meeting qualifications for placement on the 2003 ballot.
Qualified electors who will be 18 years of age or older on September 9, 2003, who have registered to vote on or before August 11, 2003 with a qualified political party and who have resided in the City of Tucson since August 10, 2003, may vote for their partys candidate for Mayor.
Qualified electors who meet these requirements and who have resided in Ward 1, Ward 2 or Ward 4 since August 10, 2003, may ALSO vote for their partys candidate for Council Member in their council ward.
Qualified electors registered as Independent or No Party Preference or as a member of a political party other than Democratic, Republican, Libertarian, or Green may vote in the Primary Election for one of the qualified parties.
GENERAL ELECTION Tuesday, November 4 Held to elect a Mayor and Council Members in Ward 1, Ward 2, and Ward 4.
Qualified electors who have resided in the City of Tucson (regardless of City Ward) since October 5, 2003, who will 18 years of age or older on November 4, 2003 (regardless of party affiliation) are eligible to vote for all offices and on all issues.
Once elected, Mayor and Council Members will serve a four- year term in office.
CANDIDATE QUALIFICATIONS A candidate must have been a qualified elector and resident of the City of Tucson for not less than three (3) years immediately prior to becoming a candidate.
Additionally, council candidates shall have resided in the ward for which nomination is sought at least one (1) year immediately prior to becoming a candidate, unless such residence has been shortened by the redistricting of the City as to wards.
(Note: Time of residence in any area and being a qualified elector thereof shall be counted as residence and electoral qualifications within the City one (1) year after the area becomes annexed to the City).
An Individual can not run simultaneously for both Mayor and Council Member during this election.
Individuals who are members of the Democratic, Republican, Libertarian, or Green parties may participate in the Primary Election either by obtaining enough signatures to have their names printed on the Primary Election ballot, or by filing as write-in candidates.
Candidates nominated in the Primary Election will be placed on the ballot for the General Election.
In addition, individuals who are not members of the Democratic, Republican, Libertarian, or Green parties may have their names placed on the General Election ballot either by obtaining the required number of signatures for Nomination Other than by Primary or by filing as write-in candidates.
Name printed on primary election ballot: (Filing May 12 through 4 p.m. June 11, 2003) Write-in candidates: (Filing deadline for Primary Election: 5 p.m. August 26, 2003) (Filing deadline for General Election: 5 p.m. October 21, 2003 Nomination other than by primary for placement on general election ballot: (File: May 12 through 5 p.m. June 11, 2003)
FILING A STATEMENT OF ORGANIZATION OR A $500 THRESHOLD EXEMPTION STATEMENT Every candidate or political committee shall file a Statement of Organization or a $500 Threshold Exemption Statement with the City Clerk before making expenditures, accepting any contributions, distributing any campaign literature or circulating any petitions.
(This also applies to committees that have filed a Statement of Organization or a $500 Threshold Exemption Statement with another jurisdiction.)
If a candidate or political committee has filed a $500 Exemption Statement and receives contributions or makes expenditures of more then $500, that candidate or political committee shall file a Statement of Organization with the City Clerk within five business days after exceeding the $500 limit.
A political committee registered in another state that intends to use monies in Arizona which were raised before filing the Statement of Organization shall also file with the City Clerk complete copies of its previous campaign finance or other similar reports filed in those other jurisdictions.
The reports must cover all contributions or receipts for the preceding two years.
RECALL INFORMATION Recall is the power to require a public officer holding an elective office of the City of Tucson to resign or have the issue of retention of office submitted to a vote of the electorate via a petition process.
The Mayor and Council are the only elected officers of the City of Tucson.
The Rules and Regulations governing the Recall process are taken from the: Tucson Charter Chapter XXI Tucson Code Section 12 Arizona Revised Statutes Title 19 Arizona Constitution Article VIII
2001 Recall Rules 
[clearpixel.gif] [clearpixel.gif]
City Clerks Office City Hall, 255 W. Alameda, PO Box 27210 Tucson, AZ 85726-7210.
520.791.4213 Fax 520.791.4017 TTY 520.791.2639 Mayor 
[clearpixel.gif] [clearpixel.gif]
E-Services | Business | Jobs | Visitor Info | Mayor 
