Screen Readers: Use this link to skip navigation Banner _______________________________________________________________________ JWST Short Cuts: [Fast Facts.......]
Home News Meetings Science Goals Working Group Community Educators Media Project Office Contacts Documents Library ISIM Contacts Observatory Contacts NGST logo Obs.
Prime Contractor Ground Segment contacts STScI Logo Science 
On 10 September 2002, the Next Generation Space Telescope (NGST) was named in honor of James E. Webb, NASA administrator from 1961-1968.
FAQ - Answers __________________________________________________________________
JWST Program 
1.
What is the James Webb Space Telescope?
The James Webb Space Telescope, or JWST, is a large, infrared-optimized space telescope designed to study the formation of the first stars and galaxies, the evolution of galaxies and the production of elements by stars, and the process of star and planet formation.
2.
What was the JWST called before it was named after James Webb?
The James Webb Space Telescope was originally called the "Next Generation Space Telescope," or NGST.
It was called "Next Generation" because the JWST is a space telescope that will build on and continue the science exploration started by the Hubble Space Telescope.
Hubble has given us wonderful answers and new questions that require a new, different, and more powerful telescope.
Also, JWST is a "Next Generation" telescope in an engineering sense, introducing new technologies like the lightweight, deployable primary mirror and paving the way for future missions.
On 10 September 2002, the Next Generation Space Telescope was named in honor of James E. Webb, NASA's second administrator.
3.
Who was James E. Webb?
The space-based observatory was named after James E. Webb (1906 -- 1992), NASA's second administrator.
While Webb is best known for leading Apollo and a series of lunar exploration programs that landed the first humans on the Moon, he also initiated a vigorous space science program, responsible for more than 75 launches during his tenure, including America's first interplanetary explorers.
"It is fitting that Hubble's successor be named in honor of James Webb.
Thanks to his efforts, we got our first glimpses at the dramatic landscapes of outer space," said NASA Administrator Sean O'Keefe.
"He took our nation on its first voyages of exploration, turning our imagination into reality.
Indeed, he laid the foundations at NASA for one of the most successful periods of astronomical discovery.
As a result, we're rewriting the textbooks today with the help of the Hubble Space Telescope, the Chandra X-ray Observatory and, in 2010, the James Webb Telescope."
During the Apollo era, Administrator Webb recognized the importance of a balanced space exploration program that went far beyond the Moon and ushered in a decade of space science with a surge of launches that remains a record to this day.
Many Americans recall the excitement from missions such as the Ranger series, the Lunar Surveyor landers and the Lunar Orbiters, which led the way for Astronauts to walk on the Moon, and America's first interplanetary probes, the historic Mariners which explored Venus and Mars.
Over 75 space science missions were launched during his tenure to study the stars and galaxies in deep space, as well as our own Sun, and the as-yet unknown environment of space above the Earthís atmosphere.
These missions included the Orbiting Solar Observatory and the Explorer series of astronomical satellites and numerous others.
Few, however, know that as early as 1965 James Webb wrote that a major space telescope, then known as the Large Space Telescope, should be a major effort for NASA.
That concept eventually became the Hubble Space Telescope, launched in 1990.
He also advocated strengthening NASA's core of scientists and engineers with outside participants from academia for what was to become the Hubble Space Telescope.
This led to the establishment of what eventually became the Space Telescope Science Institute, which was selected a few years ago to be the science institute for JWST.
It seems fitting that the institute founded as a direct result of his efforts will manage the science program for a space telescope bearing his name.
Administrator James E. Webb led the space agency from May 1961 until Oct 1968.
For more information on James Webb Go here.
4.
How will JWST be better than the Hubble Space Telescope?
JWST is designed to look deeper into space to see the earliest stars and galaxies form in the Universe and to look deep into nearby dust clouds to study the formation of stars and planets.
In order to do this, JWST will have a much larger primary mirror than Hubble (2.5 times larger in diameter, or about 6 times larger in area), giving it much more light gathering power.
It also will have better infrared instruments than Hubble, allowing it to see the formation of stars and galaxies (see below).
Finally, JWST will operate much farther from Earth, where operations are simpler, and where giving the telescope a stable pointing is easier than with the Earth-orbiting Hubble.
5.
How much will JWST cost?
JWST is projected to cost one-fourth to one-third the cost of Hubble, one of the most successful science instruments ever, yet JWST will be more capable than Hubble in many ways.
The JWST will realize these cost savings primarily through advanced technology.
JWST has a shorter lifetime, and since it will not be serviced in space, there are no costs for servicing.
6.
How can JWST's primary mirror be more than twice the size of Hubble's while JWST is so much less massive than Hubble?
The main reason is progress in technology since the building of Hubble.
The best example of weight reduction is the primary mirror, which takes up a considerable fraction of the total mass budget.
The mirror has to be very accurately shaped.
Any variations from the perfect shape of the mirror have to be less than a fraction of the shortest observing wavelength, which is about 0.1 micrometer (in the ultraviolet) for Hubble and 0.6 micrometer (green light) for JWST.
To keep the mirror in such a perfect shape, Hubble has a thick, solid glass mirror with a mass around 1000 kg (2200 lbs on Earth).
JWST's mirror will consist of 18 ultra-thin, beryllium, lightweight mirror segments, which will be kept in the right shape and place by a large number of adjustors attached to a stiff backing frame.
These kinds of technologies, which were not available at the time Hubble was built, will be used throughout JWST.
You can learn more about JWST's lightweight optics at http://www.JWST.nasa.gov/Hardware/text/optics_new.htm.
7.
The primary mirror on JWST will be made of beryllium.
What is beryllium?
Beryllium (atomic symbol: Be) is a gray, brittle metal with an atomic number of 4.
Beryllium has a high strength per unit weight.
It tarnishes only slightly in air.
The addition of beryllium to some alloys often results in products that have high heat resistance, improved corrosion resistance, greater hardness, greater insulating properties, and better casting qualities.
Many parts of supersonic aircraft are made of beryllium alloys because of their lightness, stiffness, and dimensional stability.
Other applications make use of the nonmagnetic and nonsparking qualities of beryllium and the ability of the metal to conduct electricity.
Beryllium is toxic and no attempts should be made to work with it before becoming familiar with proper safeguards.^1
8.
Why is JWST optimized for near- and mid-infrared light?
The primary goals of JWST are to study galaxy, star and planet formation in the Universe.
To see the very first stars and galaxies form in the early Universe, we have to look deep into space to look back in time (because it takes light time to travel from there to here, the farther we look, the further we look back in time).
The Universe is expanding, and therefore the farther we look, the faster objects are moving away from us, creating redshift.
Redshift means that light we normally see and study is shifted more and more to redder wavelengths, into the near- and mid-infrared part of the light spectrum for very high redshifts (for more on redshift see the Science 
Therefore, to study the earliest star formation in the Universe, we have to observe infrared light and use a telescope and instruments optimized for this light.
Star and planet formation in the local Universe takes place in the centers of dense, dusty clouds, obscured from our eyes at normal visible wavelengths.
Near-infrared light, with its longer wavelength, is less hindered by the small dust particles, allowing near-infrared light to escape from the dust clouds.
By observing the emitted near-infrared light we can penetrate the dust and see the processes leading to star and planet formation.
Objects of about Earth's temperature emit most of their radiation at mid-infrared wavelengths.
These temperatures are also found in dusty regions forming stars and planets, so with mid-infrared radiation we can see the glow of the star and planet formation taking place.
An infrared-optimized telescope allows us to penetrate dust clouds to see the birthplaces of stars and planets.
9.
Why does JWST have to go so much farther away from Earth than Hubble? What is the second Lagrange point orbit?
Although it makes sense to keep certain satellites near the Earth for communication considerations or launch weight considerations (i.e. it's hard to put massive objects far from Earth because this requires great thrust from the rocket), JWST requires a distant orbit for several reasons.
JWST will observe primarily the infrared light from faint and very distant objects.
But all objects, including telescopes, also emit infrared light.
To avoid swamping the very faint astronomical signals with radiation from the telescope, the telescope and its instruments must be very cold.
Therefore, JWST has a large shield that blocks the light from the Sun, Earth, and Moon, which otherwise would heat up the telescope, and interfere with the observations.
To have this work, JWST must be in an orbit where all three of these objects are in about the same direction.
The most convenient point is the second Lagrange point (L2) of the Sun-Earth system, a semi-stable point in the gravitational potential around the Sun and Earth.
The L2 point lies outside Earth's orbit while it is going around the Sun, keeping all three in a line at all times.
The combined gravitational forces of the Sun and the Earth can almost hold a spacecraft at this point, and it takes relatively little rocket thrust to keep the spacecraft near L2.
Although the L2 region is nearly 1 million miles (1.5 million km) from Earth, the JWST can communicate easily with ground stations on the Earth.
The cold and stable temperature environment of the L2 point will allow JWST to make the very sensitive infrared observations needed.
10.
Why is JWST not serviceable like Hubble?
When JWST is at the second Lagrange point (see previous question), it will be out of reach of the Space Shuttle and repairs cannot be made once it has been launched.
This also means that no provisions have to be made to allow astronauts to make repairs.
11.
Why will it take JWST 3 months to reach its final orbit?
JWST is going to the second Lagrange (L2) point, which is 1 million miles (1.5 million km) away from Earth, and it just takes a while to travel such a distance.
Although a faster transit to orbit could be accomplished, such a direct insertion orbit would cost a great deal in extra equipment, extra fuel and a larger rocket.
The JWST will be able to start operating during its trip to L2, so the time won't be wasted.
12.
Why do we have to go to space at all? Can we not get these data with large telescopes on the ground, using adaptive optics?
The Earth's atmosphere is nearly opaque and glows brightly at most of the infrared wavelengths that JWST will observe, so a cold telescope in space is required.
For those wavelengths that are transmitted, the Earth's atmosphere blurs the images seen from the ground and causes stars to twinkle.
Adaptive optics can correct for this blurring currently only over small fields of view near bright stars functioning as reference beacons, allowing access to only a small fraction of the sky.
Artificial light beacons created with strong lasers may provide better access to the sky in the future.
Finding the earliest star formation will require very low foreground light levels, ultra-sharp images over large areas, and studies at many infrared wavelengths, a combination of observing conditions only available from space.
13.
When will JWST be launched?
The current development schedule calls for launch in August 2011.
14.
How will JWST be launched?
The current proposed launcher for JWST is the Ariane 5 made by Arianespace.
15.
How long will the JWST mission last?
JWST will be designed to last 5 years; the goal is to have a mission lifetime of 10 years.
16.
Who are the partners in the JWST project? Which countries are involved?
NASA is the main partner in JWST, with significant contributions from the European Space Agency (ESA) and the Canadian Space Agency (CSA).
The main industrial partner is Northrop Grumman who will build the telescope and prepare the spacecraft for launch.
The countries involved are the United States, Canada and the 15 European countries which are the member states of ESA.
The European participation also depends on the involvement of individual countries in funding the instrument development.
17.
Who will be able to use JWST and how is this decided?
JWST will be a General Observatory, meaning that qualified astronomers from Universities and other research institutes can write proposals to perform observational studies with JWST.
These proposals will be judged by a peer review system.
Teams of independent astronomers will rank the observing proposals according to scientific merit.
The results of these studies will be published in scientific journals, and the data will be made available through the World Wide Web to other astronomers and the general public for further studies.
This is the same system that is used to schedule the Hubble Space Telescope and many other space and ground-based observatories.
18.
At which wavelengths will JWST observe?
JWST will work from 0.6 to 28 micrometers, ranging from visible green light through the invisible mid-infrared.
19.
What kind of instruments will JWST have?
JWST will have a near-infrared and visible camera (NIRCam), a near-infrared multi-object spectrograph (NIRSpec) and a mid-infrared instrument (MIRI) with camera and spectrograph.
NIRCam will have two dual beam imagers, each with a field of view of 2.3 x 2.3 arc-minutes, working from 0.6 to 2.3 micrometers and from 2.4 to 5 micrometers, with intermediate and broadband filters.
NIRSpec will be able to take spectra from at least 100 objects simultaneously in the 1-5 micrometers range over a 3 x 3 arc-minute field of view.
The selection of targets will probably be performed by a MEMS (micro-electro-mechanical system) device, a 1,000 x 2,000 reconfigurable array of tiny shutters.
Each shutter is about the diameter of a human hair.
MIRI will consist of a camera with a 2 x 2 arc-minute field of view and a spectrograph, working in the 5-28 micrometer range.
A long slit allows light from a small region of the sky into the spectrograph.
The Fine Guidance Sensor is also a science instrument.
It will have two tunable filter imaging modules: one working from 1.2 to 2.5 micrometers, the other from 2.5 to 4.5 micrometers.
All modules will have coronagraphic capabilities.
20.
How big is JWST going to be?
The most important size of a telescope is the diameter of the primary mirror, which will be about 6 meters (20 feet) for the JWST.
This is about 2.5 times larger than the diameter of Hubble, or about 6 times larger in area.
The JWST will have a mass of approximately 6,200 kg, with a weight of 13,400 lbs on Earth (in orbit, everything is weightless), a little more than half the mass of Hubble.
The largest structure of JWST will be its sunshade, which must be able to shield the deployed primary mirror and the tower that holds the secondary mirror.
The sunshade is approximately the size of a tennis court.
21.
Why does JWST have a segmented, unfolding primary mirror?
JWST needs to have an unfolding mirror because the mirror is so large that it otherwise cannot fit in the launch shroud of currently available rockets.
The mirror has to be large in order to see the faint light from the first star forming regions and to see very small details at infrared wavelengths.
Designing, building and operating a mirror that unfolds is one of the major technological developments of JWST.
Unfolding mirrors will be necessary for future missions requiring even larger mirrors, and will find application in other scientific, civil and military space missions.
22.
How sharp are the images of JWST going to be?
The sharpness of images is what astronomers call angular resolution.
JWST will have an angular resolution of somewhat better than 0.1 arc-seconds at a wavelength of 2 micrometers (one degree = 60 arc-minutes = 3600 arc-seconds).
Seeing at a resolution of 0.1 arc-second means that we can see details the size of a US penny at a distance of about 24 miles (40 km), or a regulation soccer ball at a distance of 340 miles (550 km).
23.
What kind of detectors will JWST have?
JWST will have two types of detectors: visible and near-infrared arrays with 2,048 x 2,048 pixels, and mid-infrared arrays with about 1,024 x 1,024 pixels.
Several detectors will be mounted next to each other to give a larger field of view.
NIRCam will use HgCdTe detectors made by Rockwell Scientific.
MIRI will employ Si:As detectors produced by Raytheon.
NIRSpec and FGS intend to select their detector technology in late 2003.
24.
What is the operating temperature of the telescope and the instruments?
The large sunshade will protect the telescope from heating by direct sunlight, allowing it to cool down to a temperature below 45 kelvin (equal to -378°F, or -228°C).
The near-infrared instruments will work at about 30 K (-405°F, -243°C) through a passive cooling system.
The mid-infrared detectors will work at a temperature of 7 K, using stored cryogen.
The definition of the kelvin temperature scale is that 0 K is "absolute zero," the lowest possible temperature.
Water freezes at 0°C or 32°F or about 273 K.
25.
How will JWST communicate with scientists at Earth?
The JWST will send science and engineering data to Earth using a high frequency radio transmitter.
Large radio antennas will receive the signals and forward them to the JWST Science 
26.
How faint can JWST see?
JWST is designed to discover and study the first stars and galaxies that formed in the early Universe.
To see these faint objects, it must be able to detect things that are ten billion times as faint as the faintest stars visible without a telescope.
This is 10 to 100 times fainter than Hubble can see.
JWST Science 
1.
What are the main science goals of JWST?
JWST is designed to discover and study the first stars and galaxies that formed in the early Universe, to study the evolution of galaxies and the production of the elements by stars, to measure the geometry of the Universe and the distribution of dark matter, and to investigate the processes of star and planet formation.
2.
JWST is part of NASA's Origins Program.
What is the goal of the Origins Program and what are some of the other missions in this program? What comes after JWST?
The Origins Program supports investigations studying the origin and development of galaxies, stars, planets, and ultimately, life.
Some space missions became part of the Origins Program after they started, like the Hubble Space Telescope and the Space Infrared Telescope Facility (SIRTF).
Origins missions currently under development include the Space Interferometry Mission (SIM) and JWST.
Long-term plans call for Terrestrial Planet Finder (TPF) and Life Finder (LF) missions.
Details about the Origins Program can be found at http://origins.jpl.nasa.gov/.
Details about all of NASA's space science missions can be found at http://spacescience.nasa.gov/.
3.
What will the first galaxies that formed after the Big Bang look like?
Current theories of galaxy formation suggest that the birth process for these vast systems of stars may be very violent events, and will be billions of times brighter than our Sun.
Such events may remain visible at highly redshifted wavelengths.
That is, although much of the energy produced comes out in the ultraviolet (for an observer nearby), it will be redshifted into the infrared for us because of the extreme distance (in space and time) from the present.
4.
How far will JWST look?
One of the main goals of JWST is to detect some of the very first star formation in the Universe.
This is thought to happen somewhere between redshift 15 and 30 (redshift explained below).
At those redshifts, the Universe was only one or two percent of its current age.
This figure is uncertain because we do not know how much the expansion of the universe has been speeding up or slowing down since the beginning.
We also do not know the exact age of the Universe, but it is about 13 to 14 billion years.
So if the Universe is exactly 13 billion years old now, the first star formation would have occurred about 12.7 to 12.9 billion years ago, and JWST must see light that has traveled for this length of time, and hence this distance expressed in light-years, to observe this first star formation.
5.
Will the James Webb Space Telescope see planets around other stars?
The JWST may be able to detect the likely presence of planetary systems around nearby stars from their infrared radiation.
It may even be able to see directly the reflected light of very large planets - at least the size of Jupiter - orbiting around nearby stars.
It may also be possible to see very young planets in formation, while they are still hot.
JWST will have a coronagraph, an instrument used to block out the light of the parent star of the planets.
This is needed, as the parent star will be millions of times brighter than the planets orbiting it.
JWST will not have the resolution to see any details on the planets; it will only be able to detect a faint light speckle next to the bright parent star.
JWST can only see large planets orbiting at relatively large distances from the parent star.
To see small Earth-like planets we will need a space telescope capable of seeing at even higher angular resolution.
NASA is studying such a space mission, the Terrestrial Planet Finder.
JWST will also be able to see free-floating sub-brown dwarf stars as small as 1 Jupiter mass in the Orion star-forming region, if stars this small exist.
6.
How will JWST contribute to the dark matter research?
JWST can not directly see "dark matter," the unseen matter that makes up a large fraction of the mass of galaxies and clusters of galaxies, but JWST can measure its effects.
One of the best ways to measure mass is through the gravitational lens effect.
As described by Einstein's General Relativity theory, a light beam passing near a large mass will be slightly deflected, because space-time is disturbed by the presence of mass.
By taking pictures of distant galaxies behind nearby galaxies, astronomers can calculate the total amount of mass in the foreground galaxies by measuring the disturbances in the background galaxies.
Because astronomers can see how much mass is present in stars in the foreground galaxies, they can then calculate how much of the total mass is missing, which is presumed to be in the dark matter.
JWST will be particularly well suited for this type of measurements, because of its very sharp images which allow very small disturbances to be measured, and because it can see so deep into space, giving it access to many more background galaxies to measure disturbances caused by this gravitational lensing effect.
Also, JWST will observe the epoch of galaxy formation and scientists can compare these observations to theories of the role that dark matter played in that process, leading to some understanding of the amount and nature of the dark matter in galaxies.
7.
What is redshift and how do you measure it?
Redshift is a special astronomical case of a physical phenomenon called the Doppler effect (after Johann Doppler [1803-1853]).
The Doppler effect occurs when a source sending out waves (either sound or light) is moving with respect to an observer.
When the source is moving toward the observer, waves arrive earlier than they would in the stationary case and the wave peaks arrive closer together (the sound is higher pitch or the light is bluer).
If the source is moving away from the observer, the waves get more stretched out (the sound is lower pitch or the light is redder).
The Doppler effect can be clearly observed when a siren or fast train is passing by.
In an astronomy context, most galaxies are moving away from us because the Universe is expanding, so the light from the galaxies is redshifted.
The farther the galaxy is away from us, the faster it is moving, and the larger the redshift.
How redshift is connected to the distance of an object depends on the expansion rate of the Universe, the geometry of the Universe and the energy content of the Universe (slowing down or accelerating the expansion).
Determining these values is an important subject of investigation of current day astronomy.
Redshifts are measured by taking spectra of the electromagnetic radiation (X-rays, ultra-violet, visible and infrared light, microwaves, radio waves, etc.).
Physical processes within the atoms and molecules that make up stars and galaxies cause the spectra to have certain recognizable features at very specific wavelengths.
The wavelengths of these atomic and molecular absorption or emission lines can be measured very accurately in laboratories.
By measuring the observed wavelength of a feature in the spectrum of a galaxy, and comparing it to the known emitted wavelength, astronomers can measure the Doppler shift of the galaxy.
Galaxies are said to have a redshift of 1 if their spectral features have shifted to twice as long a wavelength.
If their features have shifted to 3 times longer wavelength they have redshift 2, and so on.
JWST is designed to see galaxies at redshifts of 15 or more, where the ultraviolet light is redshifted into the infrared.
8.
What is a light-year? And what is a parsec?
A light-year is the distance traveled by light in one year, about 5,880,000,000,000 miles (9,460,000,000,000 kilometers).
As it takes light as long to travel from there to here as the distance in light-years, we can say that when we look at an object that is a million light-years away, we see it now here as it was a million years ago there.
Looking deep into space is looking far back into time.
Astronomers use most of the time "parsec" to measure distances.
One parsec is equal to about 3.26 light-years.
Distances between galaxies are measured in Megaparsecs (Mpc), or millions of parsecs.
9.
What is a micrometer? What is a micron?
A micrometer, also called a micron, is a millionth of a meter, or a thousandth of a millimeter.
As a reference, the diameter of a human hair is about 100 micrometers.
Wavelengths of infrared radiation are typically expressed in micrometers.
10.
What is an arc-minute? What is an arc-second?
Arc-seconds and arc-minutes are used to measure very small angles.
An arc-minute is 1/60 of a degree, and an arc-second is 1/60 of an arc-minute, or 1/3600 of a degree.
11.
What is infrared radiation?
Infrared radiation is one of the many types of 'light' that comprise the electromagnetic spectrum.
Infrared light is characterized by wavelengths that are longer than visible light (400-700 nanometers, or 0.4-0.7 micrometers; also denoted as microns).
Astronomers generally divide the infrared portion of the electromagnetic spectrum into three regions: near infrared (0.7-5 micrometers), mid infrared (5-30 micrometers) and far infrared (30-1000 micrometers).
JWST will be sensitive to near-infrared and mid-infrared radiation.
12.
What is the electromagnetic spectrum?
Much of the information we have from the universe comes from light.
Sunlight (and all starlight) is made up of many different colors.
We can see this by holding a prism up to the sunlight.
The prism separates the light into the individual colors of the rainbow - the visible light spectrum.
Yet the light we can see represents only a very small portion of the electromagnetic spectrum.
On one end are gamma rays, with wavelengths millions of times shorter than those of visible light.
On the other end of the spectrum are radio waves having wavelengths millions of times longer than those of visible light.
In between we have X-ray, ultraviolet, visible and infrared light, and microwaves.
The wavelength is directly related to the amount of energy the waves carry per photon.
A photon is a fundamental particle of electromagnetic energy.
The shorter the radiation's wavelength, the higher is the energy of each photon.
Although the photon energy carried by each wavelength differs, all forms of electromagnetic radiation travel at the speed of light - about 186,000 miles (300,000 km) per second.
For more on the Electromagnetic spectrum, please visit http://www.JWST.nasa.gov/science/EMspectrum.html
13.
How does our atmosphere block infrared radiation from space?
Only certain parts of the electromagnetic spectrum (all light ranging from gamma ray to radio waves) can make it to the Earth's surface.
Our atmosphere absorbs much of this light.
Visible light, radio waves and a few small ranges of infrared wavelengths do make it through.
Gamma rays, X-rays and most of the ultraviolet rays and infrared rays do not.
Much of the infrared light is absorbed by water vapor in our atmosphere.
This is why infrared telescopes are placed on high, dry mountains (like Mauna Kea in Hawaii) so that they can observe more infrared radiation.
The only way to study the entire range of infrared (as well as gamma rays, x-rays, ultra-violet) is to place telescopes in space well above the atmosphere.
Only some (not all) of the infrared radiation between 1 and 40 micrometers makes it to the Earth's surface.
Water vapor in our atmosphere absorbs most of the rest.
Infrared radiation is also absorbed to a lesser degree by carbon dioxide, ozone, and oxygen molecules.
^1 "Beryllium," Microsoft® Encarta® Online Encyclopedia 2003 http://encarta.msn.com © 1997-2003 Microsoft Corporation.
All Rights Reserved __________________________________________________________________
Home | Fast Facts | News | Science | FAQs | Site map | Documents
Search: ____________ Advanced Search Get document # ___
Please submit questions and comments about this site via our feedback form.
NASA ESA CSA
This page was last modified on
Monday, 05-Jan-2004
Curator: Joel D. Offenberg Responsible NASA Official: Jonathan G. Bryson
