FirstGov for Seniors Logo A Portal Site of . . .
Click here to go to the new FirstGov website!
If you like this site, please [email2.gif] E-mail us to a friend!
http://www.ssa.gov FirstGov for Seniors is maintained by SSA.
Departments "" Consumer Protection "" Education 
Federal Portals
Text Links
[Climate.....................]
[BUTTON]
Eldercare Locator
Text Links [state] Zip Code: _____
submit Need Help Finding Zip Codes? Click Here.
Federal Agencies
Text Links
[Admin on Aging...........]
[BUTTON]
State Web Sites
Text Links
[Alabama...............]
[BUTTON]
Apply for Social Security Retirement Benefits Online! Diabetes Home--
Diabetes is a disorder of metabolism--the way our bodies use digested food for growth and energy.
Most of the food we eat is broken down by the digestive juices into a simple sugar called glucose.
Glucose is the main source of fuel for the body.
When we eat, the pancreas is supposed to automatically produce the right amount of insulin to move the glucose from our blood into our cells.
In people with diabetes, however, the pancreas either produces little or no insulin, or the body cells do not respond to the insulin that is produced.
As a result, glucose builds up in the blood, overflows into the urine, and passes out of the body.
Thus, the body loses its main source of fuel even though the blood contains large amounts of glucose.
Diabetes can cause serious health complications including heart disease, blindness, kidney failure, and lower-extremity amputations.
Diabetes is the seventh leading cause of death in the United States.
An estimated 16 million people in the United States have diabetes mellitus--a serious, lifelong condition.
About half of these people do not know they have diabetes and are not under care for the disorder.
Each year, about 798,000 people are diagnosed with diabetes.
"" HHS Issues National Plan To Reduce Impact Of Diabetes On Women March 25, 2003 - HHS Secretary Tommy G. Thompson today introduced a national plan to address the growing health epidemic of diabetes in women.
Diabetes is the sixth leading cause of death in the United States and is a major contributor to heart disease, the number one killer of women.
"" Two Websites Devoted To Diabetes May 6, 2002 - The FDA has launched a pair of Websites with information for consumers on diabetes, a disease that affects more than 17 million Americans.
One site gives general background on the disease and FDA's role; the other site is part of the agencys Take Time to Care campaign, targeted at early detection and treatment of diabetes in women.
* FDA Diabetes Information and * Take Time to Care .
The National Diabetes Information Clearinghouse, Diabetes Dictionary defines the different types of diabetes as:
Type I diabetes:
A chronic condition in which the pancreas makes little or no insulin because the beta cells have been destroyed.
The body is then not able to use the glucose (blood sugar) for energy.
Type I diabetes usually comes on abruptly, although the damage to the beta cells may begin much earlier.
The signs of Type I diabetes are a great thirst, hunger, a need to urinate often, and loss of weight.
To treat the disease, the person must inject insulin, follow a diet plan, exercise daily, and test blood glucose several times a day.
Type I diabetes usually occurs in children and adults who are under age 30.
This type of diabetes used to be known as juvenile diabetes, juvenile-onset diabetes, and ketosis-prone diabetes, and insulin-dependent diabetes mellitus (IDDM).
New Resources To Treat Type 1 Diabetes In October 2001, the National Center for Research Resources (NCRR), a part of the National Institutes of Health (NIH), announced the award of grants in the amount of $10.4 million to establish 10 Islet Cell Resource (ICR) centers.
Type II diabetes
The most common form of diabetes mellitus; about 90 to 95 percent of people who have diabetes have type II diabetes.
Unlike Type I diabetes, in which the pancreas makes no insulin, people with Type II diabetes produce some insulin, sometimes even large amounts.
However, either their bodies do not produce enough insulin or their body cells are resistant to the action of insulin.
People with Type II diabetes can often control their condition by losing weight through diet and exercise.If not, they may need to combine insulin or a pill with diet and exercise.
Generally, Type II diabetes occurs in people who are over age 40.
Most of the people who have this type of diabetes are overweight.
Type II diabetes used to be called adult-onset diabetes, maturity-onset diabetes, ketosis-resistant diabetes, and stable diabetes and noninsulin-dependent diabetes mellitus (NIDDM).
Diet and Exercise Dramatically Delay Type-2 Diabetes At least 10 million Americans at high risk for Type-2 diabetes can sharply lower their chances of getting the disease with diet and exercise, according to the findings of a major clinical trial.
The diabetes medication Metformin is also effective.
The web sites below provide resources from government agencies, private companies, and nonprofit organizations.
Specifically, the web sites supply additional information about the symptoms, diagnosis, treatment, and current research about diabetes.
(Sources: CDC's Diabetes and Public Health Resource, FAQs, The National Diabetes Information Clearinghouse, and the Diabetes Dictionary.)
Government Resources:
National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases The National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases (NIDDK) conducts and supports research on many of the most serious diseases affecting public health.
The Institute supports much of the clinical research on the diseases of internal medicine and related subspecialty fields as well as many basic science disciplines.
National Diabetes Information Clearinghouse The National Diabetes Information Clearinghouse (NDIC) is an information dissemination service of the National Institute of Diabetes and Digestive and Kidney Diseases (NIDDK).
NIDDK is part of the National Institutes of Health (NIH), one of eight health agencies of the Public Health Service, which is under the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services.
NDIC provides a Diabetes Dictionary to define words that are often used when writing or talking about diabetes.
Diabetes and Periodontal Disease: A Guide for Patients The National Institute of Dental and Craniofacial Research provides an online pamphlet that explains the link between diabetes and periodontal disease.
Diabetes and Public Health Resource The Division of Diabetes Translation is part of the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention (CDC).
The division translates scientific research findings into health promotion, disease prevention, and treatment strategies.
National Eye Institute Provides Information about Diabetic Eye Disease The National Eye Institute provides an online publication entitled Dont Lose Sight of Diabetic Eye Disease.
Diabetic eye disease refers to a group of eye problems that people with diabetes may face as a complication of this disease.
All can cause severe vision loss or even blindness.
Private and Nonprofit Resources:
American Diabetes Association The American Diabetes Association is the nation's leading nonprofit health organization providing diabetes research, information and advocacy.
The mission of the organization is to prevent and cure diabetes, and to improve the lives of all people affected by diabetes.
American Association of Diabetes Educators (AADE) The American Association of Diabetes Educators (AADE) is a multidisciplinary organization representing over 10,000 healthcare professionals who provide diabetes education and care.
Membership is open to all health professionals with an interest in helping people live full and productive lives.
The Diabetes Mall The Diabetes Mall is a leading Web-based source of information and retail products focused exclusively on diabetes.
The site provides a weekly online diabetes newspaper Diabetes This Week, plus research reports, articles analyzing current diabetes issues, interactive tools for better blood sugar control, contests, and information on the latest drugs, medications, devices, products, diets, blood sugar management tools and future developments in diabetes care.
Diabetes.com Diabetes.com is one of the Internet's most trusted destinations for diabetes information.
This site provides articles covering a spectrum of diabetes topics, including prevention, conventional and alternative treatments, tight blood glucose control, and diet and fitness.
The site also offers interactive tools, an expert columnist, answers from our staff pharmacists, and a range of diabetes products and medications you can read about and purchase.
Joslin Diabetes Center Joslin Diabetes Center and the Joslin Clinic are International leaders in diabetes treatment, research, and education.
Established in 1898, and affiliated with Harvard Medical School, Joslin leads the field in both basic and clinical research, and is devoted to educating both patients and professionals.
Dr. C. Everett Koop Provides Online Diabetes Information Dr. Koop, former U.S. Surgeon General and current Chairman of drkoop.com, provides accurate and reliable healthcare information online.
Diabetes - Doctor's Guide to the Internet The latest medical news and information for patients or friends/parents of patients diagnosed with diabetes.
This site provides medical news and alerts, diabetes information, discussion groups and newsgroups, and other related sites.
Top of Page
Divider Bar
About Us | Feedback | Privacy | Search This Site | Site Map | Home
Disclaimer: References from this web page or from any of the information services sponsored by FirstGov to any non-governmental entity, product, service or information does not constitute an endorsement or recommendation by FirstGov, Social Security, or any of its employees.
We are not responsible for the contents of any off-site web pages referenced from this server.
Although our page includes links to sites including or referencing good collections of information, we do not endorse any specific products or services provided by public or private organizations.
