Link to City of Albuquerque Home Page City Services Environment Transportation Business Services Recreation Jobs Public Safety Visitor Information [spacer.gif] search ______________ in [- ALL -............]
Go
[USEMAP:airport_nav_r1_c1.gif] Flight Information Directions Shops Ground Transportation Rentals [USEMAP:airport_nav_r2_c1.gif]
Gifts 
Retail Stores
Distant Drums Distant Drums: A specialty store featuring the finest handmade sterling silver and gold jewelry from Pueblo, Navajo, and other Southwest and Native American tribes.
Including earrings, necklaces, rings, bracelets, pendants, squash blossom necklaces, belt buckles, watches, watchbands, bolo ties, and concho belts.
Located on the third level of the terminal building just prior to the security checkpoint.
Daily 6:00 am - 9:00 pm
Earth Spirit: A contemporary jewelry gallery offering a wide selection of sterling silver and gold jewelry, as well as art glass, hand wrought art sculpture, polished wood jewelry boxes, carved stone figures, hand painted silk scarves and many other quality gifts.
Located at the A/B Connector area beyond the security checkpoint.
Daily 6:00 am - 9:00 pm.
Earth Spirit
Fiesta Market: Fiesta Market is a celebration of New Mexico products offering a wide range of regional foods, t-shirts, southwestern gifts, toys, souvenirs, cactus, greeting cards, collectibles, and music.
Located on the third level of the terminal building just prior to the security checkpoint.
Daily 6:00 am - 9:00 pm.
Hudson News Hudson News: A wide variety of national, local, and international newspapers, various magazine publications, and top 25 book bestsellers, along with a variety of sundry items including travel accessories, film and batteries, sunglasses, portable electronics, candy, gum, etc.
Located on the third level of the terminal building just prior to the security checkpoint.
Daily 6:00 am - 9:00 pm.
Hudson's Book Corner: A full-line assortment of books for every taste including New York Times bestsellers, new releases, children's books, travel guides, regional interest titles, and international specialty titles.
Emphasis will be placed on paperback new titles including mysteries, romances, science fiction, and horror.
Located on the third level, beyond the security checkpoint, "A" Concourse.
Daily 6:00 am - 9:00 pm.
Thunderbird Curio Thunderbird Curio: Offering a wide variety of Southwestern and authentic New Mexican souvenirs and crafts.
Including kachinas, pottery, baskets, textiles, sculptures, jewelry, clothing, cactus candies, sand paintings, wall hangings, etc.
Located at the A/B concourse connector area beyond the security checkpoint.
Daily 6:00 am - 9:00 pm.
Kiosks
In addition to the retail shops, kiosks featuring t-shirts, jewelry, souvenirs, accessories, specialty candy, newspapers, magazines, books, and southwestern apparel are located throughout the terminal.
Fiesta Gifts Kiosk "A" and " B" Concourse Daily 6:00 am - 9:00 pm
Hudson Newstand "A" Concourse 7:00 am - 7:00 pm
Page Industries Great Hall Lobby "B" Concourse 6:00 am - 5:00 pm
Senor Murphy Candy Maker Great Hall Lobby Concourse "A" Daily 7:00 am - 7:00 pm
Zia Gifts "A" Concourse Daily 7:00 am - 7:00 p.m.
Banking Services
A variety of Automated Teller Machines (ATM's) can be found throughout the airport terminal building.
City of Albuquerque Aviation Department P.O. Box 9948, Albuquerque, NM 87119-1048 (505) 244-7700
Top Sends email to:
Copyright 2000 City of Albuquerque - Disclaimer - Privacy Statement
