We the People: News 
Each year, NEH will select books that share a theme important to the nation's heritage.
For 2003 the program focuses on the theme of "courage."
2003 "We the People Bookshelf" on Courage
Grades K - 3
* The Cabin Faced West by Jean Fritz * Anansi the Spider by Gerald McDermott * Sylvester and the Magic Pebble by William Steig
Grades 4 - 6
* The Dream Keeper and Other Poems by Langston Hughes * The Matchlock Gun by Walter D. Edmonds * Little House on the Prairie by Laura Ingalls Wilder * My Side of the Mountain by Jean Craighead George
Grades 7 - 8
* Johnny Tremain by Esther Forbes * Narrative of the Life of Frederick Douglass by Frederick Douglass * The Hobbit by J.R.R. Tolkien
Grades 9 - 12
* The Red Badge of Courage by Stephen Crane * Invisible Man by Ralph Ellison * Profiles in Courage by John F. Kennedy * Adventures of Huckleberry Finn by Mark Twain * To Kill a Mockingbird by Harper Lee
Beginning in the fall, NEH will invite applications from school and public libraries across the nation to participate in the first "We the People Bookshelf" program.
NEH will award copies of the 15 books in the "We the People Bookshelf" to more than 500 eligible libraries.
These libraries will organize a program or event to make their community aware of the importance of reading classic literature and the themes of the "We the People Bookshelf."
Chosen with the help of librarians and a blue-ribbon panel of historians and authorities on children's literature, the "We the People Bookshelf" will encourage young people to read classic literature and explore the ideas and ideals of America.
This year's blue-ribbon panel included: * Carla D. Hayden, president-elect, American Library Association and director, Enoch Pratt Free Library (Baltimore, Md.); * Sybille Jagusch, chief, Children's Literature Center, Library of Congress; * David Macaulay, author, illustrator, National Humanities Medalist; * David McCullough, author, historian, 2003 Jefferson Lecturer in the Humanities; * Robert V. Remini, professor, historian, 2003 Heroes of History Lecturer; and * Morghan Transue, winner, 2003 NEH "Idea of America" Essay Contest.
Many of the titles in this year's "We the People Bookshelf" highlight important chapters in American history; others are expressions of universal themes that are also integral parts of American culture.
These books represent the rich texture of the American heritage, a tradition that has incorporated ideas and texts from around the world.
We recognize that it is a challenging list in many respects, but we want to involve parents, teachers, librarians, mentors, and others in talking to children about these books.
All the books were selected from Summertime Favorites, an NEH list of recommended readings that represents the Endowment's long-standing effort to highlight classic literature for young people from kindergarten through high school.
For 2003 NEH revised and updated Summertime Favorites with help from librarians and reading experts.
Since 1988, thousands of parents and teachers have used Summertime Favorites as a supplement to school reading lists to emphasize the value of reading classic books.
A complete list of books included in Summertime Favorites and additional information about NEH and its We the People initiative can be found on the Internet at www.neh.gov and www.WethePeople.gov.
The National Endowment for the Humanities gratefully acknowledges support for its "We the People Bookshelf" provided by the National Trust for the Humanities and Bristol-Myers Squibb Company.
The NEH looks forward to working with the American Library Association to disseminate information and to encourage libraries to take part in the "We the People Bookshelf" grant program.
Contact: Lucy Cutrona or Noel Milan at (202) 606-8446
