spacer image used to assist interface IMLS spacer image used to assist interface Institute of Museum and Library Services Contact Search Subscribe Site Map spacer image used to assist interface Adobe Acrobat spacer image used to assist interface Home spacer image used to assist interface About IMLS spacer image used to assist interface What's New spacer image used to assist interface Apply for Grants and Awards spacer image used to assist interface Publications, Conferences and Resources spacer image used to assist interface A Closer Look spacer image used to assist interface man tending plant gold line spacer image used to assist interface spacer image used to assist interface man tending plant gold line spacer image used to assist interface gold line Grants in Your State gold line IMLS Projects Online gold line Highlights of the Month gold line Archived Highlights gold line spacer image used to assist interface man tending plant gold line white space white space Collaboration Highlight for 2002 Printer Friendly Version School Libraries Get Top Marks with Help from IMLS Grants Students in schools with media centers that are well-staffed, have networked technology, and have strong collections perform better on standardized tests, according to a major study funded in part by IMLS.
The Library Research Service of the Colorado State Library released a report in June 2000.
It showed that state reading scores for students in schools that focused on improving their library programs were, on average, eight to 21 percent higher than similar schools without such development, even when other factors like community demographics are taken into account.
Findings from this and other studies across the country prove what many in the library community already know: that school media centers can make a big difference in student achievement.
Through the administration of Library Services and Technology (LSTA) grants through state library agencies, IMLS has developed a track record of support for school libraries and librarians.
Many of these libraries are earning extra credit with students, teachers, principals, and communities with projects that reach underserved audiences, promote literacy and reading, improve collections, and use technology creatively.
Lesson in partnership
The Federal Hocking School District is located in the rural foothills of the Appalachian Mountains in southeastern Ohio.
District services are spread across 250 square miles, and the public library is as far as 20 miles away from the homes of some residents.
District librarian Bonnie Lackey strives to provide library services to the district's 1,444-student population, which includes many from low-income families.
A coalition between the school district and the Nelsonville public library was formed as a result of LSTA funds.
The coalition established the Lancer Satellite Resource Center, a mini-library and homework center for residents and students in the small town of Stewart and surrounding district communities.
The school system provided the space for the center in an existing former school building.
The building is near the new middle school and high school complex and is in walking distance for people living in Stewart.
The LSTA grant helped outfit it with quick reference materials, computers, and technology accessibility.
Center patrons have access to these resources, several online research databases, and more, after school and during evening hours.
On-site volunteers who staff the center can help patrons obtain new library cards and reserve library resources on the public library's Web catalog.
The public library delivers materials to patrons at the center through interlibrary loan.
The opening and planning of the center mobilized the community.
Teachers, students, parents, residents, and 4H groups came together one night to help clean, paint, and prepare what was once an old classroom and was soon to be new resource center.
Teachers, who once had taught in the room, reminisced as they rolled up their shirtsleeves to prepare the space for new students and adult patrons.
Future plans include additional partnerships, workshops, and community gatherings.
The center has also sparked interest in town hall meetings for the revitalization of the old school building and an investigation into the historic value of the campus.
Community activists are hoping to revive the ball fields and playgrounds that surround the center and improve the cohesiveness of a largely separated district.
Infusing schools with technology
Rosemary Sharpe is the media specialist at South Jones Middle School in the small town of Ellisville, Mississippi.
She applies regularly for grants to supplement funding for her library and school.
In a school district where nearly 60 percent of the students come from low-income families, where computers in the home are rare, and home Internet connections are rarer still, she finds that school-based access to technology is critical.
In 1999, she received funding through LSTA and the Mississippi State Library to integrate computer use in all of the school's classrooms.
The school building was new and all of the classrooms were wired for computers and networking, but funding had run out before the school had reached that goal.
With LSTA and other grants, Sharpe was able to obtain classroom computers, enough for one computer for every five students, and the local area network to link them.
The school library serves as the network hub.
With new equipment in place, Sharpe said, it was far easier to make the case to the school district for Internet hookup.
Now, the library is not only the computer network hub, it is also the center for digital information, computer training (for both students and teachers), and library resources.
The library and the classrooms have free access to online reference databases for collections of resources in science, literature, history, current events, biographies, and much more through the statewide library consortium Web site.
"A benefit of the grant was the increased use of the technology by the teachers," said Sharpe.
The teachers were enthusiastic about computer training and took advantage of state-offered classes that covered the most basic skills to more sophisticated office software, such as the popular PowerPoint program.
At student of South Jones Middle School A student of South Jones Middle School in Ellisville, Mississippi, uses a Golden Mean gauge to measure proportions of an illustration of the Parthenon.
Math, science, and art teachers at the school used computers funded through LSTA to enhance their lessons with units on the Fibonacci ratio.
According to Sharpe, teachers have embraced the technology and are infusing curriculum with online resources that cut across disciplines and address state standards.
Teachers at the school are using the Copernicus Learning Network to see and share lesson plans online, and they have found Web sites resources to use with their Fibonacci-based lessons.
The Fibonacci number sequencing principle has been used at the school to demonstrate proportions used in art, classical architecture, human anatomy, botany, and, of course, mathematics.
Students mural depicting famous buildings that conform to the Golden Ratio.
Students at South Jones Middle School in Ellisville, Mississippi, created a mural depicting famous buildings that conform to the Golden Ratio or Rectangle.
They studied the Fibonacci ratio and its application to classical architecture with the Golden Ratio using computers and a Golden Mean gauge purchased with LSTA grants.
Media Specialist Linda Lovely of Bloomfield Elementary School in Trenton, Ohio, used LSTA-funded technology to address the problem of having too many classes to serve and not enough time in the day.
"There were so many classes coming in for their scheduled 30 minutes that there wasn't enough time to help students with their individual research projects," she said.
Students at Bloomfield Elementary School.
Students at Bloomfield Elementary School, of Trenton, Ohio, enjoy using the LSTA-funded Mobile Reference Library for their research projects.
Credit: Linda Lovely
Her solution: to bring the library to the classrooms with a mobile reference library built upon three rolling book and computer carts.
One has a complete encyclopedia set with a small-scale copier on top.
The second has 10 laptops with electronic encyclopedias installed and wireless connections to a printer which sits on top, and the third has four extra laptops that can be plugged into the network from the classroom for access to the Internet, the library catalog, and public library resources.
Mrs. Kelly Philpot and her third grade students.
Mrs. Kelly Philpot and her third grade students at Bloomfield Elementary in Trenton, Ohio, use the mobile reference unit to conduct research for their animal reports.
They are excited to discover that they can hear animal sounds on the computer.
Credit: Linda Lovely.
Librarian Linda Lovely and the school's teachers have been very pleased with the mobile reference library.
She said, "We were in a real dilemma.
I have no clue how we would have allowed kids to do research if it hadn't been for that grant being funded."
Linking libraries' resources
RILINK is a Web-based union catalog of Rhode Island school library materials.
The catalog allows each of the 25 participating media centers access to any of the 300,000 cataloged items through interactive interlibrary loans.
Students can search the catalog themselves, from home or school, and find out the shelf status of a book.
The students' searches are linked to relevant Web sites that have been selected by the vendor and are maintained on the vendor's site.
RILINK logo The Rhode Island Library Information Network (RILINK) began four years ago as an LSTA project linking the resources of just two school libraries.
Now, RILINK is a self-supporting service of the East Bay Educational Collaborative and includes more than 300,000 items in 25 media centers.
Linda Wood, school library media specialist from South Kingstown High School in Wakefield, Rhode Island and co-founder of RILINK, said, "Students at my school would often come up to me and say, 'I can't find anything that I'm looking for, and I've searched the catalog.'
It would be frustrating to know that the information existed somewhere, in some other library.
I felt that if we only had some way of sharing resources between one school library and another school library and the public library, we'd be able to fill that void, and students would be able to find the information they needed."
Dorothy Frechette, executive director of RILINK, described typical scenarios in which RILINK proves its merit.
For instance, when a new book is added to the collection and a teacher decides to do a new unit on it, a school librarian would need 10 or 12 copies all at once for the class.
Or suppose an entire class is doing a project on whales, and the school library only has two items on whales.
RILINK allows librarians to search libraries throughout the state for the materials they need.
She said, "RILINK opens up a lot more resources for students and teachers.
It is especially helpful for those who can't get to a public library."
By enabling materials to be shared among libraries, RILINK provides patrons access to collections worth far more than what an individual library could afford.
Wood figures that at an average cost of $20 for each new item to put on a library shelf, RILINK makes more than $22,000-worth of additional books and other materials available to students and teachers.
Project staff and participants have made cost-saving changes and have implemented other improvements since the project was begun in 1998 with just two schools.
The network, which was established and supported in part by LSTA grants until last year, has become self-sustaining with payments from member libraries.
RILINK shifted its virtual library from a computer server at the vendor's site to one in the office of the public library consortium at the Warwick Public Library, for annual savings of more than $20,000.
The project staff who now maintains the server can update the database frequently.
Before, updates took place only once a year.
The project also now uses a new, powerful program to standardize and reduce duplicate records in the catalog.
Beyond the service provided to students, RILINK has established new collaboration and communication between school librarians, said Frechette.
"There has been a real opportunity beyond the statewide library media association for school librarians to work together," she said.
"They sometimes feel isolated in individual schools.
RILINK provides an opportunity for collegiality and for working with peers."
Books, books, everywhere
One of the key predictors of academic achievement identified by the Second Colorado study was the level of the library media program development, which is determined in great part by the collection size and relevancy.
Yet even as new schools are being built and new technology is secured, local funding often is in short supply for collection maintenance and improvement, resulting in book collections that are out-of-date, insufficient in numbers, and no longer aligned with the curriculum.
Resourceful librarians and school administrators have sought new ways to support their library collection acquisitions and have sometimes turned to federal LSTA funding.
Teresa Thomas was hired as a new media specialist by Candor Elementary School in North Carolina around the time the new school building was completed.
She said, "The collection was very outdated.
When I started weeding through it, I got rid of almost half of the entire collection, everything prior to the 1970s and 80s.
If I took away everything, I wouldn't have had anything left on the shelves."
From the 4,200-piece collection, she removed more than 2,000 books, some of which had not been checked out in 20 years.
In particular, the school needed new poetry and geography books.
Even the media center's globe was outdated, showing the USSR.
Thomas knew from the beginning that she wanted to improve the collection.
Fortunately she was able to take advantage of an LSTA grant program administered by the State Library of North Carolina aimed at improving school library collections.
The program helps school librarians describe the connection between strong library collections and academic achievement and reveal the deficiencies of their collections to important groups both within and outside of the school system, including principals, teachers, school district administrators, and PTAs.
In order to apply for a grant, applicants must first conduct a collection assessment, develop a multi-year collection development plan, and arrange for local dollar for dollar matching funds.
In the program's three years, between 150 and 175 grants have been awarded annually in amounts from $500 to $10,000 for purchasing library materials.
According to Penelope Hornsby, the state library's federal grants program consultant, the grant program was set up to be a one-time "shot in the arm" for school library media centers.
The requirements for planning, matching funding, and local involvement are designed to help libraries make a case to local stakeholders for improved annual collection development budgets.
"We don't see these grants as an on-going way to address a problem of this magnitude.
They can help librarians spotlight their need so they can tackle it locally," she said.
Thomas obtained a commitment from the Parent-Teacher Organization (PTO) to match the $10,000 grant received through the state library.
With additional PTO support for bilingual publications, she is right on track with her three-year collection development plan.
Ptarmigan Elementary School Principal Jimmie Daniels, in Anchorage, Alaska, had an opportunity for LSTA funding that produced a similar boost in materials for his school library collection.
He obtained a $12,000 LSTA grant from the Alaska State Library to establish an Accelerated Reader family literacy program.
The Accelerated Reader software program is a system based on current research trends that allows children to test their reading proficiency by computer, select books based on their difficulty, keep track of books read, and measure reading improvement.
Daniels applied for the grant at a time when many of the library books were outdated, there was little participation in recreational reading, and reading test scores were low.
He was able to purchase 1,000 new books for the library, in addition to buying the $4,000 computerized system.
The Accelerated Reader program is on the school server and can be accessed from anywhere in the building.
The school set up Accelerated Reader as a recreational program, so that students are encouraged to read more books between classes and in their spare time.
Students in each grade level strive to reach the goals for their grade, gaining points for each book read.
Students in grade levels that reach their goals are treated to a monthly ice cream social.
Family reading nights bring parents into the school to participate in the reading and to test the software.
"The main thing," said Daniels, "is to stretch the abilities of the kids with books that are not too difficult and not too easy, to get them to practice."
Is the program working? Tests show that the program has produced a five percent increase in reading schoolwide.
Power Libraries: institutionalizing change
Since 1998, selected exemplary Colorado school library media programs have been paired with "developing library programs" to encourage a schoolwide focus on library development and improved student achievement.
Reading assessment scores in the schools increased, on average, by more than seven percent over previous years.
In the Power Libraries Project, "high performance" school library media specialists and their principals meet with and mentor library staff, principals, and classroom teachers at "developing" schools.
Teams from both commit to improve their programs through staff training and long-range planning.
Ninety-one schools have participated, reaching more than 60,000 students and hundreds of school teams.
From 1998 to 2001, the project was funded by LSTA.
It is continuing under the guidance of the Central Colorado Library System, one of the seven regional library consortia in the state.
Principal David Knapp Tammy Copper's fourth grade class gets fired up about poetry.
Librarian Mary Perine and Copper collaboratively planned and are teaching the unit about recognizing and constructing a simile.
The lesson is one of many that are taught in the school media center with the librarian, thanks to the LSTA-funded Power Libraries Project.
Mary Perine, library media specialist at Cherry Drive Elementary School in the Denver suburbs, runs a very busy library.
She provides flexible scheduling so students can complete projects and do long-term research in the library.
She collaborates with teachers on curriculum so the library is an extension of the classroom.
She teaches alongside the classroom teacher in the library.
And she oversees student projects that provide hands-on learning and fun.
It has not always been so.
Before she arrived at the school during the 1995-1996 school year, the school was running a traditional library program, with each teacher bringing classes of students into the library for weekly half-hour sessions.
Participating in the Power Libraries program required a change in the way of thinking at her school.
She said, "When I first arrived, some people kind of liked the idea of flexible scheduling and teacher-librarian collaboration, but most were used to the old way.
Some said, 'all I want is for you to teach the students some library skills for a half-hour.
That's all I want from you.
Nothing else.'
It was difficult the first couple of years."
After forming the required library advisory team, composed of an administrator and teachers from all grades, Perine began working with a mentor school.
Two events helped the school see the benefits of the new library program model.
First, the school received $6,500 as part of the LSTA grant, which Perine told teachers was theirs to spend on materials for lessons and units planned collaboratively with the librarian.
Then, a group of teachers were provided with substitutes so they could visit the mentor school.
The group heard from the principal, who was very enthusiastic about the library program, and they observed in the library a couple of lessons that had been collaboratively planned.
Perine said, "Just talking about it doesn't convey the idea, but when you are there, you can see how it works.
You see the teacher doing one thing, the librarian doing something else, the kids are spilt up or working together.
It's well-planned and running smoothly.
And everyone is having fun."
Fourth graders, Max and Nicholas Fourth graders, Max and Nicholas, of Cherry Drive Elementary School in Thronton, Colorado, hunt for words to write a simile.
They know that learning is fun in their school library, which has recently been designated by the Colorado Power Libraries Project a "high performance" library.
At the next staff meeting, teachers were ready to participate.
For two years, the school grew in the developing category.
This year, it was designated a high performance school, an indication that the program is embraced by the entire school.
Mary Perine and fourth grade teacher Tammy Copper Cherry Drive Elementary School librarian Mary Perine and fourth grade teacher Tammy Copper co-teach poetry in the library.
The school, in Thronton, is one of 33 schools in Colorado designated "high performance" in the Power Library Project.
Most days, Perine is booked solid.
She may have fourth graders coming in to work on a poetry lesson that includes exercises in dance, music, theater, and art.
Or she may be with first graders who are reading and studying author Eric Carle.
Their lesson may involve seeing a video on him, writing about his themes, and painting Carle-inspired paper for making paper collages.
"Everybody wins," Perine says of the arrangement.
"I win because I work in my standards that I have to present.
The teachers have a second person to help with their lessons."
A recent survey of Power Libraries participants backs up the recommendations from the second Colorado Study for strong library programs, combined with librarian-teacher collaboration and technology support.
Perine said, "What a difference a good library program can make.
It's just phenomenal.
The whole focus is student achievement.
That is what we care about."
gold line Vital Statistics: gold line Grant: National total for LSTA State-Administered Programs for 2002 is $149,014,000.
Awards made to fifty states, the District of Columbia, and the U.S. Territories according to a population-based formula.
LSTA Overview Museum and Library Services Act gold line Highlighted Projects: The following Web sites provide more information about the highlighted initiatives.
Lancer Satellite Resource Center-- http://www.seovec.org/libraries/fhhs.htm RILINK-- http://www.ri.net/RILINK/about.html Power Libraries Program-- http://cemacolorado.org/plp.htm gold line
About IMLS | What's New | Apply for Grants and Awards Publications 
HOME | CONTACT IMLS | SEARCH | SUBSCRIBE | SITE MAP ADOBE ACROBAT READER
Questions, comments, or problems? Contact IMLS via email imlsinfo@imls.gov or by phone (202) 606-8536.
white space spacer image used to assist interface spacer image used to assist interface spacer image used to assist interface spacer image used to assist interface spacer image used to assist interface spacer image used to assist interface spacer image used to assist interface spacer image used to assist interface spacer image used to assist interface
