FAS Online Logo Return to the FAS Home Page [spacer.gif] FAS Logo II FACT SHEET: The Dairy Import Licensing System __________________________________________________________________ March 2002 Import licensing is one of the tools the U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) uses to administer the tariff-rate quota (TRQ) system for U.S. imports of dairy products.
TRQs replaced Section 22 import quotas for dairy products on Jan. 1, 1995, as a result of the Uruguay Round Agreement.
Under these TRQs, a low tariff rate, called the low-tier rate, applies to imports up to a specified quantity.
A higher tariff rate, called the high-tier rate, applies to any imports in excess of that amount.
High-tier tariff rates were reduced by 15 percent over the 6 years since the Uruguay Round Agreement was implemented in 1995, while quantities subject to low-tier rates were increased gradually over that same period.
TRQ rates and quantities vary by product.
For dairy products subject to TRQs, an import license from USDAs Foreign Agricultural Service (FAS) is generally required to bring in items at the low-tier tariff rate.
No license is required to import products at the high-tier rate; to import dairy products for an agency of the U.S. Government; or to bring in products for personal use, as long as net weight does not exceed 5 kilograms (11 pounds) in any one shipment.
FAS issues licenses in late December each year for the following calendar year (January 1-December 31).
What products are covered?
The licensing system covers nearly all dairy products from cows milk, except for soft-ripened cheeses such as Brie.
It also covers blue cheese made from sheeps or goats milk.
Is a license needed to import a small amount of dairy products for a trade show, research, or other special use?
If you do not have a license and want to pay the low-tier duty, you must ask FAS to send an "ex-quota permit" to the U.S. Customs Service at the port of entry.
FAS will consider ex-quota permits for imports of samples that will not enter U.S. commerce but are to be used at a trade fair, by a foreign embassy, or for taking orders, research, or testing of equipment.
You do not need a license to import a product if you pay the high-tier duty rate.
What products may be imported without a license?
You do not need a license to import soft-ripened cows-milk cheeses, such as Brie, or products from 100-percent sheeps or goats milk (except for blue cheese made from or containing sheeps or goats milk).
Certain dairy products may also be imported without a license under a "first-come, first-served" system.
This means these products may be brought in at the low-tier duty rate until a specified TRQ is filled.
Once the TRQ is filled, importers have to pay the high-tier duty.
The items covered under the first-come, first-served system include: * dairy products from Mexico, * certain dairy products from Israel, * cheddar cheese from Canada (made from unpasteurized milk and aged 9 months or more), * fluid milk or cream (fresh or sour), * milk or cream (condensed or evaporated and in airtight containers), and * dried buttermilk or whey.
You can find a complete list of first-come, first-served dairy products and the corresponding TRQs in FAS Dairy Monthly Imports report.
Contact FAS at the address at the end of this fact sheet to receive a sample copy of the monthly report.
What import rights and limitations are conveyed by a license?
All licenses have specific limitations.
A typical license will identify the product, the country the product can be imported from, and the maximum amount that can be imported under that license.
An "any country" license allows imports of a certain quantity of a particular product from any country in the world, instead of only one country.
An "other country" license allows an importer to import a certain quantity of a particular product from any country other than a country that already has a specific TRQ.
For example, the following suppliers have specific country TRQ allocations for American-type cheese: Australia, New Zealand, the European Union, and other countries.
An importer with an "other country" license for 4,683 kilograms of American-type cheese could import up to that amount from the Slovak Republic or another country, which is not one of the three countries or regions with a specific TRQ allocation.
What is the fee for a license?
The fee for 2003 is $170 per license.
The fee is based on FAS estimated expenses to administer the licensing system.
FAS publishes the fee for the upcoming year in the Federal Register, usually around June.
What is the difference between historical and nonhistorical licenses?
Historical licenses are renewable.
A person with a historical license in one year may ask for a license for the same product from the same country for the next year.
A new license will be issued as long as that person has met the requirements of the regulation.
Nonhistorical licenses cannot be renewed.
A person may reapply for an identical nonhistorical license for the next year, but the application may or may not be granted because these licenses are issued through a lottery.
What are designated licenses?
These cheese import licenses are issued to importers who have met the regulations qualification standards and have been designated by the government of the exporting country to receive a license.
Not all countries participate in the designation process.
(See appendix 3 of the regulation for a list of participating countries and cheese types.)
What are the qualification requirements for a dairy import license?
First, you must have a place of business in the United States and an agent for service of process (a representative available during business hours should USDA need to serve legal papers on the company).
There are also different qualification standards listed in section 6.23 of the dairy import licensing regulation for importers, exporters, and manufacturers.
Note that exporters may apply for licenses to import noncheese dairy products, such as butter, but not for licenses to import cheese or cheese products.
How does an importer qualify for a license to import cheese or cheese products?
You must have been the owner and importer of record of either of the following: at least 19,000 kilograms of cheese or cheese products in eight or more shipments, with each shipment weighing at least 450 kilograms (net), imported during three quarters of the eligibility period (September 1-August 31); or at least 57,000 kilograms of cheese or cheese products in three or more shipments during the eligibility period, with each shipment weighing at least 2,000 kilograms (net).
For example, for a 2003 license, FAS will review an applicants imports from Sept. 1, 2001, through Aug. 31, 2002.
Qualifying cheese or cheese product imports include: * imports under licenses, * imported goats and sheeps milk cheese, * imports of cheese not covered by the licensing system (such as Brie), including imports under the first-come, first-served system, and * imports at the high-tier duty rate.
There are other qualification requirements for currently licensed people who request licenses for the next year; see section 6.23 of USDAs dairy import licensing regulation.
"Cheese" and "cheese products" are defined in section 6.21 of the regulation.
What if someone else was the owner and importer of record for the qualifying shipments?
You cannot use imports to qualify for a license unless you were the owner and importer of record at the time the product entered the United States.
How does an importer qualify for a license to import noncheese dairy products?
You must import dairy products (defined in section 6.21 of the regulation) in the same minimum quantities, number of shipments, and minimum shipment weights as specified for cheese or cheese products.
Qualifying dairy imports include: * imports of cheese or other dairy products under license, * imported goats and sheeps milk cheese, * imports of dairy products not covered by the licensing system (such as ice cream), including imports under the first-come, first-served system, and * imports at the high-tier duty rate.
Imports of chocolate crumb cannot be used to qualify for a noncheese import license.
How does a cheese manufacturer or processor qualify for a license to import cheese or cheese products?
You must be the owner or operator of a plant located in the United States and listed under Section II (or Section I as a cheese processor) in the most recent edition of USDAs Dairy Plants Surveyed and Approved for USDA Grading Service.
In addition, you must have manufactured, processed, or packaged at least 450,000 kilograms of cheese or cheese products in that plant during the eligibility period (September 1-August 31).
The publication, Dairy Plants Surveyed and Approved for USDA Grading Service, is available from:
U.S. Department of Agriculture Agricultural Marketing Service Dairy Grading Branch Room 2746-S P.O. Box 96456 Washington, DC 20090-6456 Tel: (202) 720-3171 Fax: (202) 720-2643 Web: www.ams.usda.gov/dairy/grade.htm
How does a dairy products manufacturer or processor qualify for a license to import noncheese dairy products?
You must be the owner or operator of a plant located in the United States and listed in any of the sections of the most recent edition of USDAs Dairy Plants Surveyed and Approved for USDA Grading Service.
In addition, you must have manufactured, processed, or packaged at least 450,000 kilograms of dairy products in that plant during the eligibility period (September 1-August 31).
A manufacturer or processor with an import license must use at least 75 percent of its licensed imports in its own plant.
See section 6.27(b) of the regulation.
How does a dairy products exporter qualify for a license to import noncheese dairy products?
You must have exported 19,000 kilograms of dairy products in eight or more shipments, each shipment weighing at least 450 kilograms (net), and exported during three quarters of the eligibility period (September 1-August 31); or 57,000 kilograms of dairy products, each shipment weighing at least 2,000 kilograms (net), and exported in three or more shipments during the eligibility period.
If a company with dairy import licenses is sold, will FAS transfer the licenses to the new owner?
Licenses can be transferred if the sale meets certain conditions, which are established in section 6.28 of the regulation.
If you buy a company with historical licenses, you will be able to apply for that companys licenses for the next year, assuming you have met USDAs regulatory requirements for the sale, as well as the eligibility criteria.
If you buy a company with designated licenses, you will also need to be designated by the government of the exporting country to receive those licenses for the next year.
What documents should accompany an application for an import license?
If you are an importer, you must provide copies of Customs Form 7501 showing that you are the importer of record of the products.
If you are an exporter, you must provide copies of Census Form 7525 (or a copy of your electronic submission), as well as copies of the related commercial invoices and bills of sale.
If you are a manufacturer or processor, you are not required to provide additional documents with your application.
However, you may be audited by USDA to verify your compliance with the requirement to use 75 percent of your imports in your own plant and to process at least 450,000 kilograms of cheese or other dairy products (as appropriate) in your plant.
How can an applicant find out a products tariff classification?
You need to know the Harmonized Tariff Schedule classification of your product so you can apply for an import license match-ing your needs and pay the appropriate duty.
If you are not sure how your product is classified under the U.S. tariff system, you must contact the U.S. Customs Service and obtain a classification ruling on your product.
FAS does not have the authority to classify products for U.S. Customs purposes and cannot provide advice to the public on classification matters.
You can contact your local U.S. Customs Service office (see Customs Service or Treasury Department, Customs Service, in the U.S. Government listings in your telephone directory) or:
U.S. Customs Service National Commodity Specialists Division 1 Penn Plaza 10th Floor New York, NY 10119 Tel: (646) 733-3030
Is an import license the same as a health certificate?
An import license is not a health or sanitary certificate, which may also be required to import dairy products.
The U.S. Food and Drug Administration (FDA) has information on health and sanitary requirements for imported dairy products.
You can contact FDA at the address listed below.
Who can provide information about health and labeling standards for imported dairy products?
Contact the FDA at:
Food and Drug Administration Office of Plant and Dairy Foods and Beverages HFS-300 5100 Paint Branch Parkway College Park, MD 20740-3835 Tel: (301) 436-1700 Fax: (301) 436-2632
Where can importers obtain information on livestock disease and quarantines in foreign countries?
Contact USDAs Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service (APHIS) at:
U.S. Department of Agriculture Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service Veterinary Services, NCIE Animal Products Program 4700 River Road, Unit 40 Riverdale, MD 20737-1231 Tel: (301) 734-3277 Fax: (301) 734-8226
What are the import license application deadlines?
You should request an application in August if you want to apply.
Completed applications must be postmarked no earlier than September 1 and no later than October 15 to be accepted.
There is no application fee.
To request a license application, a copy of USDAs dairy import licensing regulation, a list of persons and firms with dairy import licenses, or other information on USDAs licensing system, contact:
U.S. Department of Agriculture Foreign Agricultural Service Attn: Michael Hankin Ag Stop 1021 1400 Independence Avenue, SW Washington, DC 20250-1021 Tel: (202) 720-9439 Fax: (202) 720-6556
General information about FAS programs, resources, and services is available on the Internet at the FAS home page: http://www.fas.usda.gov
The U.S. Department of Agriculture (USDA) prohibits discrimination in all its programs and activities on the basis of race, color, national origin, sex, religion, age, disability, political beliefs, sexual orientation, and marital or family status.
(Not all prohibited bases apply to all programs.)
Persons with disabilities who require alternative means for communication of program information (Braille, large print, audiotape, etc.) should contact USDAs TARGET Center at (202) 720-2600 (voice and TDD).
To file a complaint of discrimination, write USDA, Director, Office of Civil Rights, Room 326-W, Whitten Building, 14th and Independence Avenue, SW, Washington DC 20250-9410 or call (202) 720-5964 (voice or TDD).
USDA is an equal opportunity provider and employer.
[spacer.gif]
[spacer.gif] Last modified: Wednesday, October 08, 2003
