[ltrhd.GIF] June 29, 2001 June 29, 2001 The Honorable W.J.
"Billy" Tauzin Chairman Committee on Energy and Commerce U.S. House of Representatives Washington, D.C. 20515
The Honorable Dan Burton Chairman Committee on Government Reform U.S. House of Representatives Washington, D.C. 20515
Dear Chairman Tauzin and Chairman Burton:
We are writing to bring your attention to a recently released report (GAO-01-857, "Energy Markets: Results of Studies Assessing High Electricity Prices in California") that we requested from the General Accounting Office (GAO).
In the report, the GAO analyzed FERC's effort to determine whether market manipulation was occurring in California and found it woefully lacking.
FERC has clearly demonstrated it is not capable of a thorough investigation of the market manipulation alleged in several studies.
In addition, recent revelations by whistle blowers reinforce the conclusions of these studies.
Therefore, we believe that it is appropriate for your committee to hold hearings on allegations of market manipulation in the West and FERC's inept response.
An airing of these issues is also important since generators have repeatedly asserted that FERC exonerated them from any wrong doing.
The GAO report clearly refutes any supposed exoneration of energy companies.
The GAO raised a number of concerns about the February 2001 FERC report that concluded there was no evidence of market manipulation.
Among GAO's criticisms were:
FERC's methodology (telephone interviews, in-person interviews at company headquarters, and just a few on-site inspections) "was not thorough enough to support its overall conclusion that audited companies were not physically withholding electricity supply to increase prices."
No accurate outage data existed prior to the time period covered by the FERC report.
This makes it impossible to have a legitimate baseline with which to determine whether outages are above normal in number, type, or duration.
FERC did not even attempt to determine whether companies were using techniques other than the actual physical withholding of generation in order to manipulate prices.
For example, a company could avoid bidding its full capacity or could bid at prices high enough to ensure exclusion from the market.
These tactics are referred to as "economic withholding."
FERC has a responsibility to provide adequate oversight.
When it fails to do so, its actions send signals to both the public and the market.
In this case, FERC's inadequate review resulted in sending a message to generators and marketers that it was acceptable to increase electricity charges by 1000 percent or more.
Evidence is mounting that generators withheld power from the market in order to drive up wholesale prices in the West.
Former employees for Duke Energy recently acknowledged before an investigative committee of the California legislature that they were ordered to trash spare parts that could have been used for maintenance and to ramp the power plant up and down based on market prices, rather than to meet demand.
Employees of Reliant Energy raised similar charges in the San Francisco Chronicle on May 20, 2001.
According to the Reliant employees, power traders at company headquarters in Houston had a direct phone link to power plant operators in California.
When headquarters saw prices trending lower, they ordered plant operators to cut their output.
In addition, as the GAO report acknowledges, studies done by Frank Wolak of the Market Surveillance Committee of the California Independent System Operator, and Paul Joskow of the Massachusetts Institute of Technology, found strong evidence of market manipulation.
The GAO report highlights the obvious problem of moving toward a free-wheeling, deregulated electricity market when the regulators are asleep at the wheel.
Even FERC's own staff acknowledge the agency's lack of investigative and monitoring capability necessary to guarantee fair markets.
A leaked memo from a senior economist at FERC called the agency's ability to monitor, foster, and ensure competitive electric power markets "impotent."
The memo goes on to say, "The Commission appears to have taken the tact (consciously or unconsciously) that industry should police itself."
Clearly that has not worked.
We are concerned by reports that the ongoing settlement conference required by FERC's June 22, 2001, Order may lead to an agreement to provide energy conglomerates immunity from future lawsuits and investigations.
Given the mounting evidence of manipulation, and GAO's critical report of FERC's lackluster effort to investigate, we believe granting immunity would be a serious mistake.
We are hopeful that congressional hearings to highlight the market abuses and inadequate oversight by regulators will forestall an imprudent rush to grant blanket immunity to generators and marketers.
We appreciate your consideration of our request and we stand ready to assist in any way we can.
Sincerely,
/s/ PETER DeFAZIO /s/ JAY INSLEE Member of Congress Member of Congress
Print Note: This page is excerpted from the web site of U.S. Representative Peter DeFazio, Fourth District, Oregon.
http://www.house.gov/defazio/.
