STATE PROPOSITIONS ON THE MARCH 1996 BALLOT PROPOSITION 197 MODIFICATION OF WILDLIFE PROTECTION ACT OF 1990: ALLOWING MANAGEMENT OF MOUNTAIN LIONS, INCLUDING HUNTING, TAKING, OR RELOCATING.
This measure, placed on the ballot by the Legislature as SB 28, authored by Senator Tim Leslie, would amend Proposition 117, a voter-approved initiative on the June 1990 ballot that banned mountain lion hunting in California.
Background Since the earliest records on the subject in 1890, five people nationwide have been killed by mountain lions, also called cougars.
Over the past decade, incidents of mountain lion sightings and confrontations have increased in California and other Western states.
There have been several cougar attacks on humans in California since 1985.
Last year, at least two individuals were killed by mountain lions, the first fatalities in California since 1909.
The state Department of Fish and Game (DFG) estimates the statewide mountain lion population expanded from between 2,400 and 3,000 in the early 1970s to between 4,000 and 6,000 in 1994.
Trends in confirmed mountain lion damage to livestock and pets show a significant increase from the 10 to 15 confirmed incidents in the early 1970s to 322 confirmed incidents in 1994.
In addition, 121 cougars were killed under permits issued in 1994 for causing damage to property.
It is not clear whether this increase in incidents is due to human encroachment into mountain lion habitat, a heightened state of awareness by the public due to publicity surrounding attacks and/or an increased mountain lion population.
Current law, as specified by the passage of Proposition 117, the Wildlife Protection Act of 1990, designates mountain lions as specially protected mammals.
This status protects mountain lions from sport hunting.
Proposition 117 allows the Department of Fish and Game to hunt and kill mountain lions to prevent or combat livestock losses and health and safety threats.
The act further prohibits the Fish and Game Commission from enacting regulations that conflict with or supersede provisions of the act.
Proposition 117 also created the Habitat Conservation Fund (HCF) and requires a minimum annual appropriation to the HCF of $30 million.
The act requires the state controller to transfer annually 10 percent of any unallocated funds in the Cigarette and Tobacco Products Surtax Fund to the HCF.
The funds in the HCF are to be spent annually for habitat acquisition and protection, as specified in the act.
The act prohibits the Legislature from changing the special protected status of the mountain lion except by a four-fifths vote of the membership of both houses, and then only consistent with, and in furtherance of, the purposes of the act.
The HCF may not be altered without a vote of the electorate.
Under current law, the Fish and Game Commission manages mammals that are not threatened, rare, or endangered using management tools such as regulated sport hunting, habitat enhancement, and public education.
How Proposition 197 Would Work Proposition 197 would:
Require the Fish and Game Commission and the Department of Fish and Game to regulate and manage mountain lions in the same manner as they regulate and manage mammals that are not rare, endangered, or threatened species.
Require the department to prepare a mountain lion management plan.
Authorize the department or designee, including, but not limited to, an appropriate governmental agency or an owner of land, to remove or kill mountain lions perceived to be imminent threats to public health or safety or livestock anywhere in the state except within the state park system.
Authorize the department or appropriate government agency to remove or kill mountain lions in the state park system only with concurrence of the Department of Parks and Recreation.
Within the state park system, the initiative authorizes the Department of Fish and Game, or government entities authorized by the department, to remove or take lions perceived to be an imminent threat to public health or safety.
Require the state Department of Fish and Game to prepare, submit to the commission for approval and implement a scientifically sound management plan that promotes public health and safety protection and protection of livestock, domestic animals, other property, and other wildlife species.
The plan would identify zones based on the departments estimates of mountain lion densities, and would designate priority zones where the removal of individual mountain lions to protect public safety, domestic animals, other property and other wildlife species had not alleviated threats.
Require the remains of slain mountain lions to be available for inspection to department personnel upon request.
Appropriate from the Habitat Conservation Fund up to $250,000 for the 1996-97, 1997-98 and 1998-99 fiscal years and up to $100,000 for each fiscal year thereafter to pay the departments cost of preparing and implementing the mountain lion management plan.
Declare legislative intent that an additional $250,000 be appropriated annually to the department from sources other than the HCF.
Allow any provision of Proposition 117 to be amended or repealed by a majority vote of the Legislature, thus repealing the four-fifths vote requirement for amendments to the provisions of Proposition 117.
Specify that the ballots for the election will read: Amendment of the California Wildlife Protection Act of 1990: This act authorizes the Legislature to manage mountain lions to protect the people and resources of California.
Related Legislation Several Assembly bills to address issues regarding mountain lions were introduced but did not win passage in 1995:
AB 87 (Cortese) would develop a statewide policy and procedure to remove mountain lions which are an imminent threat.
AB 117 (Knowles) would place repeal of Proposition 117 on the ballot, and authorize the killing of mountain lions as game mammals under license tags issued by the department.
AB 1362 (Knowles) would, upon the approval of the voters, repeal the provisions of Proposition 117 granting special protection to mountain lions and would restore their status to that existing before enactment of the California Wildlife Protection Act of 1990.
AB 1363 (Knowles) would require the Department of Fish and Game to do biennial reports on the mountain lion population.
Policy Impacts Although there is very little data available on the mountain lion population, a seven-year-old study estimated a minimum statewide population of 5,100 cougars.
This estimate, however, excluded half of California as mountain lion habitat and disregarded lions that had not grown to maturity.
Based upon this estimate and the DFGs conservative tally of lions in 1988, Californias lion population in 1994 probably would have been over 10,000.
The initiative would allow the re- establishment of sport hunting of cougars, which could be expected to reduce their population growth.
It is unclear what impact this would have on human contact, as safety concerns could increase as younger, less experienced lions with less fear of human contact take the place of those killed as trophies.
Fiscal Impacts The Joint Legislative Budget Committee, based on the July 17, 1995, version of the bill, estimates the fiscal impact at about $250,000 annually for the DFG to prepare and implement a statewide mountain lion management plan for the first three years.
Between $100,000 and $300,000 annually (would be required) thereafter, to update and implement the plan on an ongoing basis, depending on the number of actions that need to be taken to implement the management plan.
These costs presumably would be covered by the HCF.
Arguments in Support This initiative would entrust to wildlife scientists the ability to manage mountain lions proactively, rather than only after attacks had occurred, proponents say.
The authors office states that Proposition 117 has not protected the public safety, as evidenced by two human deaths blamed on mountain lions, several brutal attacks on men, women and children and countless accounts of wildlife and domestic animal maulings.
According to the Attorney Generals Office, The mountain lion population has burgeoned, leading to more contact with humankind and, lately, the tragic mauling and killing of a park visitor and a jogger.
Supporters state that since cougar sightings are occurring more often in suburban settings, it seems only a matter of time before another person needlessly loses his or her life to one of these predators.
Arguments in Opposition Opponents argue that Proposition 197 is a solution without a problem.
They note current law, Proposition 117, requires the DFG to authorize the removal or killing of mountain lions that are perceived to endanger public safety Opponents claim support for this bill comes from trophy hunters who are hiding behind the public safety appeal.
Opponents contend that, within existing law, there should be no problems controlling mountain lion dangers if the DFG does its job appropriately.
However, since the DFG receives a part of its budget from hunting license fees, the department is conflicted when it comes to enforcement, they argue.
Opponents further assert that sport hunting of mountain lions would do nothing to prevent further suburban attacks on humans.
They also complain that Proposition 197 contains a provision that permits killing a lion if it endangers wildlife, which, opponents say, means a cougar could be shot for eating its normal prey.
Partial List of Supporters California Lion Awareness San Bernardino County Sheriffs Department Attorney General Dan Lungren California State Sheriffs Association California Chamber of Commerce California Wool Growers Association California Farm Bureau Federation California Cattlemens Association Redwood Houndsmen Fresno County Sportsmens Club Gun Owners of California, Inc.
Modoc County Cattlemens Association North Central California Houndsmen Association Lassen Sportsmens Club California Houndsmen for Conservation Shasta Cascade Houndsmen California Grange Intermountain Houndsmen 
Outdoor Sportsmens Coalition of California California Trappers Association El Dorado County Farm Bureau Sacramento County Department of Parks and Recreation Lassen County Board of Supervisors Glenn County Fish and Game Commission Inyo County Board of Supervisors Safari Club International The California Sportsmans Lobby, Inc.
Numerous individual letters
Partial List of Opponents Mountain Lion Foundation Sierra Club Planning and Conservation League Environmental Protection Information Center Humane Society of the United States Fund for Animals Contra Costa Humane Society Elsa Wild Animal Appeal The Kern Audubon Society California Sportsfishing Alliance Action for Animals North Coast Center for Biodiversity and Sustainability South Coast Audubon Advocates for Animals Whittier Audubon Society El Dorado Audubon California Federation for Animal Legislation
Senate floor vote: 26-8 Assembly floor vote: 44-30
Sources Text of the initiative Text of Proposition 117 Senate and Assembly committee staff analyses of SB 28
Prepared by Alan Gordon
