U.S. House Committee on Transportation and Infrastructure U.S. Rep. Don Young, Chairman
Contact: Steve Hansen (Director of Communications) (202) 225-7749 Email: Steve.Hansen@mail.house.gov Justin Harclerode (Deputy Director of Communications) (202) 226-8767 Email: Justin.Harclerod@mail.house.gov
To: National Desk/Transportation Reporter April 1, 2003
GAO Warns That Some U.S. Coast Guard Missions May Be Suffering As Result Of Increased Homeland Security Duties
Washington, D.C. - The Commandant of the U.S. Coast Guard and a representative of the General Accounting Office (GAO) appeared before a Congressional Subcommittee today to provide assessments of the ongoing transition of the Coast Guard from the Department of Transportation to the Department of Homeland Security.
Admiral Thomas Collins, U.S. Coast Guard Commandant, assured the U.S. House Coast Guard and Maritime Transportation Subcommittee that the services programs were adequately funded and that the Coast Guard was managing its resources effectively.
JayEtta Hecker, GAOs Director of Physical Infrastructure Issues, however, cautioned that some Coast Guard missions are experiencing a decreased level of resources caused by its enhanced Homeland Security duties.
Traditional Missions Such As Search 
The Coast Guards multi-mission charge is daunting and will bring immense organizational, administrative and operational challenges for the service, said U.S. Rep. Frank LoBiondo (R-NJ), Chairman of the Subcommittee.
LoBiondo stated that the Subcommittee would continue to observe the Coast Guards commitment to implementing the Maritime Transportation Security Act of 2002 and to ensure the Coast Guard sufficient funding to protect our ports and waterways.
LoBiondo added, The Coast Guards traditional missions such as search and rescue, drug and migrant interdiction, pollution prevention, boater safety and fisheries law enforcement must be preserved.
While I am very pleased with the Presidents continued commitment to increase funding for the Coast Guard, I am concerned that this level of funding may not adequately fulfill the Coast Guards needs.
Should Operations Iraqi Freedom and Liberty Shield continue longer than anticipated or if the Coast Guard is required to increase its level of participation, I would firmly advocate for a higher level of fiscal year 2003 supplemental funding for the Coast Guard, said LoBiondo.
Addressing the Coast Guards potential difficulties in providing adequate resources for its non-defense missions in light of its expanded Homeland Defense duties, LoBiondo said, I want to assure the public that this Committee intends to pursue aggressive oversight of this issue.
As We Transition To The New Department, We Are Accomplishing Our Safety And Security Missions Admiral Collins
As we transition to the new Department, we are accomplishing our safety and security missions, both of which must be adequately funded to maintain our high standards of operational excellence in meeting Americas future maritime needs, said Admiral Collins.
The Coast Guard has engaged in deliberate planning with DOT and others to ensure continuity of essential services to the nation, while improving homeland security functions.
Admiral Collins told the Subcommittee that he feels the Coast Guard is allocating their available resources in the most intelligent and effective manner possible to address the challenges before them.
Members of the Subcommittee praised the Coast Guards performance under the circumstances, but expressed concerns that the service would be unable to adequately fulfill its increased responsibilities at current levels of funding.
GAO Finds Substantial Declines In Levels Of Time Spent On Fisheries Enforcement And Drug Interdiction
GAOs Hecker addressed the Coast Guards allocation of resource hours towards its various missions.
The most recent levels of effort for the Coast Guards various missions - as measured by the use of multiple-mission resources such as cutters, patrol boats, and aircraft - show clearly the dramatic increase in the amount of time spent on homeland security following the September 11th attacks, said Hecker.
The amount of resource hours currently being spent on search and rescue and maintaining aids to navigation are fairly consistent with traditional levels over the last five years.
However, there have been substantial declines from traditional levels of time spent on two law enforcement missions - fisheries enforcement and drug interdiction.
The fiscal year 2004 budget request for the Coast Guard, which includes a $592 million increase over the 2003 budget, does not include initiatives that would substantially reverse these declines.
Hecker warned that projects integral to the Coast Guards future plans are already troubled because of its expanded duties.
The Coast Guards Deepwater Project, a modernization effort for cutters, patrol boats, and aircraft, has already experienced delays in the delivery of key assets, jeopardizing the agencys future ability to carry out a number of missions at optimum levels, said Hecker.
This situation could worsen because the Coast Guard has tied successful completion of the project to levels of funding that are beyond what has been available.
Hecker listed measures that could help the Coast Guard meet its mission requirements more effectively.
One is to continue finding ways to operate more efficiently to maximize the existing resources available.
Another is to develop a comprehensive blueprint or strategy for accomplishing mission responsibilities.
Without such a blueprint, the Coast Guard also runs a risk of continuing to communicate that it will try to be all things to all people when, in fact, it has little chance of actually being able to do so.
# # #
