CURRENCY The Committee on Banking and Financial Services U.S House of Representatives, 105th Congress James A. Leach, Chairman
Phone: (202) 226-0471 Fax: (202) 226-6052 Internet: http://www.house.gov/banking
For Immediate Release Contact: David Runkel or Saturday, May 16, 1998 Andrew Biggs 226-0471
Statement of Rep. James A. Leach Chairman, House Banking and Financial Services Committee To the International Leadership Conference American Jewish Committee
In her seminal work, The Origins of Totalitarianism, the philosopher Hannah Arendt noted that what hallmarked Auschwitz, as well as the Gulag, was the destruction of personal identity.
Individuals were taken from their homes without notice or cause, became prisoners with numbers, and eventually bones without flesh, interred for the ages in mass graves.
Life was not only rubbed out, but robbed of its meaning.
While there is no way to equate the systematic genocide of the Holocaust to the property losses that occurred, this dichotomy does not provide a valid excuse for civilized people to ignore the imperative of seeking accountability for the greatest theft, as well as mass murder, in history.
It is simply indisputable that one of the impelling causes of the attempted liquidation of the Jewish people of Europe was avarice, a desire of the victimizers to take the victims' property.
This is not to say that greed precipitated the Holocaust.
After all, it is possible to confiscate property without killing the owner.
Nevertheless, integral to the anti-Semitism of the time was a coveting prejudice that must be taken into account if evil and the causes of evil are to be understood.
At the end of World War II, the Nuremberg trials properly placed emphasis on individual accountability for aggression and genocide.
The principle of individual accountability was also applied to issues of property restitution.
Allied forces insisted, for example, that art works were not spoils and had to be returned to their rightful owners.
But urgency to rebuild devastated parts of Europe, coupled with a concern not to repeat the punitive approach that characterized post-World War I settlements and may have brought on World War II, caused many property issues to be overlooked in the immediate aftermath of the war.
And for nearly 50 years, Congress and most European parliaments exhibited little interest in the topic of returning assets extorted or seized from Holocaust victims to their rightful owners.
But over the past two years, the banking committees of the U.S. House and Senate have been looking into issues of asset restitution.
The House Banking Committee has conducted the most extensive hearings on Holocaust-related issues of any Congressional committee in a generation.
We have taken testimony from more than 70 witnesses from seven countries and four continents.
That most of the hearings have been held in the House -- the people's body--underscores the fact that these are issues of consequence to all Americans, not just those from states where a disproportionate number of families have been touched by the Holocaust.
My initial concern about these matters arose from reports that Swiss banks held--and were refusing to return--millions of dollars in dormant accounts that rightfully belonged to Holocaust victims or their heirs.
Most of these accounts had been opened by Jewish families who wanted to shield their assets from the Nazis.
Swiss bank secrecy laws lent themselves, and indeed were designed, for just that purpose.
After the war, Swiss banks used these secrecy statutes to turn away legitimate claimants, a number of whom told their stories to the Committee, by demanding details and documents, like death certificates, that were usually impossible to produce if the original owner had died in a concentration camp.
Prodded by the Committee, representatives of the Swiss government and the Swiss Bankers Association solemnly pledged to the Congress that Swiss banks would search their records and return "every red centime" of money in their vaults to their rightful owners or turn it over to charity if the owners were no longer alive and there were no heirs.
Subsequently, in cooperation with a commission headed by Paul Volcker, the banks published lists of dormant accounts owned by foreigners featuring many Jewish names--including that of the mother of the U.S. Ambassador to Switzerland, Madeleine May Kunin.
A comprehensive settlement appears to be nearing, involving Swiss banks, private litigants in New York, the World Jewish Congress, and the Department of State, with the committees of Congress playing an unprecedented oversight role.
In other hearings, the Committee examined how the Nazis looted the gold of various European countries.
A report produced under the direction of Stuart Eizenstat - who I consider to be one of the most thoughtful individuals to serve in any Administration in modern times - concluded, among other things, that Switzerland's cooperation with Hitler's Germany in the last stages of the war was not necessary to the preservation of Swiss sovereignty and that, in fact, it prolonged the conflict.
The Committee also heard perspectives on the Holocaust of historians and legal experts from Argentina, Britain, Israel, Portugal, Spain and Sweden, as well as Switzerland.
Our hearings, though they have not been well publicized in the U.S., have received a great deal of attention in Europe and helped spur the creation of a series of national commissions on World War II atrocities and led in December to a 42-nation conference in London on Holocaust asset issues, which will be followed by one this November in Washington.
Americans have every reason to be proud of the sacrifices our country made to defeat Nazi Germany in World War II.
But our history on Holocaust issues is not without imperfections.
In May of 1939, we rebuffed the 930 Jewish refugees aboard the SS St. Louis from landing on our shores, sending them back to Europe and, as we learned later, almost certain death.
And it took the American government a shamefully long time after the end of the war--some 17 years--to come up with a flinty settlement for the unclaimed assets of Holocaust victims in this country.
Accordingly, to provide a measure of relief for the remaining victims of the Holocaust and to stimulate greater international efforts on this subject, I introduced legislation, the Holocaust Victims Redress Act, which passed the House and Senate unanimously and was signed into law by the President in March
The law authorizes $25 million as a U.S. contribution to organizations serving survivors of the Holocaust living in the United States and abroad, and an additional $5 million for archival research to assist in the restitution of assets looted or extorted from Holocaust victims.
The $5 million should go toward projects such as the cataloguing and translation of foreign archives.
These projects should be identified by groups Jewish groups here and abroad and vetted by the Holocaust Memorial Museum, which will administer the fund.
I would hope that the $5 million of government money would be supplemented by private contributions.
The law also puts Congress on record in support of dedicating to Holocaust victims the remaining assets under the control of an institution called the Tripartite Gold Commission.
The TGC consists of the United States, the United Kingdom and France.
It was created after World War II to oversee the return of looted gold from Nazi-occupied lands.
Most of the gold recovered from that period was long ago given back to claimant countries.
However, a small portion of that gold, about six metric tons, worth anywhere from $50 million to $70 million depending on the price of gold at a given time, is still in TGC custody and remains to be distributed.
Fifteen nations hold claim to some portion of that gold.
The U.S. is not a claimant, but a U.S. contribution to the gold pool would serve as an act of conscience on the part of this nation, and would go a long way in encouraging a similar gesture of generosity by claimants of the gold pool, or others who are not claimants but may have reason to provide redress for actions taken during that dark night of the human soul we call the Holocaust.
We can only guess at the size of the unclaimed assets of Holocaust victims that remained in the U.S. after World War II.
We know from a 1941 census of foreign assets that German holdings in the U.S. amounted to $198 million at the time.
Included in these holdings were assets sent abroad for safekeeping by Jews and other victims of Nazi persecution.
After the war, the U.S. government took over the German holdings.
Holocaust victims and their heirs were given an opportunity to reclaim what belonged to them.
But an unknown number of accounts remained in the U.S. Treasury because their owners and their families had perished.
Given this circumstance, Congress decided that these funds should go to Holocaust survivors and in 1962 authorized up to $3 million to meet claims brought by the Jewish Successor Restitution Organization for the heirless accounts.
The task of adjudicating individual claims proved so controversial, however, that Congress ultimately chose to settle for a $500,000 lump-sum appropriation.
The JSRO had little choice but to go along with this relatively modest amount, although, as New York Senator Kenneth Keating observed at the time, "it is clear that heirless property exists in amounts substantially larger that the amount stated."
Thus, in essence, my bill represented an inflation-adjusted contribution roughly equal to what is believed to be the value of heirless assets that were mingled with German holdings during the war.
The second title of the Holocaust Victims Redress Act deals with Nazi-looted art.
As an art historian noted at our hearings, "the 12 years of the Nazi era mark the greatest displacement of art in history."
Purged from state museums were impressionist, abstract expressionist, and religious art, as well as art deemed politically or racially incorrect - "degenerate," as Hitler called it.
Private collections were either exchanged for exit permits by their owners or confiscated as they and their families were sent to concentration camps.
In turn, Nazis authorities at various levels sold these confiscated works of art for hard currency to enrich themselves or finance the war.
Under international legal principles, including the Hague Convention of 1907, pillaging is forbidden in war, as is the seizure of works of art.
Even so, thousands of items disappeared into the international marketplace.
After the war, great efforts were made to return looted art, but to this day many pieces remain lost to their original owners and heirs.
It is difficult not to be proud of the U.S. Army's unit for Monuments, Fine Arts 
Operating in occupied Germany, the unit did a magnificent job of returning hundreds of thousands of art works to the countries from which they were taken.
Perhaps for the first time in history, military officers became cultural heroes, but their accomplishments were not without controversy.
Although the 1907 Hague Convention prohibits taking cultural property as a spoil of war, United States policy in the immediate months after the war was by no means clear that German museums should be given back their treasures.
In late 1945, some 200 masterpieces were brought from Berlin museums to America and triumphantly exhibited around the country.
For a number of Monuments officers the tour appeared uncomfortably close to expropriation.
They protested in a communiqué to their superiors: "We wish to state that from our own knowledge, no historical grievance will rankle so long, or be the cause of so much justified bitterness, as the removal, for any reason, of the part of a heritage of any nation, even if that heritage be interpreted as a prize of war."
The United States soon made the right decision--to return cultural artifacts found at the war's end, no matter where they came from.
In thus affirming a relatively new precept of international law, it demonstrated an awareness that, to paraphrase Toynbee, art provides a revealing avenue to understanding history, civilization and ultimately ourselves.
Returning artworks to their rightful owners is not a simple task.
Many collectors today are several steps removed from the plundering that occurred in World War II.
They bought artworks in good faith, unaware of the possibly tainted past of a particular piece.
They too would be victimized if someone else made a legitimate claim to what they assumed to be their property.
Another complication lies in the conflicting nature of various legal systems.
In the United States and other common law societies, we rely on the principle that good title does not emanate from a thief--or from any successors in interest.
In Europe, generally speaking, a good faith purchaser acquires good title, even at the expense of victims of theft.
With regard to Holocaust art, however, the principle must be manifest: confiscated property must be returned.
I am happy to report that American museums are determined to abide by this principle.
In a rare joint appearance, the directors of our country's greatest museums--the Metropolitan Museum and the Museum of Modern Art in New York, the Art Institute of Chicago and the National Gallery of Washington--pledged to the House Banking Committee that they would rigorously re-examine the provenance of their collections and publish, under the auspices of the American Association of Art Museum Directors, guidelines and recommendations for dealing with art pieces that may be of suspicious origin.
I am expecting to hear from them in the next couple of weeks.
Most recently, the Committee has looked at insurance issues - specifically, charges that German, Swiss and Italian insurance companies failed to pay the life policies to the heirs of Holocaust victims.
The Committee heard from claimants, as well as major insurance companies, one of which was headed for a short period during World War II by an individual who liked to wear his S.S. uniform to work.
In the wake of our hearing--which included statements from the state insurance commissioners of Florida, California and Washington--an agreement was reached to create a settlement commission.
Key European insurance companies have agreed to open their books to an international committee modeled on the Volcker group and establish a fund of unspecified size to aid impoverished Holocaust survivors.
A critical question is whether a settlement can or should replace claims by private litigants and release insurance companies from further liabilities before American courts.
Finally, on the legislative front, a few weeks ago Senator D'Amato and I, with the support of the Administration, introduced legislation to establish a U.S. Holocaust Assets Commission to review the historical record of the disposition of Holocaust victims' assets in the U.S.
The commission will look not only at bank accounts, but other classes of assets, including insurance policies, art works, and real estate.
The Commission, we hope, will be formed by the end of the summer.
In the more immediate future, the House Banking Committee has scheduled a hearing on the role of neutral countries during World War II.
State Department officials will present a new historical review of that period prepared by an inter-agency task force, and we have invited a panel of eminent philosophers and theologians to give us their views on the moral dilemmas of neutrality in the face of crimes against humanity.
I had hoped to hold that hearing this week, but the White House held up the report, on the odd grounds that the press coverage would interfere with President's message in Germany.
In conclusion, let me stress that inquiries into asset disposition and efforts toward redress are less about monetary than about human values.
The founders of the United States affirmed a belief in inalienable rights that no legitimate state may deny.
The rights to life, to liberty and to the pursuit of happiness belong to humanity.
In Auschwitz, Maidanek and Buchenwald, humanity was denied.
Victims of the Holocaust were cremated and their ashes thrown anonymously into mass graves.
The property they left behind may, in many cases, be the sole tangible link of this generation to these individuals and to their lives.
In seeking to return bank deposits, gold, artworks, insurance claims and other looted property to their rightful owners, we are thus not merely matching names with account numbers or providing succor to Holocaust survivors who are elderly and often destitute.
We are reasserting to the world the very humanity that the Nazis attempted to eviscerate.
Little is more difficult or dangerous than, generations later, to attempt to establish retrospective justice.
But people and their earthly goods cannot be allowed to disappear without trace or accountability.
While coming to terms with the past is a difficult process for all countries involved, history does not have a statute of limitations.
For the survivors, time is in short supply.
For successor generations, no aspect of modern history is more important to come to grips with than the Holocaust, that moment when civilization buckled and man's inhumanity to man reigned supreme.
************
