[USEMAP:topnav.gif] _______________ submit search njda njda home [Agriculture Links...........]
Jersey Fresh (609) 292-8853 [transparent.gif]
Visit our new Jersey Fresh site
It's a rare Garden State resident who hasn't savored the taste of locally-grown Jersey Fresh fruits, vegetables and herbs or planted shrubs, trees or flowers grown at a local nursery or greenhouse.
Through the Jersey Fresh marketing and promotional program overseen by the Division of Markets, word of the diversity, freshness and quality of New Jersey farm products reaches the state's consumers through newspaper and television advertisements, point-of-purchase displays at supermarkets, and special food and wine festivals and celebrations throughout the year.
Jersey Fresh matching grants are offered each year to agricultural organizations which use the funds to carve out their own promotional or educational Jersey Fresh niche through food and wine festivals, rural tourism guides and other efforts.
THE JERSEY FRESH ADVERTISING AND PROMOTIONAL PROGRAM
The Jersey Fresh advertising and promotional program was developed in 1983 to draw consumer attention to the availability of New Jersey farm products.
This unique program quickly became the standard against which other states modeled their own marketing programs.
Initially begun as a radio advertising campaign, the Jersey Fresh program has also used billboards, televised and print ads, and colorful point-of-purchase (PDF 12K) materials to remind consumers about the availability of locally grown products.
The Jersey Fresh message has reached nearly every state in the nation and in many countries abroad with special emphasis on consumers along the Eastern Seaboard from Richmond, Va., to Montreal, Quebec, where the campaign was translated in to French to accommodate this important New Jersey market.
For many years, the Jersey Fresh promotional program has kept millions of consumers in the tri-state area, New England and Eastern Canada abreast of the availability of hundreds of farm products.
The Jersey Fresh advertising program includes virtually all of the products raised on Garden State farms, including fruits and vegetables, dairy products, fish and seafood, nursery and greenhouse products and horses.
Three seasonal 30-second Jersey Fresh television commercials alternate with ten 30-second infomercials covering spring greens, peaches, corn, tomatoes and peppers, greenhouse/nursery and dairy products, blueberries, herbs and squash.
The infomercials alert consumers to the crops in season and offer selection, storage and preparation tips for each commodity as well.
In 2000 Jersey Fresh matching grants totaling $250,000 were awarded to 70 agricultural organizations which used the funds to carve out their own promotional or educational Jersey Fresh niche through food and wine festivals, urban farm market promotional events and other efforts.
As a result, more than $500,000 worth of additional publicity was generated by and for the Jersey Fresh program.
A survey undertaken in 1997 to measure the success of the Jersey Fresh advertising and promotional program revealed that 38 percent of shoppers in the New York-Philadelphia metropolitan region were aware of the Jersey Fresh program.
Fifty-four percent of all shoppers surveyed indicated that they were more inclined to purchase Jersey Fresh farm products if they are labeled as such at the point of purchase, further underscoring the importance of working with retailers and produce managers to make sure Jersey Fresh point-of-purchase material is displayed.
[transparent.gif] nj state graphic
