Table of Decisions Previous Decision Next Decision Quick List of Decisions __________________________________________________________________ [ v15 p867 ] 15:867(165)CA The decision of the Authority follows: __________________________________________________________________ 15 FLRA No. 165
DEPARTMENT OF THE NAVY NORFOLK NAVAL SHIPYARD PORTSMOUTH, VIRGINIA Respondent
and
TIDEWATER VIRGINIA FEDERAL EMPLOYEES METAL TRADES COUNCIL Charging Party
Case No. 43-CA-1294
DECISION AND ORDER
The Administrative Law Judge issued the attached Decision in the above-entitled proceeding finding that the Respondent had engaged in certain unfair labor practices alleged in the complaint, and recommending that it cease and desist therefrom and take certain affirmative action.
Exceptions to the Judge's Decision were filed by the Respondent.
Pursuant to section 2423.29 of the Authority's Rules and Regulations and section 7118 of the Federal Service Labor-Management Relations Statute (the Statute), the Authority has reviewed the rulings of the Judge made at the hearing and finds that no prejudicial error was committed.
The rulings are hereby affirmed.
Upon consideration of the Judge's Decision and the entire record, the Authority hereby adopts the Judge's findings, conclusions, and recommended Order.
Ordinarily, the removal of an employee from assigned duties solely because of the employees' protected union activity constitutes an unfair labor practice.
See, e.g., Internal Revenue Service, Boston District, Boston, Massachusetts and Internal Revenue Service Center, Andover, Massachusetts, 5 FLRA 700 (1981).
However, the Authority recognizes that conflicts may arise between the rights of employees and the rights and duties of management.
Section 7101 of the Statute, for example, provides both for the right of employees to participate in the collective bargaining process through labor organizations of their own choosing, and for the safeguarding of the public interest in maintaining an effective and efficient Government.
Further, irreconcilable conflicts may arise between management's right to insist on the performance of a job that cannot be deferred and an employee's right to engage in protected union activity, such as the representational activities of the employee herein involved.
Where such conflicts arise, management must be free to assign the employee, without loss of pay, to other duties that will not impair any essential function of the agency, but will permit the employee to perform those other duties and to also engage in protected union activity.
It is the burden of management when exercising that right, however, to show that such a transfer of assignment is warranted.
Thus, applying this principle to the facts in this case, we find, in agreement with the Judge, that the record does not demonstrate that the protected representational activities of the employee here involved interfered with the performance of his duties so as to warrant a transfer of assignment, and that the Respondent's action therefore violated the Statute.
Accordingly, the Authority finds that the Respondent violated section 7116(a)(1) and (2) of the Statute by removing Richard L. Lake, Chief Steward of Shop 07 for the Charging Party, from fire alarm truck duties because of his union activities, and that, in the circumstances of this case, an order that Lake be made whole for any loss of overtime earnings suffered as a result of his discriminatory removal is appropriate.
The details of such remedy are left to the compliance procedures of this case.
See American Federation of Government Employees, AFL-CIO, Local 2000, 4 FLRA 601 (1980).
ORDER
Pursuant to section 2423.29 of the Federal Labor Relations Authority's Rules and Regulations and section 7118 of the Statute, the Authority hereby orders that the Department of the Navy, Norfolk Naval Shipyard, Portsmouth, Virginia, shall:
1.
Cease and desist from:
(a) Failing and refusing to restore Richard L. Lake to duties as fire alarm electrician, which assignment he had held prior to April 21, 1980, when he was relieved of such duties because he had exercised his rights under the Statute to assist a labor organization by serving as a union officer and had utilized official time in such capacity in accordance with the parties' negotiated agreement.
(b) Discriminating against Richard L. Lake with regard to overtime, or any other condition of employment, in order to discourage membership in, or activities on behalf of, the Tidewater Virginia Federal Employees Metal Trades Council, or any other labor organization.
(c) In any like or related manner interfering with, restraining, or coercing its employees in the exercise of their rights assured by the Statute.
2.
Take the following affirmative action in order to effectuate the purposes and policies of the Statute:
(a) Offer to restore Richard L. Lake to duty as fire alarm electrician, including his restoration to the fire alarm truck as lead mechanic, and make him whole for any loss of overtime earnings which he may have suffered as the result of his discriminatory removal from his assigned duty of fire alarm electrician on April 21, 1980, for the period beginning April 21, 1980, and continuing to the effective date of Respondent's offer of restoration to the assignment which he held prior to April 21, 1980.
(b) Post at its facilities copies of the attached Notice on forms to be furnished by the Authority.
Upon receipt of such forms they shall be signed by the Commanding Officer, Norfolk Naval Shipyard, Portsmouth, Virginia, or his designee, and shall be posted and maintained for 60 consecutive days thereafter, in conspicuous places, including all bulletin boards and other places where notices to employees are customarily posted.
Reasonable steps shall be taken to insure that such Notices are not altered, defaced, or covered by any other material.
(c) Pursuant to Section 2423.30 of the Authority's Rules and Regulations, notify the Regional Director, Federal Labor Relations Authority, Region IV, in writing, within 30 days from the date of this Order, as to what steps have been taken to comply herewith.
Issued, Washington, D.C., August 31, 1984
Barbara J. Mahone, Chairman Ronald W. Haughton, Member Henry B. Frazier III, Member FEDERAL LABOR RELATIONS AUTHORITY
NOTICE TO ALL EMPLOYEES
PURSUANT TO A DECISION AND ORDER OF THE FEDERAL LABOR RELATIONS AUTHORITY AND IN ORDER TO EFFECTUATE THE POLICIES OF CHAPTER 71 OF TITLE 5 OF THE UNITED STATES CODE FEDERAL SERVICE LABOR-MANAGEMENT RELATIONS
WE HEREBY NOTIFY OUR EMPLOYEES THAT:
WE WILL NOT fail or refuse to restore Richard L. Lake to duties as fire alarm electrician, which assignment he had held prior to April 21, 1980, when he was relieved of such duties because he had exercised his rights under the Statute to assist a labor organization by serving as a union officer and had utilized official time in such capacity in accordance with the parties' negotiated agreement.
WE WILL NOT discriminate against Richard L. Lake with regard to overtime, or any other condition of employment, in order to discourage membership in, or activities on behalf of, the Tidewater Virginia Federal Employees Metal Trades Council, or any other labor organization.
WE WILL NOT in any like or related manner interfere with, restrain, or coerce any employee in the exercise of rights assured by the Statute.
WE WILL offer to restore Richard L. Lake to duty as fire alarm electrician, including his restoration to the fire alarm truck as lead mechanic.
WE WILL make Mr. Richard L. Lake whole for any loss of overtime earnings which he may have suffered as the result of his discriminatory removal from his assigned duty as fire alarm electrician on April 21, 1980, for the period beginning April 21, 1980, and continuing to the effective date of our offer to restore him to the assignment which he had held prior to April 21, 1980.
(Activity) By: (Signature) (Title)
Dated: . . .
This Notice must remain posted for 60 consecutive days from the date of posting, and must not be altered, defaced, or covered by any other material.
If employees have any questions concerning this Notice or compliance with its provisions, they may communicate directly with the Regional Director, Region IV, Federal Labor Relations Authority, whose address is: 1776 Peachtree Street, NW, Suite 501, North Wing, Atlanta, Georgia 30309 and whose telephone number is: (404) 881-2324.
-------------------- ALJ$ DECISION FOLLOWS --------------------
Case No. 43-CA-1294 Brenda S. Green, Esquire For the General Counsel
Walter B. Bagby, Esquire For the Respondent
Before: WILLIAM B. DEVANEY Administrative Law Judge
DECISION
Statement of the Case
This proceeding, under the Federal Service Labor-Management Relations Statute, Chapter 71 of Title 5 of the United States Code, 5 U.S.C. 7101, et seq., /1/ and the Final Rules and Regulations issued thereunder, 5 C.F.R. 2423.1, et seq., was initiated by a charge filed on June 30, 1980 (G.C. Exh. 1(a)) alleging violations of Sec. 16(a)(1), (2) and (8) of the Statute and the matter was assigned Case No. 3-CA-1294.
By Order dated July 3, 1980, pursuant to Sec. 2429.2 of the Rules and Regulations, the case was transferred from Region 3 to Region 4 (G.C. Exh. 1cc)) and thereafter was assigned Case No. 43-CA-1294.
On August 22, 1980, a 1st Amended Charge was filed (G.C. Exh. 1(d)) which alleged violations of Secs. 16(a)(1) and (2).
A Complaint and Notice of Hearing issued on October 21, 1980 (G.C. Exh. 1(f)), pursuant to which a hearing was duly held on January 7, 1981, in Norfolk Virginia, before the undersigned.
The Complaint, in substance, alleges that on, or about, April 21, 1980, Respondent reassigned Mr. Richard Lake from duties of inspection, repair and maintenance of fire alarm systems, and has failed and refused to reinstate him to his former duties, because Mr. Lake engaged in activities in and on behalf of the Tidewater Virginia Federal Employees Metal Trades Council (hereinafter, also, referred to as "Union") in violation of Secs. 16(a)(1) and (2) of the Statute.
All parties were represented, were afforded full opportunity to be heard, to examine and cross-examine witnesses, to introduce evidence bearing on the issues involved, and to present oral argument.
At the close of the hearing, February 9, 1981, was fixed as the date for mailing post-hearing briefs, which time was subsequently extended, for good cause shown, including delay in receipt of the transcript, to March 2, 1981.
Counsel for the General Counsel and for Respondent each timely mailed a very helpful brief, received on or before March 3, 1981, which have been carefully considered.
Upon the basis of the entire record, including my observation of the witnesses and their demeanor, I make the following findings and conclusions:
Findings
1.
Mr. Richard L. Lake was employed by Respondent on September 29, 1975, as an apprentice electrician.
He was, and is, a member of the International Brotherhood of Electrical Workers, Local 734.
Mr. Lake became a journeyman electrician (mechanic) on, or about, October 7, 1979 (Tr. 94, 95), and at about the same time became Chief Steward for Shop 07, a maintenance shop.
Mr. Joseph Griffith is maintenance Superintendent of Shop 07; he has three general foremen and fifteen foremen and the Shop performs work in seventeen different trades.
2.
The Union is the exclusive representative and there is in effect a negotiated agreement (G.C. Exh. 2).
Mr. Lake is Treasurer of IBEW Local 734; a delegate to the Union (Council); and prior to becoming Chief Steward for Shop 07 had been a steward in Shop 07.
3.
Mr. Lake is a high voltage electrician (GW-10) and his immediate supervisor is Mr. Charles R. West.
4.
Mr. West is foreman over all high voltage electrical work and distribution of power in the shipyard; maintenance and power distribution, elevators and fire alarm systems.
He is under the immediate supervision of a general foreman, which had been Mr. Richard W. Horner until Mr. Horner's retirement on May 12, 1980, and both were under the supervision of the Superintendent, Mr. Griffin.
Mr. West, a high voltage mechanic, became foreman in August, 1979.
5.
One of the duties of high voltage electricians is maintenance of the fire alarm system.
In August, 1979, Mr. West assigned Mr. Lake to fire alarm system duties.
There are five trucks assigned to Mr. West and one truck is primarily used for fire alarm system work and is generally referred to as the "Fire Alarm Truck."
Certain equipment pertaining to the fire alarm system work is kept on this truck, although, at night, the truck is used for other purposes.
Initially, as an apprentice, Mr. Lake worked under either Mr. Whitford or Mr. Pinner (G.C. Exh. 4); however, after he: a) became a mechanic and b) completed the fire alarm maintenance course in October, 1979, Mr. Lake became the lead mechanic on the fire alarm truck.
6.
The practice is to have two men assigned to the fire alarm truck.
When emergencies arise any number of high voltage electricians may be assigned to fire alarm system work; nor do the men normally assigned to fire alarm system work spend all their time on this work but they are routinely assigned to other duties as high voltage electricians as required (See, G.C. Exh. 3).
7.
Mr. West very credibly testified that ninety percent of this time two men, working together, are required for fire alarm system work, in part because the nature of the work, but principally because of safety considerations and, accordingly, when Mr. Lake left on union business the other man would usually return to the shop and Mr. West would have to find someone else to put on the truck (Tr. 173), although on some occasions the "other" man checked boxes alone(Tr. 94).
Mr. West also, very credibly, testified that when emergencies arose he could not get in touch with Mr. Lake when he was on union business.
Mr. Lake's assertion that he carried a portable Fire Department radio with him when he left the truck, which I fully accept as true, does not, as counsel for General Counsel asserts, refute in the slightest Mr. West's testimony that he could not contact Mr. Lake on his radio, or through his base station, for the reason that, as Mr. Ault's testimony shows (Tr. 60), Mr. West was not communicating on the Fire Department radio.
Nor, accepting Mr. Ault's testimony, that when Mr. Lake came to the Union's trailer with the truck he parked immediately outside the door of the trailer, which he left open, with the truck radio on, would the fact that he made an effort to be able to hear the truck radio demonstrate that Mr. Lake could have heard the radio had Mr. West sought to contact him since Mr. Ault further testified that Mr. Lake had come to the Council trailer only once or twice prior to April 18, 1980, and only at lunch time and there is nothing to indicate that Mr. West had ever sought to contact Mr. Lake when he was on his lunch break.
8.
Although the record shows that Mr. Lake spent time on union activities and that Mr. West on such occasions had been unable to contact Mr. Lake by radio, the record does not show how often this occurred since Mr. West prior to May, 1980, did not record Mr. Lake's time on union activity when it was less than an hour and Mr. Lake maintained no record of his time on union activities.
The time spent on union activities by Mr. Lake on and after May 28, 1980 (Res. Exh. 2) provides some indication of the general frequency of his activities as Chief Steward although I am aware that Mr. Lake testified that his union activities had been somewhat less in the period prior thereto.
In any event, Respondent Exhibit 2 shows that on and after May 28, 1980, the greatest amount of time spent by Mr. Lake on union activities during any week was seven hours and that the average per week was roughly 3 hours.
The record shows, and I so find, that Mr. West had discussed the problem on several occasions with General Foreman Horner and with Superintendent Griffith; however, I conclude, as Mr. Lake testified, that, prior to April, 1980, he had never been told by Mr. West that he had ever missed a call (Tr. 232).
Weighing all testimony, it seems inherently more probable that, while Mr. West did not discuss the matter with Mr. Lake, he did "tighten-up" his release procedures.
Accordingly, on or about, April 17, when Mr. Lake, at about 7:20 a.m., asked permission to go to the Union trailer, Mr. West "asked him what his business was, what he had to go there for" (Tr. 185) to which Mr. Lake replied that "it was none of his business"; /2/ and Mr. West denied Mr. Lake permission to go to the Union trailer.
Later, Mr. Lake called Mr. Ault who obtained clearance for Mr. Lake and he went to the Union trailer sometime before lunch.
After Mr. Lake had gone to the Union trailer, Mr. West and Mr. Lake met with Mr. Horner.
I credit Mr. West's testimony that the discussion with Mr. Horner concerned Mr. Lake's it's "none of your business" retort.
There is no dispute that Mr. West stated that employees had told him they didn't want to work with Mr. Lake and that he specifically mentioned Michael (Mickey) J. White as having made such statement.
/3/ Later on the afternoon of April 17, I conclude, as Mr. West testified, Mr. West assigned Mr. Lake to assist with a cable problem.
Shortly thereafter, Mr. Lake requested permission to go to the Union trailer and Mr. West denied permission for him to go immediately because this was an emergency (Tr. 140) but told Mr. Lake that if he finished in time "we would see about letting him go" (Tr. 140).
Mr. Lake did finish the job by about 3:30 p.m., but Mr. West never got back to Mr. Lake to release him.
9.
The following morning, April 18, Mr. West called Mr. Lake on the radio to come to Berth 42.
Mr. Michael J. White testified that he got out of the truck and Mr. West got in and that Messrs. Lake and West drove off for a while and returned in 15 to 30 minutes (Tr. 186).
Mr. White stated that Mr. Lake told him Mr. West had told him he could go to the Union office.
During the morning, Mr. Lake asked Mr. White if he had told Mr. West and he and the rest of the people in the gang didn't want to work with him (Lake) and Mr. White told Lake he hadn't said that to Mr. West and when they got back to the shop he would talk to Mr. West.
Mr. Lake stated that Mr. White had said "I was hard to get along with.
They told him that I was hard to get along with sometimes."
(Tr. 25).
10.
After lunch, and after Mr. Lake had taken care of his union business (Tr. 187), Messrs. Lake and White went back to the shop and Mr. White did talk to Mr. West and told him he had not said he didn't like working with Mr. Lake.
Mr. West and Mr. Lake then got into a discussion as to what had or had not been said (Tr. 25) and Mr. White testified that Mr. West said,
" . . . if Rick Lake thought that he was a bigger man than him, then they could go outside the shipyard and settle their differences."
(Tr. 188) /4/
There is no dispute that Mr. West then relieved Mr. Lake of his duties on the fire alarm truck for the rest of the day and Mr. White very credibly testified that Mr. West said he,
" . . . did not feel that Mr. Lake could carry out his full duties as both a fire alarm electrician and union steward."
(Tr. 191).
11.
There is no dispute that when he relieved Mr. Lake of his fire alarm system duties on April 18 Mr. West assigned Mr. Lake duties in the shop.
Although Mr. White (Tr. 188) said that Mr. West told Mr. Lake to sweep and Mr. Lake said that Mr. West told him to "get a broom and sweep down the floor the rest of the day" (Tr. 25), I found Mr. West's version far more credible and, accordingly, conclude, as Mr. West testified, that Mr. Lake said he wanted to speak with Mr. Horner and that he (West) " . . . told him go ahead down to the work center and be cleaning up the work area and I will set the appointment up , . . . .
" (Tr. 148, 166).
A few minutes later Mr. Lake called Mr. Ault who, because he could not get away, directed Mr. Lake to another member of Conference Committee, Mr. Joe Joiner, and Mr. Joiner came down and requested that Mr. Lake be released to go to the Union trailer and Mr. West released Mr. Lake and he spent "almost the rest of the afternoon" at the Union trailer talking with Mr. Ault and Mr. Bernie White, a member of the Conference Committee.
12.
On the next regular work day, April 21, 1980, at the beginning of the shift, Mr. West told Mr. Lake " . . . to take my tools and equipment off the fire alarm truck and move them to one of the other trucks in the gang, that I wasn't going to work on the truck any more."
(Tr. 26).
13.
At about 9:00 a.m. on April 21, 1980, Mr. Lake was called back to the shop for a meeting with Mr. West and Mr. Horner.
At this time, Mr. Lake testified that Mr. West said, " . . .
he wanted to apologize for my (Lake's) misunderstanding in believing that he said he was going to whip my ass."
(Tr. 27).
Mr. Lake told Mr. West he couldn't accept an apology for his believing that I had made a mistake, that I didn't misunderstand him and I left."
(Tr. 27).
14.
At about 2:00 p.m. on April 21, 1980, there was a meeting, requested by Mr. Bernie White at the direction of Mr. Ault (Tr. 57), with Mr. Griffith.
In attendance for the Union were: Messrs. Ault, Bernie White and Lake; and in attendance for Respondent were: Messrs. Griffith, Horner and West.
Mr. Ault began by reminding Mr. Griffith of a prior occasion of a supervisor "physically assaulting employees" and stated, "I didn't want anything like that to occur.
. . . and that we wanted some effective assurances that nothing like this was going to occur."
(Tr. 58).
Mr. Lake gave his account of the events and then Mr. West.
Mr. Lake testified that Mr. West said, " . . .
he took me off of it (truck) because at times I was hard to get in touch with because I was on union business."
(Tr. 28).
Mr. Ault fully confirmed Mr. Lake's testimony, stating,
" . . .
Mr. West had stated that the reason he had taken Mr. Lake off the fire alarm truck was because he needed someone reliable on the truck; that Mr. Lake was not reliable because the union duties was taking him off. . . .
" (Tr. 59) /5/
15.
Mr. Lake was not reassigned to fire alarm system work regularly after April 21, 1980, although he was on some eleven or twelve days in October, November and December, 1980, assigned to the fire alarm truck (Tr. 155) and on six of these days he was on Union business part of the day (Tr. 155).
16.
The record shows that Mr. Lake attended gas school from June 27, 1980, to August 12, 1980 (Res. Exh. 2, Tr. 146); and that Mr. Lake turned down overtime twice (Tr. 180).
Respondent Exhibit 1 consists of the 1980 Service Cards for employees assigned to Mr. West.
Overtime is indicated by a plus (.) or by the letter "F".
From Mr. Lake's card, Counsel for General Counsel states that for the first eight pay periods of 1980, ending April 19, Mr. Lake worked 77.3 hours overtime; in the second eight pay periods, ending August 9, Mr. Lake worked 24.4 hours of overtime; and in the last ten pay periods of 1980, ending December 27, Mr. Lake worked 58.4 hours of overtime (General Counsel Brief, p. 23).
I have examined Mr. Lake's Service Card carefully and find the information shown extremely difficult to read especially when double code designations appear for a given date.
My examination of Mr. Lake's Service Card shows that for the first eight pay periods Mr. Lake may have had 79.3 hours overtime; for the second eight pay periods 43.3 hours overtime; and for the last ten pay periods 62.4 hours overtime.
General Counsel Exhibit 3, while not prepared to show overtime hours, shows hours, some of which are designated as overtime.
Assuming from this exhibit that hours in excess of eight per day (G.C. Exh. 2, Art.
16, p. 55) and hours designated as overtime were paid as overtime, this exhibit would show for the first eight pay periods that Mr. Lake worked 72.3 hours overtime which is quite close to the overtime shown on Respondent Exhibit 1 (77.3 or 79.3); however, I can not reconcile the hours for the pay periods ending 1/12; 2/9; 2/23; 3/8 and 4/9 as between Respondent Exhibit 1 and General Counsel Exhibit 3.
Nevertheless, General Counsel Exhibit 3 shows that of the 72.3 hours overtime shown only 31.7 hours related to the fire alarm system.
Mr. West testified that more overtime was involved in work other than work on the fire alarm system which is fully consistent with General Counsel Exhibit 3.
General Counsel Exhibit 4 shows that only two other mechanics, Mr. C. E. Eckenstein and Mr. G. A. Whiteford were assigned to the fire alarm truck during the period of April 20 through August 9, 1980, and Mr. Whiteford only during April and May, 1980.
The Service Cards for these employees (Res. Exh. 1) show that Mr. Eckenstein worked 50.6 hours overtime (the second eight pay periods) and that Mr. Whiteford worked 34.4 hours overtime.
However, during the last ten pay periods, only Mr. Eckenstein was shown to have been assigned to the fire alarm truck and during this period he worked 122.5 hours overtime.
(Res. Exh. 1).
Conclusions
For reasons set forth above, the record shows that Mr. Lake's activities as Chief Steward for Shop 07 did interfere with the fire alarm system work in that the second man assigned to the truck with Mr. Lake either had to work alone, which restricted the work he could perform, or, as was more often true, return to the shop to await the assignment of another electrician; that his foreman, Mr. West, was unable to contact Mr. Lake by radio when he was engaged in union activities; and that Mr. West discussed the problem on several occasions with his superiors.
The record is also clear that Mr. West's initial attempt on the morning of April 17, 1980, to tighten up his release procedure, by asking Mr. Lake "what his business was, what he had to go there for", was emphatically rebuffed by Mr. Lake who responded, it's "none of your business."
Mr. Lake's release for union activity, which Mr. West had denied because Mr. Lake had refused to say why he wanted to go to the Union trailer, was obtained by Mr. Ault, Council Chairman.
When Mr. Lake in the afternoon of April 17, 1980, again sought release to go to the Union trailer, Mr. West denied permission for Mr. Lake to go immediately because of his assignment to work on a cable emergency and, although he told Mr. Lake that if he finished the job in time "we would see about letting him go", Mr. West failed to get back to Mr. Lake, even though Mr. Lake had finished the job by 3:30 p.m., and Mr. Lake did not go to the Union trailer that afternoon.
There can be no doubt that Mr. Lake was displeased with Mr. West's refusal to release him on the preceding afternoon when they met the following morning but their conversation, in the fire alarm truck, was not shown beyond Mr. Michael J. White's testimony that Mr. Lake said that Mr. West had told him he could go to the Union office, which he did.
/6/ During the course of the morning, Mr. Lake asked Mr. White if he had told Mr. West he did not want to work with Mr. Lake.
Mr. White told him he had not and said that when they got back to the shop he would talk to Mr. West.
Messrs. Lake and White returned to the shop after lunch; Mr. White talked to Mr. West and told him he had not said he didn't want to work with Mr. Lake (Mr. Lake stated that Mr. White told him he had told Mr. West that Mr. Lake was hard to get along with) and Mr. Lake and Mr. West entered into a discussion as to what had, or had not, been said and there ensued: a) Mr. West's statement to Mr. Lake about settling their differences outside the shipyard; and b) Mr. West relieved Mr. Lake of his duties on fire alarm truck for the stated reason that he "did not feel that Mr. Lake could carry out his full duties as both a fire alarm electrician and union steward".
Obviously, Mr. Lake was relieved of his duties on the fire alarm truck on April 18, and was removed from those duties on April 21, 1980, because of his union activity.
Ordinarily, such action for such admitted reason is, without question, an unfair labor practice; however, an exception has been recognized where an employee is transferred to a less demanding position solely because the employee was unable to meet the work requirements of the position because of representational duties, Department of the Air Force, 4392 d/ Aerospace Support Group, Vandenberg Air Force Base, California, A/SLMR No. 537, 5 A/SLMR 486 (1975); Puget Sound Naval Shipyard, Department of the Navy, Bremerton, Washington, A/SLMR No. 768, 6 A/SLMR 709 (1976).
/7/ Respondent asserts that: a) the decision to reassign Mr. Lake from the fire alarm system to other duties as a high voltage electrician was a reserved right of management pursuant to Sec. 6(a)(2)(A) and (B) of the Statute; and/or b) when the use of official time "becomes disruptive of the Activity's mission, it is incumbent upon Management to take appropriate action to insure that the accomplishment thereof is not compromised" (Respondent's Brief, p. 7), as recognized and approved in Vandenberg, supra, and Puget Sound, supra.
If it were shown that Mr. Lake's use of official time had become disruptive of the maintenance of Respondent's fire alarm system, I would agree with Respondent's position.
While the proportion of time devoted to union activities may be significant in determining whether there is disruption of the mission of an Agency, such factor would neither be controlling nor of any great weight if it were shown that even brief absences on union activity compromised the performance of an essential and critical operation such as Respondent's fire alarm system.
But, having given careful consideration to Respondent's contentions, I do not find that the record supports them.
First, there is no doubt that Mr. West's removal of Mr. Lake from his duties on the fire alarm truck was precipitated by their argument on April 18, in the course of which Mr. West, by his own admission, told Mr. Lake "if he had anything personal, I would talk to him after work about it" or as Mr. White testified, Mr. West said, "if Rick Lake thought he was a bigger man than him, then they could go outside the shipyard and settle their differences".
Second, while, as Mr. White testified, Mr. West also stated that he "did not feel Mr. Lake could carry out his full duties as both a fire alarm electrician and union steward", and Mr. Ault testified that, on April 21, Mr. West stated that he had taken Mr. Lake off the fire alarm truck "because he needed someone reliable on the truck; that Mr. Lake was not reliable because the union duties was taking him off".
But, in reality, Mr. West's concern was, as he testified, "It would help my scheduling . . .
Instead of me having to pull someone off, it would be better for them to come off a three-man or five or six-man job than come off a two man job."
That is, Mr. West objected to Mr. Lake leaving the fire alarm truck which, generally, required the truck to return to the shop and Mr. West having to locate and assign another electrician to the truck.
I appreciate full well the inconvenience to Mr. West of his having to replace Mr. Lake; but I cannot equate this to "unreliability" in view of Mr. West's testimony that Mr. Lake always notified him prior to leaving, indeed, except when Mr. West was directed to release Mr. Lake, the record shows that Mr. Lake requested permission to leave on union business and, certainly, both were aware that Article 7 of the parties' agreement (G.C. Exh. 2) contains various qualifications and limitations, including, by way of example: Section 5 a.
"It is agreed and understood that a Council representative's first responsibility is to his job." and Section 5 b.
"A Council steward, when desiring to stop work to transact appropriate Council/Employer business, shall first obtain approval from his immediate supervisor.
If the requirements of the job, in the judgement of the supervisor, are such that the representative cannot be excused at the time requested, he shall be retained in a work status.
However, the supervisor will arrange for a mutually acceptable time . . . ."
Neither General Counsel nor Respondent has addressed the consequences of replacement of Mr. Lake and it would be inappropriate to comment on an issue neither has raised.
Third, Respondent's assignment of Mr. Lake to the fire alarm truck on some eleven or twelve occasions in October, November and December, 1980, coupled with the fact, as Mr. West testified, that on six of those days Mr. Lake was absent on Union business, strongly refutes Respondent's assertions either that Mr. Lake was not reliable or that his absence on union activity compromised accomplishment of his mission in maintaining the fire alarm system.
Fourth, although the record shows that Mr. West was unable to contact Mr. Lake by radio when he was absent on union activity, if, as Mr. West testified, he replaced him on the fire alarm truck, the significance vis-a-vis the fire alarm system, escapes me.
Indeed, since Mr. West communicated with the fire alarm truck, a reasonable inference would be that the actual difficulty was Mr. Lake's removal of the truck from service when he was on union activity.
Certainly, if Mr. West could not contact the truck, the fault could be attributed to Mr. Lake only if he were responsible; but the record affirmatively shows that Mr. West never told Mr. Lake that he had missed a call.
It is not contended, of course, that Mr. Lake had any right whatever to use the fire alarm truck for union activity; however, this was not the issue raised by Respondent.
In short, the record plainly demonstrates a series of discussions involving Mr. West and Mr. Lake beginning on April 17, which continued on the morning of April 18, all involving, in one manner or another, Mr. Lake's union activity and culminated in the acrimonious "discussion" on the afternoon of April 18 which ended with the removal of Mr. Lake from his duties on the fire alarm truck because of his union activities, i.e., Mr. Lake could not "carry out his full duties as both a fire alarm electrician and union steward."
I do not find that the record demonstrates that Mr. Lake's union activities interfered with the performance of his duties as fire alarm electrician so as to warrant application of the Vandenberg, supra, Puget Sound, supra, exception.
Nor, conversely, does the record demonstrate that the requirements of the job had impinged on the performance of Mr. Lake's union activities as Chief Steward, notwithstanding that the job requirements for the particular duty may well, pursuant to Article 7 of the parties' agreement, more severely restrict release for union activity than would be required if Mr. Lake were assigned to a crew of three or more.
The fact that a union official would have greater freedom to perform his union activities does not, in my opinion, warrant a change of his job assignment unless the performance of union duties interferes with discharge of the employee's assigned duties.
This was shown both in Vandenberg, supra, and in Puget Sound, supra, and, accordingly, the transfer to a job which would allow time for the performance of union activity, without loss of pay, was found not to have violated Sections 19(a)(1) or (2) of Executive Order 11491, as amended, which are substantially identical to Secs. 16(a)(1) and (2) of the Statute.
The Authority, in United States Army, Corpus Christi Army Depot, supra, n. 7, held that management may not restrict an employee's job opportunities because of the employee's union activities in advance of selection for a job.
By implication, certainly, the selection of the employee, who had been and was still the president of the local union whose union activities required 70-80% of his working time, compels the conclusion that, if he may not be denied selection for a job because of his union activity, neither may he be removed after selection merely because of his union activity.
I would further draw the inference from the Authority's decision that the amount of time spent in union activities is not, in any event, the controlling consideration.
Rather, it is whether the performance of the employee's union activities disrupts performance of an essential mission.
In the Corpus Christi case, for example, Mr. Hall's union activities may have severely limited his productivity in the transmission shop, as the same activities must necessarily have limited his productivity in the air frame division, but without effect on the mission of the activity in either instance, namely the operation of the transmission shop or the operation of the air frame division.
On the other hand, if performance of union activities impedes an essential mission of the agency or activity, procurement in Vandenberg and trouble shooting in Puget Sound, then assignment to job duties which would permit the performance of union activities, without loss of pay, may be proper.
As noted above, I do not find that Respondent has shown that Mr. Lake's union activities impeded the performance of his concededly essential mission, namely maintenance of the shipyard fire alarm system.
In purely practical terms, I view Vandenberg and Puget Sound, as both a necessary and proper accommodation when there is an irreconcilable conflict between the need, and right, of management to insist that a job, which will not admit of deferral, be performed, and the union officer's need, and right, to engage in protected activity.
When such irreconcilable conflict exists, then assignment of the employee to duties, without loss of pay, which will permit the employee to perform the representational activities without impairment of any essential function of the agency constitutes a proper accommodation of the equally compelling need of management, on the one hand, and of the union officer, on the other.
As to Mr. Lake, no such irreconcilable conflict was shown.
To be sure, Mr. West may have found replacement of Mr. Lake on the fire alarm truck an inconvenience and, obviously, given his "druthers" he would rather not.
Neither the frequency nor duration of Mr. Lake's absence on union activity shows any irreconcilable conflict between the performance of his duties and the discharge of his union activity; Mr. Lake sought permission in advance; Mr. West testified that he did replace Mr. Lake on the truck; and, upon replacement of Mr. Lake, the mission was not, in any manner, impaired.
Accordingly, the essential justification for application of the Vandenberg, supra, and Puget Sound, supra, principle was not shown.
Loss of Earnings
It is clear that fire alarm system work falls within the job description of high voltage electrician; and that there is no job description of fire alarm electrician.
It is further clear that Mr. Lake's wage grade and his hourly rate of pay were not affected when he was relieved of duty on the fire alarm truck; he continued to perform duties as a high voltage electrician; and that the only change was that, instead of being assigned to the fire alarm truck, which normally was a two man operation, he was assigned to crews performing other high voltage work which normally consisted of three or more electricians.
Respondent asserts that because Mr. Lake continued to perform normal duties of a high voltage electrician without change of grade or hourly rate, there was no loss of earnings and, further that there was as much, or more, overtime opportunity in other high voltage work.
General Counsel asserts that Mr. Lake did suffer a substantial loss of overtime earnings following his removal from the fire alarm truck.
The record shows without dispute that assignment to fire alarm system duty carries with it an overtime opportunity and/or requirement.
This results, in part, from the fact the employees assigned to the truck are first offered the opportunity to perform overtime on the fire alarm system and, in part, from the fact that the name of the electrician assigned to the truck is given to the Fire Department for emergency calls.
Indeed, the record shows that Mr. Pinner had been removed from the fire alarm truck because he was no longer willing to perform overtime on emergency calls.
The record shows that during the first eight pay periods of 1980, Mr. Lake worked either 77.3 or 79.3 hours of overtime; but only about 31.7 hours appears to have related to the fire alarm system.
For the second eight pay periods of 1980, Mr. Lake worked either 24.4 or 43.3 hours of overtime; however, I do not find that the present record shows that the level of Mr. Lake's overtime earnings for this period, although obviously less than his overtime earnings for the first eight pay periods, can be attributed to his removal from the fire alarm truck.
First, Mr. Lake attended gas school from June 27 to August 12, 1980; and Second, the employees assigned to the fire alarm truck, Messrs. Eckenstein and Whiteford, worked 50.6 and 34.4 hours overtime, respectively.
/8/
During the last ten pay periods of 1980, Mr. Lake worked either 58.4 or 62.4 hours overtime.
But Mr. Eckenstein worked 122.5 hours overtime during the same period while assigned to the fire alarm truck.
Thus, it appears, as General Counsel asserts, that at least during the last ten pay periods of 1980, Mr. Lake may have suffered a substantial loss of overtime earnings as a result of his discriminatory removal from his assignment to the fire alarm truck.
As noted in footnote 8, the record does show that Mr. Lake declined overtime twice but the record does not show whether this occurred in the second eight pay periods or in the last ten pay periods.
Nevertheless, without adjustment for overtime work declined, it appears that Mr. Lake may have suffered a loss of overtime of roughly 60 hours, or possibly 30 hours if subject to equalization by Mr. West, /9/ during the last ten pay periods as the result of his removal from the fire alarm truck.
As Mr. Lake has not been regularly reassigned to the fire alarm truck, he may have incurred the loss of overtime after 1980.
Accordingly, as part of the remedy, Respondent will be ordered to compensate Mr. Lake for the loss of overtime earnings, if any, attributable to his discriminatory removal from duty on the fire alarm truck from April 21, 1980, the date of his removal, to the effective date he is offered reassignment to such duties.
Although the present record does not show any loss of overtime earnings for the second eight pay periods of 1980, i.e. April 20 through August 9, 1980, attributable to his removal from the fire alarm truck, nothing contained herein shall preclude the inclusion of overtime earnings lost during this period if, upon subsequent investigation, loss of overtime for the period is found to have occurred.
Any overtime work declined by Mr. Lake shall be treated as overtime worked by him and shall be determined, where possible, by the hours worked by the employee who accepted the overtime assignment refused by Mr. Lake; and if no other employee accepted the overtime assignment, then, pursuant to Article 16, Section 9 of the parties' agreement, two hours shall be "credited" as overtime worked on such occasions.
Having found that Respondent engaged in certain conduct in violation of Sec. 16(a)(1) and (2) of the Statute, as alleged in Paragraphs 7 through 11 of the Complaint, I recommend that the Authority issue the following:
ORDER
Pursuant to Section 2423.29 of the Federal Labor Relations Authority's Rules and Regulations, 5 C.F.R. 2423.29, and Section 18 of the Statute, 5 U.S.C. 7118, the Authority hereby orders that the Department of the Navy, Norfolk Naval Shipyard, Portsmouth, Virginia, shall:
1.
Cease and desist from:
a) Failing and refusing to restore Mr. Richard L. Lake to duties as fire alarm electrician, which assignment he had held prior to April 21, 1980, when he was relieved of such duties because he had exercised his rights under the Statute to assist a labor organization by serving as a union officer and had utilized official time in such capacity in accordance with the parties' negotiated agreement.
b) Discriminating against Mr. Richard L. Lake in any manner with regard to hire, tenure, promotion, transfer, overtime, or other conditions of employment, in order to discourage membership in or activities on behalf of the Tidewater Virginia Federal Employees Metal Trades Council, or any other labor organization.
c) In any like or related manner interfering with, restraining, or coercing its employees in the exercise of their rights assured by the Statute.
2.
Take the following affirmative action in order to effectuate the purpose and policies of the Statute:
a) Offer to restore Mr. Richard L. Lake to duty as fire alarm electrician, including his restoration to the fire alarm truck as lead mechanic, and make him whole for all loss of overtime earnings, if any, which he may have suffered as the result of his discriminatory removal from his assigned duty or fire alarm electrician on April 21, 1980, for the period beginning April 21, 1980, and continuing to the effective date of Respondent's offer of restoration to the assignment which he had held prior to April 21, 1980.
b) Post at its facilities copies of the attached Notice marked "Appendix" on forms to be furnished by the Authority.
Upon receipt of such forms they shall be signed by the Commanding Officer, Norfolk Naval Shipyard, Portsmouth, Virginia, and shall be posted and maintained by him for 60 consecutive days thereafter, in conspicuous places, including all bulletin board and other places where notices to employees are customarily posted.
The Commander shall take reasonable steps to insure that such notices are not altered, defaced, or covered by any other material.
c) Pursuant to Section 2423.30 of the Authority's Rules and Regulations, 5 C.F.R. 2423.30, notify the Regional Director of Region 4, Suite 501, North Wing, 1776 Peachtree Street, N.W., Atlanta, Georgia 30309, in writing within 30 days from the date of this Order as to what steps have been taken to comply herewith.
WILLIAM B. DEVANEY Administrative Law Judge
Dated: August 28, 1981 Washington, D.C.
APPENDIX
NOTICE TO ALL EMPLOYEES
PURSUANT TO A DECISION AND ORDER OF THE FEDERAL LABOR RELATIONS AUTHORITY AND IN ORDER TO EFFECTUATE THE POLICIES OF CHAPTER 71 OF TITLE 5 OF THE UNITED STATES CODE FEDERAL SERVICE LABOR-MANAGEMENT RELATIONS
We hereby notify our employees that:
WE WILL offer to restore Mr. Richard L. Lake to duty as fire alarm electrician, including his restoration to the fire alarm truck as lead mechanic.
WE WILL make Mr. Richard L. Lake whole for all loss of overtime earnings, if any, which he may have suffered as the result of his discriminatory removal from his assigned duty as fire alarm electrician on April 21, 1980, for the period beginning April 21, 1980, and continuing to the effective date of our office to restore him to the assignment which he had held prior to April 21, 1980.
WE WILL NOT discriminate against Mr. Richard L. Lake in any manner with regard to hire, tenure, promotion, transfer, overtime, or other conditions of employment, in order to discourage membership in or activities on behalf of the Tidewater Virginia Federal Employees Metal Trades Council, or any other labor organization.
WE WILL NOT in any like or related manner interfere with, restrain, or coerce any employee in the exercise of rights assured by the Statute.
(Agency or Activity By: (Signature)
Dated: . . .
This Notice must remain posted for 60 consecutive days from the date of posting and must not be altered, defaced or covered by any other material.
If employees have any question concerning this Notice or compliance with its provisions, they may communicate directly with the Regional Director of the Federal Labor Relations Authority, Region 4; whose address is: Suite 501, North Wing, 1776 Peachtree Street, N.W., Atlanta, Georgia 30309, and whose telephone number is: (404) 881-2324.
--------------- FOOTNOTES$ ---------------
/1/ For convenience of reference, sections of the Statute hereinafter are, also, referred to without inclusion of the initial "71" of the Statute reference, e.g., Sec. 7116(a)(1) will be referred to, simply, as "16(a)(1)".
/2/ I am aware that there is a conflict as to whether Mr. Lake used the word "damn", i.e.
It's none of your damn business" as Mr. West testified (Tr. 97); which Mr. Lake denied (Tr. 234-235); and which Mr. Michael J. White did not remember (Tr. 185).
However, I doubt very much that the presence or absence of such word had any significance.
/3/ I find Mr. Lake's statement, that " . . .
I had people in the gang working with me . . . ask me why Mr. West picked on me so much", difficult to accept for the reason that, insofar as the record shows, there was no basis whatever shown for the statement and Mr. Lake did not assert that Mr. West, prior to April 17, 1980, had ever questioned his use of official time and asserted, as I have found, that Mr. West never confronted him about a missed call; however, since the truth or falsity of this statement is not material to any issue herein I do not resolve this conflict.
/4/ Mr. Lake testified that Mr. West said,
" . . . apparently I thought I was a bigger man or better man than he was, and if that was the case, he wasn't threatening me inside the shipyard, but one day we would go outside and settle that."
(Tr. 25).
Mr. West testified that,
" . . .
Mr. Lake came up and started talking about the same situation and shook his finger in my face and got all red.
That's when I told him if he had anything personal, I would talk to him after work about it."
(Tr. 148).
/5/ I am aware that Mr. West testified that he stated he removed Mr. Lake, " . . . so he could perform his union duties better" (Tr. 100) and "That is the only reason I can remember."
(Tr. 100); however he also testified,
"So that he could better perform his job, do both jobs, have more time-- be more available for the union business.
It would help my scheduling out too in the morning.
Instead of me having to pull somebody off, it would be better for them to come off a three-man or five or six-man job than come off a two man job."
(Tr. 177-178).
/6/ I have considered Mr. Lake's testimony concerning the Danny Coffield matter (Mr. Lake talked to Mr. Coffield, another foreman, without having sought or obtained permission from either his foreman, Mr. West, or from Mr. Coffield) and do not credit Mr. Lake's testimony that this was discussed with Mr. West on April 18; nor do I find convincing Mr. Lake's testimony that on the morning of April 18 Mr. West made any statement with regard to Mr. Lake having obtained his release the proceeding morning through Mr. Ault, i.e., as Mr. Lake asserted Mr. West said he would "let me off the hook", in part, because it is conceded that after the incident on April 17, Mr. West and Mr. Lake had met with Horner.
Mr. West's testimony, which I have credited in this regard, showed a second request on the afternoon of April 17 by Mr. Lake to go to the Union trailer which Mr. West denied at the time because of the cable emergency to which Mr. Lake had been assigned.
Mr. West's testimony was, by clear inference, corroborated by Mr. White who testified that Mr. Lake told him that Mr. West said he could go to the Union trailer, which he did, on April 18.
Nor did Mr. Griffith recall any conversation concerning Coffield on April 18, 1980.
/7/ The Authority has not, so far as I am aware, squarely decided this issue, although by implication it may have.
United States Army, Corpus Christi, Army Depot, Corpus Christi, Texas, 4 FLRA No. 80 (1980), involved a refusal to permit an employee to transfer to a different job because Respondent had concluded, in advance of any performance in the "new" job, that the employee could not meet the requirements of the position because of the demands of his union activities.
The employee, Mr. Hall, was President of the Local Union and spent 70-80% of his time on union activity, which had led a supervisor to comment, "If I sent Mr. Hall down to the transmission shop, I would have to send somebody else down there to do the work."
(Decision of ALJ, Case No. 63-8792(CA), p.3).
The Administrative Law Judge had found Vandenberg and Puget Sound distinguishable, and he found a violation of the Order because Respondent determined "in advance of any performance by Mr. Hall in the position, that he could not meet the work performance requirements of the new position because of the demands of his union activities."
He further stated, "In my view, the proper course of action for Respondent to take, in order to balance its rights in performing its mission with those of the employee's protected activity and the goals of efficient Government, was to consider Hall's request for transfer completely apart from union considerations, and if the transfer was granted and Mr. Hall proved to be unable to perform . . .
Respondent could have taken action consistent with . . .
Vandenberg and Puget Sound . . . and transferred him out of the position."
The Authority affirmed the finding of the violation but as to the comment as to the "proper course of action", stated,
"The Authority does not reach or pass upon the Administrative Law Judge's opinion on page six of his Decision (quoted above) as to what Respondent's proper course of action in this case should have been."
/8/ The record further shows that Mr. Lake declined overtime on two occasions; however, the record does not show whether this occurred during this period or during the period covered by the last ten pay periods of 1980.
/9/ Mr. West testified that he made overtime assignments so as to equalize overtime opportunity for all mechanics, even as to fire alarm system work, i.e., people on the fire alarm truck do not necessarily receive the overtime; however, the extent to which this policy was carried out in practice was not shown.
In addition, there is overtime on the fire alarm system for which employees are called after work as to which Mr. West had no control.
As the record shows that the person assigned to the fire alarm truck is called first (Mr. Lake testified that he never refused such calls), no overtime as the result of such calls would be subject to "equalization".
__________________________________________________________________
Table of Decisions Previous Decision Next Decision Quick List of Decisions
