Committee on Science F. James Sensenbrenner, Jr. Chairman [Photo of Chairman Sensenbrenner] __________________________________________
Weekly Schedule Press Shop Members Hearings Documents Oversight Info Technology Science Education Science Policy Study Special Needs Congressional Links Science Democrats About the Committee Contact Chairman Back to Home Page __________________________________________
Committee on Science
F. James Sensenbrenner, Jr., Chairman
George E. Brown, Jr., California, Ranking Democrat
www.house.gov/science/welcome.htm
July 13, 1999
Press Contacts:
Jeff Lungren (Jeff.Lungren@mail.house.gov)
Meredith Wisor (Meredith.Wisor@mail.house.gov)
(202) 225-4275
HOUSE SCIENCE AND COMMERCE COMMITTEES LEADERS PUSH FOR PROPER CONSIDERATION OF
DOE RESTRUCTURING
Bipartisan Support for DOE External Regulation
WASHINGTON, D.C.
Citing the "strong, bipartisan consensus on the need for change" at the Department of Energy (DOE), House Science and Commerce Committees leaders wrote House Speaker Dennis Hastert requesting that those House committees with civilian energy and science jurisdiction provide the proper legislative input during consideration of DOE reorganization plans.
The letter, dated July 12, 1999, was signed by House Science Committee Chairman F. James Sensenbrenner, Jr., (R-WI), Commerce Committee Chairman Tom Bliley (R-VA) and Ranking Minority Member John Dingell (D-MI), Science Energy and Environment Subcommittee Chairman Ken Calvert (R-CA) and Ranking Minority Member Jerry Costello (D-IL), and Commerce Energy and Power Subcommittee Chairman Joe Barton (R-TX) and Ranking Minority Member Ralph Hall (D-TX).
The letter was released during todays joint Science Energy and Environment Subcommittee and Commerce Energy and Power Subcommittee hearing on DOE restructuring.
Todays hearing was the third in a series of Science Committee hearings on this issue.
DOE Secretary Bill Richardson testified at a May hearing, followed by a June hearing with the Presidents Foreign Intelligence Advisory Board (PFIAB) Chairman Warren Rudman.
Chairman Sensenbrenners statement at todays hearing emphasized the importance of DOE external regulation in any DOE restructuring plan.
"We must ensure that there is adequate oversight of environment, safety and health matters at the DOE facilities.
The Science Committeeon a bipartisan basishas strongly supported the movement to external regulation of the civilian DOE labs, particularly in light of the safety fiasco at Brookhaven National Laboratory, which has cost the scientific community a world-class research facility, the High Flux Beam Reactor.
Consequently, I strongly believe that external regulation of DOE civilian labs must be part of any reorganization legislation."
Science Energy and Environment Ranking Minority Member Jerry Costello (D-IL) remarked, "If we are trying to fix a security problem, we should find a security solution.
Some restructuring of the Department of Energy is appropriate, but any reform deserves active Congressional scrutiny.
Programs that deal with nuclear weapons and cutting edge science in our national labs should not be merged or reorganized through a hasty, ill-considered process.
Let's fix the security problems at Energy, but not before we carefully and deliberately weigh potential unintended consequences of the proposed solutions."
"We need to fix DOE's security problems, but we need to do it right.
We don't need a quick fix, we need a permanent solution to this very important problem," Commerce Committee Chairman Bliley said.
"DOE's security problems are both deeply rooted and widespread.
We need to work together to craft a bipartisan legislative package which provides a truly effective, long-term solution."
Commerce Committee Ranking Minority Member Dingell stated, "In every investigation concerning problems at the DOE facilities, the individuals responsible for the operation of defense programs consistently and repeatedly denied the problems, punished the whistle blowers, and covered up the problems to their superiors and Congress.
Proposals to set up a fully or semi-autonomous agency would only reinforce this pattern of behavior by insulating these programs from outside scrutiny and accountability."
The full letter to Speaker Hastert is attached.
###
106-61
July 12, 1999
The Honorable J. Dennis Hastert
Speaker
U.S. House of Representatives
H232, The Capitol
Washington, D.C. 20515
Dear Mr. Speaker:
We are writing to urge you to oppose any efforts to restructure the Department of Energy outside of regular order in the coming weeks.
The problems at DOE are very complex and not amenable to such quick fixes.
The recent report of the Presidents Foreign Intelligence Advisory Board (PFIAB) confirmed that the Department of Energy, as currently organized, cannot adequately protect our nations nuclear secrets.
The Departments management structure needs to be vastly simplified to ensure the most aggressive oversight and the highest standards of accountability.
We stand second to no one in our dedication and eagerness to completing this job.
There is a significant drive on to restructure one portion of the Department of Energy, Defense Programs, in the context of either the Defense authorization bill or the Intelligence authorization bill, or perhaps both.
Indeed, there are provisions currently contained in both the Senate and House Defense authorization bills that are in direct conflict with the recommendations of Senator Rudmans PFIAB and, if recent news reports are accurate, with the views of Secretary Bill Richardson.
It is apparent to us that neither the Defense nor Intelligence bill is an appropriate vehicle for legislating the kinds of comprehensive structural and cultural reforms at DOE that are so obviously necessary.
Instead, it is critical that the Congress take the thoughtful -- and by all means expeditious -- route of regular order.
The recent revelations of security breaches at DOE laboratories raise many issues, but there clearly is not agreement on how to address them.
There are sound arguments that the proposals in the Defense bill, for instance, will only serve to isolate the weapons labs and defense facilities from outside scrutiny and independent oversight, particularly in the areas of health, safety and the environment.
Without such oversight, these changes may make the situation worse instead of better, and may actually increase the risk of further problems in the future.
We urge you to reject any attempt to solve the DOEs large-scale problems through the expediency of a House-Senate conference.
Given the track record of DOEs crises in the past, quick fixes and hastily implemented solutions are not going to address the deep-rooted problems in the Department.
That can only be accomplished with a deliberate legislative process.
Both the Commerce Committee and the Science Committee have recently held hearings on the recommendations contained in Senator Rudmans PFIAB report.
On Tuesday, June 13, 1999, our Committees will hold a joint hearing on the management problems at the Department.
This will be the first day in a series of hearings to develop a comprehensive and effective legislative solution.
Our committees have conducted extensive oversight over many years on the relationship of the Department's weapons programs and its science programs, and problems in the fields of health, safety, environment, and security.
We wish to ensure that any reorganization does not adversely affect these important concerns.
There is strong, bipartisan consensus on the need for change at the Department.
Indeed, the undersigned share many common principles for moving forward: we all support the need to streamline the organizational structure and enhance the accountability of both agency officials and DOE contractors; we agree that independent oversight of sensitive areas, such as security, counterintelligence, health, safety, and the environment is required; we agree on the need to maintain a strong linkage between defense-related and non-defense science in DOE; and, we agree that legislation to reform the Department of Energy must serve the long-term needs of the nation, not the immediate demands of any particular constituency.
Finally, we agree that we should not compound current problems by enacting an ill-conceived and ill-considered "quick fix."
We therefore urge you to oppose hasty and haphazard efforts to legislate this matter on the Defense or Intelligence authorization bills.
Instead, working with our colleagues on all Committees of jurisdiction, we would like to move forward expeditiously to craft careful, bipartisan legislation that reforms the Department of Energy while ensuring the protection of our nations security, safety, health and environment.
Sincerely,
Tom Bliley John D. Dingell Chairman Ranking Member Committee on Commerce Committee on Commerce
Joe Barton Ralph M. Hall Chairman Ranking Member Subcommittee on Energy Subcommittee on Energy
and Power and Power
Ken Calvert Jerry F. Costello
Chairman Ranking Member
Subcommittee on Energy Subcommittee on Energy and Environment and Environment
F. James Sensenbrenner, Jr. Chairman Committee on Science
