U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development: Local information [Vea la versión en español de esta página] [Display the text version of this page]
Alaska Local Newsroom Homebuying Renting Homeless Consumer Info Your Community Local HUD Offices Library Complaints Common Questions Calendar HUD news Homes Communities Working with HUD Resources Tools Let's talk Webcasts Mailing lists Contact us Help
[FirstGov: Your First Click for the U.S. Government]
The White House Home 
Programs of HUD for Alaska
Local information Print version Email this to a friend
- Homeownership and Rental Loan Programs - Single Family (1 to 4 units) - Multifamily (5 or more units) - Housing and Community Development - Economic Development and Empowerment - Special Needs Housing and Homeless Assistance - Supportive Housing for the Elderly and Disabled - Homeless Assistance - Youth - Other HUD Programs - Comprehensive Grants - Rental Assistance - Self-sufficiency - Drug Elimination - Housing Counseling - Fair Housing
Home Ownership and Rental Programs
Home Ownership Programs
Title II - FHA Single Family Insured Loan Programs (1 to 4 units): HUD/FHA offers several mortgage insurance programs on one- to four-unit properties to finance home ownership, and for the construction or rehabilitation and financing of housing.
As an insuring agency, HUD provides the lending institutions with insurance against default by borrowers on mortgage loans.
In return, the lending institutions provide financing to eligible applicants for the purchase, construction or rehabilitation of homes.
* The Section 203, One-to-Four Family Home Mortgage Insurance Program, provides federal mortgage insurance to finance purchase and construction of housing.
FHA insures loans made by private financial institutions for up to 97% of the property value and for terms of up to 30 years.
The program is limited to owner-occupants.
* The Section 203(k), Rehabilitation Mortgage Insurance Program, insures rehabilitation loans to finance rehabilitation of existing property, rehabilitation and refinancing of outstanding indebtedness of a property, and finance purchase and rehabilitation of a property.
The program is only available to owner/occupants.
* The Section 234, Condominium Housing Program, offers mortgage insurance to finance construction or rehabilitation of multifamily housing by sponsors who intend to sell individual units and to finance acquisition costs of individual units in proposed or existing approved condominium developments.
Under the program, profit-motivated or nonprofit sponsors may apply for a blanket mortgage covering the project.
Mortgage insurance on individual units is limited to owner-occupants.
* The Section 245, Graduated Payment Mortgage Program, insures mortgages to finance early home ownership for households that expect their income to rise substantially.
These "graduated payment" mortgages allow homeowners to make smaller monthly payments initially and to increase in size gradually over time.
The program is limited to owner-occupants.
* The Section 251, Adjustable Rate Mortgage Program, insures mortgages where the interest rate and monthly payment may change during the life of the loan.
The initial interest rate, discount points and margin are negotiable between the buyer and lending institution.
The program is limited to owner-occupants.
* The Section 203, Energy Efficient Mortgage Program, permits borrowers to purchase an existing single family property and finance 100% of the cost of eligible energy efficient improvements into the mortgage.
The cost of any improvements to the property that will increase the property's energy efficiency, and that are determined to be cost effective, are eligible for financing into the mortgage without an appraisal of the energy improvements.
The cost that may be added to the mortgage amount is the greater of 5% of the property's value (not to exceed $8,000) or $4,000.
The cost of the energy improvements must be determined based on a physical inspection of the property by a home energy rater or energy consultant.
The program is limited to one- and two-family properties.
* The Section 255, Home Equity Conversion Mortgage Program, allows borrowers, age 62 and older, to covert the equity in their homes into monthly streams of income, lump-sum cash withdrawals, or a line of credit.
Under the program, FHA insures reverse mortgages that allow the borrower to retain ownership of the property.
They may sell the home at any time, keeping the sales proceeds in excess of the mortgage balance.
An FHA-insured reverse mortgage need not be repaid until the borrower moves, sells or dies.
When the loan is due and payable, if the loan exceeds the value of the property, the borrower or their heirs will owe no more than the value of the property.
FHA insurance will cover the balance due the lender.
* The Section 222, Homes for Service Members, provides mortgage insurance enabling members of the armed services on active duty to purchase a home partially subsidized by the service.
HUD allows the Departments of Defense, Transportation, and Commerce to pay the HUD mortgage insurance premiums on behalf of service members on active duty.
The program is limited to active service personnel, including U.S. Coast Guard or employees of National Oceanic And Atmospheric Administration (NOAA) who have served on active duty for two years.
* The Section 203(h), Mortgage Insurance for Disaster Victims Program, is a special mortgage insurance program to assist victims of Presidential-declared disasters.
Under this program, individuals or families whose residences were destroyed or damaged to such an extent that reconstruction or repair is necessary are eligible for 100 percent financing for the purchase of a home.
The program is limited to one-unit detached homes only.
Under the Section 203(h) program, two-, three-, four-unit properties and condominium units may not be purchased.
How to apply: Borrowers may obtain financing through any Title II-approved mortgage lending institution or Credit Union.
Section 184 Indian Housing Loan Guarantee Program (1 to 4 units): The Section 184 program gives Native Americans access to sources of private mortgage financing by providing loan guarantees to lenders.
Section 184 covers one- to four-family homes locate in Indian or Alaska Native areas.
The loans may be used for construction, acquisition, or rehabilitation of homes.
Eligible Applicants: Indian families who will occupy the property as a principal residence and that meet the credit and underwriting standards of the program; Indian Housing Authorities, including tribally designated housing entities (TDHEs); or Indian Tribes.
Eligible Activities: Loans may pay for the construction, purchase, or rehabilitation of single family dwellings.
Eligible properties are one- to four-family dwellings that are in at least standard condition and are located on restricted Indian land or in an Indian area.
Loan limits are generally 150% of the established FHA limits in the area.
The loan amount can be up to 97% or the first $25,000 or the home's value and up to 95% of the remainder of the home's value.
Some closing costs can be included in the financing.
The maximum mortgage term is 30 years.
A TDHE or Tribe may borrow funds guaranteed under Section 184 to develop single-family homes that are subsequently sold to eligible borrowers or to create tribally owned rental housing.
How to apply: Borrowers may obtain financing through any financial institution approved by HUD/FHA.
Title I - Property Improvement Loan Insurance Program: This program provides HUD insurance of loans to finance improvements, alterations and repairs of individual homes, apartment buildings and nonresidential structures.
Also, loans may finance new construction of nonresidential buildings.
Loans on single family homes and nonresidential structures may be for up to $25,000 and may extend to 15 years and 32 days.
Loans on apartment buildings may be as high as $12,000 per unit, but the total for the buildings may not exceed $48,000.
Funding source: Eligible borrowers may obtain financing through any Title 1 approved mortgage lending institution or Credit Union.
Eligible applicants: Any person who is able to meet the cash investment, mortgage payments and credit requirements.
Title I - Manufactured Home Loans: HUD insures loans to finance the purchase of manufactured homes and/or lots.
The maximum loan amount is $40,500 for a manufactured home, $54,000 for a manufactured home on a suitably developed lot, and $13,500 for a developed lot.
The maximum limits for combination home and lot loans may be increased up to 40% in the high-cost areas of Alaska, Hawaii or Guam.
The maximum loan term varies from 15 to 25 years, depending on the type of loan.
Funding source: Eligible borrowers may obtain financing through any Title 1 approved mortgage lending institution or Credit Union.
Eligible applicants: Any person who is able to meet the cash investment, mortgage payments and credit requirements.
HOME Investment Partnership Program: The HOME Investment Partnership Program affirms the Federal Government's commitment to provide decent, safe, and affordable housing to all Americans and to alleviate the problems of excessive rent burdens, homelessness, and deteriorating housing stock.
HOME provides funds and general guidelines to State and local governments to design affordable housing strategies that address local needs and housing conditions.
HOME strives to meet both the short-term goal of increasing the supply and availability of affordable housing and the long-term goal of building partnerships between State and local governments and private and nonprofit housing providers.
The funds may be used for such activities as tenant-based rental assistance, homebuyer's assistance, property acquisition, new construction, rehabilitation, site improvements, demolition, relocation, and administrative costs.
All HOME-based housing and rental assistance must be targeted to low-income families, and HOME funds may not be used as matching funds for other Federal programs.
Jurisdictions must reserve 15% of their HOME funds for housing to be developed, sponsored, or owned by Community Housing Development Organizations (CHDOs).
A CHDO is a private, community-based nonprofit organization that has among its purposes the provision of decent, affordable housing for low-income persons.
Eligible Applicants: The State of Alaska and the Municipality of Anchorage currently qualify for annual allocation of HOME funds.
Property Disposition - HUD Homes: A HUD home is a property put on the market by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD).
The Department acquires homes when Federal Housing Administration (FHA) insured loans are foreclosed on by lenders.
HUD pays off the insurance claims for the mortgagees, acquires the property and puts them up for sale.
HUD offers attractive sales incentives, and most of the properties qualify for FHA-insured loans, which means low down payments and competitive interest rates.
Funding source: Applicants must obtain their own source of financing, which can be through cash or by obtaining a loan from a qualified mortgage lending institution.
Eligible applicants: All qualified buyers.
Bids for HUD Homes must be made through real estate agents.
Follow this link to go Back to Top
Multifamily Rental Programs
Title II - Multifamily Insurace Programs (5 or more units)
* The Section 213, Cooperative Housing program, provides HUD-insured mortgages made by private lending institutions on cooperative housing projects of five or more units to be occupied by members of nonprofit cooperative housing corporations.
These loans may finance new construction, rehabilitation, acquisition, improvements or repairs of projects already owned; construction of projects composed of individual family dwellings to be bought by individual members with separate insured mortgages; and construction or rehabilitation of a project the owners intend to sell to nonprofit cooperatives.
Funding source: Private lending institutions, Mortgage banks, and commercial lenders.
Eligible applicants: Nonprofit corporations or trusts organized to construct homes for members of the corporation or beneficiaries of the trust; and qualified sponsors who intend to sell the project to a nonprofit corporation or trust.
* The Sections 221(d)(3) and 221(d)(4), Multifamily Rental Housing for Moderate-income Families programs, provide HUD-insured mortgages made by private lending institutions to help finance construction or substantial rehabilitation of multifamily rental or cooperative housing for moderate-income or displaced families.
The principal difference between these two programs is that HUD may insure up to 100% of the total project cost under Section 221(d)(3) for nonprofit and cooperative mortgagors, but only 90% under Section 221(d)(4).
(Click here for list of rental assisted apartment complexes in Alaska.)
Funding source: Private lending institutions, Mortgage banks, and commercial lenders.
Eligible applicants: Public agencies; nonprofit, limited-dividend, or cooperative organizations; private builders; or investors who sell completed projects to such organizations.
Additionally, Section 221(d)(4) mortgages may be obtained by profit-motivated sponsors.
* The Section 221(d), Mortgage Insurance for Single Room Occupancy (SRO) Projects program, provides HUD-insured mortgages made by private lending institutions to help finance construction or substantial rehabilitation of multifamily properties designed as Single Room Occupancy (SRO) projects.
An SRO must contain five or more units and is designed to allow for more than one unrelated occupant to reside per living unit.
Kitchens or bathroom facilities are not required to be within the units and may be shared among tenants.
Tenants are required to execute a lease of not less than 30 days.
Funding source: Private lending institutions, Mortgage banks, and commercial lenders.
Eligible applicants: Public agencies; nonprofit or limited-dividend partnerships; private builders; who sell completed projects nonprofit or limited-distribution mortgagors.
* The Section 223(f), Existing Multifamily Rental Housing program, provides HUD-insured mortgages to purchase or refinance existing multifamily projects originally financed with or without Federal mortgage insurance.
HUD may insure mortgages on existing multifamily projects, that do not require substantial rehabilitation.
Projects must by at least three years old.
Funding source: Private lending institutions, Mortgage banks, and commercial lenders.
Eligible applicants: Investors, builders, developers and others who meet HUD requirements.
* The Section 231, Mortgage Insurance for Housing for the Elderly program, assures a supply of rental housing suited to the needs of the elderly or handicapped.
HUD insures mortgages made by private lending institutions to build or rehabilitate multifamily projects.
HUD may insure up to 100% of project cost of nonprofit and public mortgagors, and up to 90% for private mortgagors.
Funding source: Private lending institutions, Mortgage banks and Commercial lenders.
Eligible applicants: Investors, builders, developers, public bodies and nonprofit sponsors may qualify for mortgage insurance.
* The Section 232, Nursing Homes, Intermediate Care Facilities, and Board and Care Homes program, provided HUD-insured mortgages made by private lending institutions to finance construction or renovation of facilities to accommodate 20 or more patients requiring skilled nursing care and related medical services, or those in need of minimum but continuous care provided by licensed or trained personnel.
Nursing homes, intermediate care, and board and care facilities may be combined in the same facility covered by an insured mortgage or may be included in separate facilities.
Major equipment needed to operate the facility may be included in the mortgage.
Funding source: Private lending institutions, Mortgage banks and Commercial lenders.
Eligible applicants: Investors, builders, developers, private nonprofit corporations or associations, public agencies (nursing homes only) or public entities that are licensed or regulated by the State to accommodate convalescents and persons requiring skilled nursing care or intermediate care.
* The Section 241, Supplemental Loans for Multifamily Projects and Health Care Facilities program, provides HUD-insured loans by private lending institutions to pay for improvements to apartment projects, nursing homes, hospitals or group practice facilities that already carry HUD-insured mortgages.
Projects may also obtain FHA insurance on loans to expand housing opportunities, to provide fire and safety equipment, or to finance energy conservation improvements to conventionally financed projects.
Funding source: Private lending institutions, Mortgage banks and Commercial lenders.
Eligible applicants: Investors, builders, developers, private nonprofit corporations, public agencies and eligible applicants who currently own a multifamily project or health care facility.
* Risk Sharing Pilot Program: Qualified Housing Finance Agencies (HFA) are authorized to underwrite and process multifamily housing projects under a Risk Sharing Agreement with HUD.
By entering into a Risk Sharing Agreement with HUD, HFAs contract to reimburse HUD for a portion of the loss from any defaults that occur while HUD insurance is in force.
A risk of between 10% and 90% can be shared between each agency on any particular loan.
HUD will insure 100% of its percentage of risk.
All projects insured under the Risk Sharing program must qualify as affordable housing.
Funding source: Eligible borrowers may obtain financing through private lending institutions, Mortgage banks and Commercial Lenders.
All mortgage insurance applications must be submitted to a Housing Finance Agency for underwriting and processing.
Eligible applicants: Public agencies; nonprofit, limited-dividend or cooperative organizations; private builders; or investors who sell completed projects to such organizations.
Follow this link to go Back to Top
Housing and Community Development Programs
Community Development Block Grant Program - Entitlement: This program provides Community Development (CDBG) on a formula basis to entitled communities directed toward neighborhood revitalization, economic development and improved community facilities and services.
Entitled communities develop their own program and funding priorities in consultation with local residents.
All CDBG activities must principally benefit low- and moderate-income persons; aid in the prevention or elimination of slums and blight; or address other community development needs that present a serious and immediate threat to the community.
Funding source: From each year's appropriation, 70% is allocated to metropolitan cities and urban counties.
The amount of each entitlement grant is determined by statutory formula, which uses several objective measures of community need, including poverty, population, housing overcrowding, age of housing and growth lag.
Eligible applicants: Metropolitan cities and urban counties are entitled to receive annual grants.
Metropolitan cities are central cities of Metropolitan Statistical Areas (MSAs) or other cities within MSAs with populations of at least 50,000.
Currently, the Municipality of Anchorage is the only community in Alaska that receives a formula allocation of CDBG funds.
Community Development Block Grant Program - States: This program provides grants to carry out community development activities directed toward neighborhood revitalization, economic development, and improved community facilities and services.
Block grant funds are provided to the State, which distributes them as grants to the eligible units of general local government.
States are required to report annually on use of funds.
All CDBG activities must principally benefit low- and moderate-income persons; aid in the prevention or elimination of slums and blight; or address other community development needs that present a serious and immediate threat to the community.
Funding source: From each year's appropriation, 30% is allocated to non-entitlement areas.
The remaining amount is then allocated among the States on a formula basis.
Each State's allocation is distributed to units of general local government.
Eligible applicants: All States and Puerto Rico.
Indian Housing Block Grants (IHBG): The Native American Housing Assistance and Self-Determination Act of 1996 (NAHASDA) reorganized the system of Federal housing assistance to Native Americans by eliminating several separate programs and replacing them with a single block grant program that recognizes the right of Indian self-determination and tribal self-governance.
It provides for tribal governing bodies to name a tribally designated housing entity (TDHE)--which may be the former Indian Housing Authority--to prepare an Indian Housing Plan (IHP).
NAHASDA aims to simplify the process of Federal housing assistance for Indian tribes and to make such assistance better fit the circumstances of Native Americans.
It became effective October 1, 1997.
It terminates assistance previously authorized under the Housing Act of 1937, the Indian Housing Child Development Program, the Public Housing Youth Sports Program, and the HOME Investment Partnership Program under the Cranston-Gonzalez National Affordable Housing Act, and the Innovative Homeless Demonstration Program.
Some existing contracts will remain in force until they expire or are re-negotiated.
Assistance is in the form of a block grant made available on an annual basis using an allocation formula for Indian tribes with approved IHPs.
Every tribe that submits an IHP (which is approved) is awarded a block grant.
The IHP has two parts: a 5-year plan and a 1-year plan.
The 5-year plan must contain a mission statement, goals, objectives, and an activities plan.
The 1-year plan must contain goals, objectives, a statement of needs, an operating budget, a statement of the affordable housing resources currently available, and certifications of compliance.
Eligible Activities: Eligible affordable housing activities must develop or support rental or ownership housing or provide housing services to benefit low-income Indian families on Indian reservations and other Indian areas.
Affordable housing must cost no more than 30 percent of the family's adjusted income.
Eligible activities include modernization or operating assistance for housing previously developed using HUD resources; acquisition, new construction, or rehabilitation of additional units; housing-related services such as housing counseling, self-sufficiency services, energy auditing, and establishment of resident organizations; housing management services; crime prevention and safety activities; rental assistance; model activities; and administrative expenses.
Eligible Grantees: Indian tribes and tribally designated housing entities (TDHEs) who will receive the block grant.
Indian Community Development Block Grant Program: The primary objective of the Indian Community Development Block Grant (ICDBG) program is to develop viable Indian and Alaska Native communities, including decent housing, a suitable living environment, and economic opportunities, principally for persons of lower and moderate income.
Tribes set their own community and economic development priorities.
They may request funding only for projects that meet the ICDBG Program's requirements for eligibility and national objectives.
Eligible Activities:
* Housing: This includes housing rehabilitation, land acquisition for housing, new housing construction, and direct homeownership assistance.
* Community Facilities: This category is divided into infrastructure (such as water and sewer), and buildings.
All tribal facilities, except buildings for the general conduct of government operations can be assisted.
* Economic Development: Economic development projects that are either tribal owned or individually owned can be funded.
A financial analysis of the project must be submitted, showing that a public benefit commensurate with the amount of the grant can reasonably be expected to result from the assisted project, and that the project has a reasonable chance of success.
Certain items not fundable with ICDBG funds include equipment, operating and maintenance costs, buildings for the general conduct of government, construction equipment, furnishings and personal property.
Eligible Applicants: Indian Tribes or Indian Organizations authorized by a tribe may apply pursuant to an annual Notice of Funding Availability (NOFA).
A tribe is limited to one application; that application can include one or more separate projects, subject to a funding limit of $500,000 per application.
Follow this link to go Back to Top
Economic Development and Empowerment
Economic Development and Supportive Services: The Economic Development and Supportive Services (ED/SS) program is designed to help families in public and Indian housing move to work and achieve self sufficiency.
It accomplishes this by providing funding to public housing agencies, Indian tribes, and tribally designated housing entities to support self-sufficiency activities among residents and promote independent living for the elderly and people with disabilities.
ED/SS funds a broad range of activities including:
Family Economic Development and Supportive Services:
* Economic and business development * Entrepreneurial training * Micro-loan funds or credit unions * Employment training and counseling * Employer linkage and job placement * Service coordinators/case managers * Supportive services, such as child care, supportive health care, tuition assistance, youth mentoring, and transportation costs.
Supportive Services for Elderly and Persons with Disabilities
* Meals * Ambulatory/self care * Housekeeping aid * Transportation services * Wellness programs and preventative health education * Referral to community resources * Adult day care (non-medical) * Personal emergency response systems * Congregate services * Employment of service coordinators * Other services/resources
Funding source: Applications for grants can be submitted pursuant to the annual Notice of Fund Availability (NOFA).
Eligible applicants: Limited to Public Housing Authorities and Tribes and tribally designated housing entities (TDHEs) that evidence a partnership with a nonprofit or incorporated for-profit agency for the purpose of providing economic development and supportive services that assist residents to become self-sufficient.
Economic Development Initiative (EDI): The Economic Development Initiative (EDI) is designed to enable local governments to enhance both the security of loans guaranteed through HUD's Economic Development Loan Fund (also known as the Section 108 loan guarantee program) and the feasibility of the economic development and revitalization projects that Section 108 guarantees finance.
EDI accomplishes this by providing grants to local governments to be used in conjunction with Section108 loan guarantees.
A locality may use the grant to provide additional security for the loan (for example, as a loss reserve), thereby reducing the exposure of its CDBG funds (which by law must be pledged as security for the loan guarantees).
A locality may also use the EDI grant to pay for costs associated with the project, thereby enhancing the feasibility of the Section 108 assisted portion of the project.
Eligible activities under the EDI program are the same activities that are eligible under the Section 108 Loan Guarantee Program.
EDI-funded projects must meet one of the CDBG program's national objectives.
Funding source: Applications for grants may be submitted pursuant to the annual Notice of Fund Availability (NOFA).
Eligible applicants: State and local governments.
Brownfields Economic Development Initiative: The Brownfields Economic Development Initiative (BEDI) is designed to help cities redevelop abandoned, idled, or underutilized industrial and commercial facilities where expansion or redevelopment is complicated by real or perceived environmental contamination--brownfields.
BEDI accomplishes this by providing funding to local governments to be used in conjunction with Section 108 loan guarantees to finance redevelopment of brownfield sites.
Eligible activities include:
* Site acquisition * Demolition * Remediation * Infrastructure construction or reconstruction * Assistance to for-profit businesses for economic development * Construction or reconstruction of public facilities.
Funding for BEDI is provided through a specific appropriation for brownfields redevelopment under the authority of the Economic Development Initiative (EDI) program.
BEDI funds are intended to be used in a manner consistent with previous iterations of the EDI program, but with a particular emphasis upon the redevelopment of brownfields sites.
Many of the brownfields activities are also eligible for Community Development Block Grant funding, which is awarded to entitlement communities on a formula basis and to States for distribution to non-entitlement communities.
Funding source: Provided through a specific appropriation for brownfields redevelopment under the authority of the Economic Development Initiative (EDI) program.
Applications for grants may be submitted pursuant to the annual Notice of Fund Availability (NOFA).
Eligible applicants: State and local governments.
Section 108 Loan Guarantee Program: Section 108 enables States and local governments participating in the Community Development Block Grant (CDBG) program to obtain federally guaranteed loans that can help fuel large economic development projects and other revitalization activities.
As the loan guarantee provision of the Community Development Block Grant program, Section 108 is one of the most potent and important public investment tools that HUD offers to State and local governments.
It allows them to transform a small portion of their CDBG funds into federally guaranteed loans large enough to pursue physical and economic revitalization projects that can help renew entire neighborhoods.
Such public investment is often needed to inspire private economic activity, providing the initial resources or simply the confidence that private firms and individuals may need to invest in distressed areas.
However, Section 108 loans are not risk free.
State and local governments borrowing funds guaranteed by Section 108 must pledge their current and future CDBG allocations (up to the loan amount) as security for the loan.
Eligible activities: Like other CDBG assistance, Section 108 loan guarantees must be used for activities that meet national CDBG objectives.
They must:
* principally benefit low- and moderate-income families; * prevent or eliminate slums or blight; or * meet other urgent community development needs.
Although funded projects generate enough cash flow to support loan payments, the 20-year term means that projects do not necessarily need to support repayment immediately.
Statutory amendments in 1994 expanded the list of eligible activities to include public facilities, which generally do not yield cash flow.
Funding source: Eligible communities may apply for the loan guarantee year-round.
Eligible grantees: CDBG entitlement communities are eligible to apply for a guarantee from the Section 108 program.
CDBG non-entitlement communities may also apply, provided that the State agrees to pledge the CDBG funds necessary to secure the loan.
Empowerment Zones and Enterprise Communities (EZ/EC): The purpose of this program is to empower American communities and their residents to create jobs and employment opportunities; take effective action to solve difficult and pressing economic, human, community and physical development challenges of today; and to build for tomorrow as a part of a Federal/State/Local Government and Private Sector Partnership.
Empowerment Zones are awarded substantial Empowerment Zone/Enterprise Community Social Service Block Grant funds in the amount of $100 million for each urban Zone.
Enterprise Communities are awarded approximately $3 million in Empowerment Zone/Enterprise Community Social Service Block Grant Funds.
Funding source: Applications for designations can be submitted pursuant to the Notice of Invitation.
Eligible applicants: To be considered for Empowerment Zone or Enterprise Community designation, an area must be nominated by the State and local governments or by a State-chartered Economic Development Corporation.
Follow this link to go Back to Top
Special Needs Housing and Homeless Assistance Programs
Supportive Housing for the Elderly - Section 202: This program provides assistance to expand the supply of housing with supportive services for the elderly.
Capital advances are made to eligible private, nonprofit sponsors to finance the development of rental housing with supportive services for the elderly.
The advance is interest free and repayment is not required as long as the housing remains available for very-low-income elderly persons for at least 40 years.
Project rental assistance covers only the difference between the HUD-approved operating cost per unit and the amount the resident pays.
Funding source: Sponsors can submit applications pursuant to the annual Notice of Fund Availability (NOFA).
Eligible applicants: Private, nonprofit organizations and consumer cooperatives may qualify for assistance.
Occupancy is open to very-low-income households which include at least one elderly person, 62 years of age or older.
(List of rental assisted apartment complexes in Alaska.)
Supportive Housing for Persons with Disabilities - Section 811: This program provides capital advances to eligible private, nonprofit sponsors to finance the development of rental housing with supportive services for the disabled.
The advance is interest free and repayment shall not be required so long as the housing remains available for very-low-income persons with disabilities for at least 40 years.
Project rental assistance covers the difference between the HUD-approved operating cost per unit and the amount the resident pays.
Funding source: Sponsors may submit applications pursuant to the annual Notice of Fund Availability (NOFA).
Eligible applicants: Private and Nonprofit organizations.
Occupancy is open to very-low-income persons with disabilities who are age 18 or older.
(List of rental assisted apartment complexes in Alaska.)
Follow this link to go Back to Top
Continuum of Care - Homeless Assistance:
* The Supportive Housing Program (SHP) helps homeless people live as independently as possible by facilitating the development of housing and related supportive services for people moving from homelessness to independent living.
SHP funds States, local governments, other governmental agencies (such as PHAs), and nonprofit organizations providing housing and supportive services for the homeless.
SHP supports five types of program designs: * Transitional housing, which helps homeless people move to independent living.
* Permanent housing for homeless people with disabilities.
* Safe havens--24-hour supportive housing that serves hard-to-reach homeless people with severe mental illness.
* Supportive services for homeless people not living in supportive housing.
* Other types of innovative supportive housing for homeless people.
Supportive services include child care, employment assistance, outpatient health services, case management, assistance in locating and accessing permanent housing, help to get employment, nutritional counseling, security arrangements, and help to obtain other assistance.
SHP funds may be used to:
* Acquire land for a homeless facility.
* Build, rehabilitate, or lease housing for homeless persons.
* Pay for new or increased supportive services for homeless people.
* Cover day-to-day operating expenses of supportive housing.
* Pay administrative expenses.
The Section 8 Moderate Rehabilitation Single Room Occupancy (SRO) Program for Homeless Individuals is designed to ensure an adequate supply of SRO units for the provision of housing for the homeless.
This program provides funding to public housing agencies and private nonprofit organizations for rental assistance for homeless individuals who rent rehabilitated SRO units.
The rental assistance is paid to owners of the rehabilitated units in the form of monthly rental subsidies.
A portion of the subsidy covers the normal rental assistance that would be paid on behalf of the person occupying the unit under the Section 8 SRO program.
The rest of the subsidy can be used by the owner to help offset the monthly debt service on the rehabilitation financing.
Occupants of the rehabilitated units must otherwise be eligible for Section 8 rental assistance.
The Shelter-Plus Care (S+C) program is designed to ensure supportive housing opportunities for homeless people with disabilities and their families.
It accomplishes this by providing funding to States, local governments, and PHAs to be used to provide rental assistance for homeless people with disabilities and their families.
The four types of rental assistance available are:
* tenant based * single-room occupancy based * project based (contracted with a building owner) * sponsor based (contracted with a nonprofit organization) Grantees must match the rental assistance with supportive services that are at least equal in value to the amount of HUD's rental assistance.
Funding source: Applications for all Continuum of Care Programs must be consistent with a locally-developed Continuum of Care strategy.
Applications for grants can be submitted pursuant to the annual Notice of Fund Availability (NOFA).
Eligible applicants: States, units of general local government, public housing agencies (PHAs), Tribes, private nonprofit organizations, CMHCs that are public nonprofit organizations.
Housing Opportunities for Persons with AIDS (HOPWA): This program funds projects for low-income persons with HIV/AIDS and their families under two categories of assistance:
* Grants for special projects of national significance, which, due to their innovative nature or their potential for replication, are likely to serve as effective models in addressing the needs of eligible persons.
* Grants for projects that are part of long-term comprehensive strategies for providing housing and related services for eligible persons.
Funding source: Applications for grants can be submitted pursuant to the annual Notice of Funding Availability (NOFA).
Eligible applicants: State, local governments, and nonprofit organizations.
The Emergency Shelter Grants program provides grants to eligible applicants in accordance with the formula used for Community Development Block Grants.
Eligible activities include renovation, major rehabilitation or conversion of buildings for use as emergency shelters for the homeless.
Within limitations, funds may also be used on essential services, homeless prevention activities and operating costs.
Funding source: Applications for grants can be submitted pursuant to the annual Notice of Funding Availability (NOFA).
Eligible applicants: States, metropolitan cities, urban counties and territories.
Follow this link to go Back to Top
Opportunities for Youth: Youthbuild Program
Youthbuild is designed to help young high school dropouts obtain education, employment skills, and meaningful work experience to help them obtain well-paying jobs and achieve self-sufficiency.
Youthbuild provides funding to nonprofit organizations State and local housing agencies, State and local governments, and other organizations eligible to provide education and employment training under Federal employment training programs.
The funding is used to implement housing construction/rehabilitation training programs for very low-income high school dropouts from ages 16 to 24.
Youthbuild programs offer educational and job training services, counseling and other support activities, and on-site paid training in housing rehabilitation or construction work.
At least 50 percent of each participant's time is spent in on-site training.
Funding source: Applications for grants can be submitted pursuant to the annual Notice of Funding Availability (NOFA).
Eligible applicants: Nonprofit organizations, State and local housing agencies, State and local governments, and other organizations eligible to provide education and employment training under Federal employment training programs.
Follow this link to go Back to Top
Other HUD Programs
Comprehensive Grant Programs (CGP): The CGP program provides modernization opportunities for Public Housing Authorities (PHAs) that own or operate 250 or more units.
Under the program, PHAs receive annual grant funds for capital improvements by a formula allocation method, thereby eliminating the competition of the CIAP program.
These funds enable PHAs to operate, upgrade and modernize public housing units.
Major Reconstruction of Obsolete Projects (MROP): MROP provides funding for PHAs to reconstruct "obsolete" housing stock which has been identified as having design or marketability problems.
Eligible Applicant: Public Housing Authorities.
Follow this link to go Back to Top
Section 8 Tenant Based Rental Assistance
The Section 8 Rental Voucher and Certificate program provides direct rental subsidy payments on behalf of eligible families and individuals to private landlords.
Public Housing Authorities (PHAs) administer the Section 8 programs by ensuring applicants are income eligible and meet certain selection criteria to participate in the program.
The use of Section 8 Vouchers and Certificates allows participants to select their housing units from the private market.
Unit size is determined by the size of the family.
The Contract Rent is subject to Fair Market Rent limitations as determined by Rent Reasonableness.
The family's portion of the contract rent is computed by a formula that equates to 30% of the adjusted family income.
The balance of the rent (Housing Assistance Payments), is provided directly to the Landlord by the PHA.
To ensure units are in a decent, safe and sanitary condition, the PHA inspects the property before the family takes possession at move-in and annually thereafter, to ensure Housing Quality Standards (established by HUD) are maintained.
Funding source: A Notice of Funding Availability (NOFA) is published annually in the Federal Register.
Funding is nationally competitive and allocated on a Fair Share basis.
Eligible applicants: Public Housing Authorities.
Interested tenants should contact the Alaska Housing Finance Corporation (AHFC) at (907) 272-1457 for availability of Section 8 certificates and vouchers.
The Section 8 - Project-Based Rental Assistance program provides rental assistance on behalf of eligible families, or elderly or disabled individuals.
Project-based assistance is tied to specific multifamily developments, which include those with HUD insured mortgages, HUD direct loans, and other private or government assisted financing.
Eligibility and rent amounts are the same as in the public housing program.
HUD's role is to provide direct rental subsidy, ensure eligibility requirements are enforced, and ensure that the housing meets specific housing quality standards.
Eligible applicants: Persons seeking residency should contact the manager or management agent of the apartment complex to make application.
Follow this link to go Back to Top
Family Self-Sufficiency
This volunteer program was established to promote economic self-sufficiency by connecting eligible families with appropriate support services and resources within their communities.
Families who participate are briefed, evaluated and then enter into a Contract of Participation with the PHA.
The contract specifies the services needed and establishes goals and objectives that the family must fulfill during the five-year term of the contract.
Upon successful completion of the Contract, the family is entitled to an escrow savings account.
The funds are the result of a portion of the increase of rent paid which would otherwise result from increased earned income.
Eligible Applicants: Public Housing Authorities.
Community Outreach Partnership Centers (COPC): The COPC program is designed to help colleges and universities apply their human, intellectual, and institutional resources to the challenge of revitalizing distressed communities.
COPC provides funding to accredited two- or four-year degree-granting nonprofit institutions of higher learning to address at least three of the following issues in a targeted urban community:
* Local housing * Infrastructure * Economic development * Neighborhood revitalization * Health care * Job training * Crime prevention * Education * Planning * Community organizing
Grantees may address these issues by conducting and applying relevant research, coordinating outreach efforts with neighborhood groups and residents, acting as a local information exchange, galvanizing support for neighborhood revitalization, developing public service projects and instructional programs, and collaborating with other partnership centers.
Multiple institutions of higher learning in a particular regions may also apply jointly as a consortium.
Funding source: Applications for grants can be submitted pursuant to the annual Notice of Funding Availability (NOFA).
Eligible applicants: Accredited two- or four-year degree-granting nonprofit institutions of higher learning.
Multiple institutions of higher learning in a particular region may also apply jointly as a consortium.
Tenant Opportunities Program (TOP): TOP is designed to help public housing residents improve their lives through training for self sufficiency, strengthening resident organizations, and encouraging partnerships with the public housing agency and community organizations.
TOP accomplishes this goal by providing funding in one of the following three grant categories:
* Economic Self Sufficiency * Organizational Development * Mediation
Economic Self Sufficiency grants will be awarded to Public Housing Resident Associations (RAs) which will provide educational, job, business, and life skill training leading to self sufficiency and welfare-to-work transitions.
Organizational Development Grants will be awarded to RAs who do not yet have the capacity to administer a welfare-to-work program.
Mediation Grants will be awarded to Intermediary Organizations that partner with professional mediators to resolve conflicts involving resident groups at specific sits.
Activities funded by TOP included:
* Employment and vocational training, counseling, placement, and follow-up * Management training and business development * Life skills training (counseling/mentoring, etc.)
* Youth programs * Resident security * Homeownership initiative * Family services, such as child care, that support these activities
Funding source: Applications for grants can be submitted pursuant to the annual Notice of Funding Availability (NOFA).
Eligible Applicants: Public Housing Resident Organizations, Resident Councils, and Regional Resident Organizations.
Interested parties may contact your local Public Housing Authority or the Office of Public Housing.
Resident Opportunities Program (formerly Resident Management Program): Grant funds to enable Resident Organizations to establish priorities based on the needs in their Public housing communities aimed at furthering economic lift and independence.
Applicants may request up to $100,000.
Grants are used to provide assistance to eligible resident grantees, including resident organizations and councils; and national, statewide, and regional resident organizations to fund training and other resident opportunities (such as the formation of such entities).
The grants can also be used to identify relevant social support for residents of Indian housing.
Also, the grant is intended to meet the needs in the communities for business development, education, job training and development, social services and for opportunities for other self-help initiatives.
Funding source: Applications for grants can be submitted pursuant to the annual Notice of Funding Availability (NOFA).
Eligible applicants: Public Housing Resident Organizations and resident councils who have a democratically elected board.
Follow this link to go Back to Top
Drug Elimination Grants:
* The goal of the Multifamily Housing Drug Elimination Program (MHDEP) is to eliminate drug-related crime and associated problems in and around the premises of federally-assisted, low-income housing.
MHDEP provides funds to owners of such housing for physical improvements to enhance security, comprehensive programs to reduce the use of drugs (for example, programs combining prevention, education, treatment, and youth services), and strengthening the role of resident councils in developing drug elimination programs involving residents.
Funding source: Applications for grants can be submitted pursuant to the annual Notice of Funding Availability (NOFA).
Eligible applicants: Owners of federally-assisted, low-income housing.
* The Public and Indian Housing Drug Elimination Program (PHDEP) grants are designed to reduce or eliminate drug-related crime in public and Indian housing neighborhoods.
The program provides grants to public housing agencies and tribally designated housing entities (TDHEs) to plan and implement a variety of activities to combat crime and drugs.
Such activities include: + Employing security personnel + Developing programs to reduce/eliminate the use of drugs (including Youth Sports activities) + Reimbursing local police for additional security services + Making physical changes to improve security + Employment of personnel and equipment for HUD-authorized Housing Authority police departments + Employing crime investigators + Funding community policing accreditation activities + Training and equipping voluntary tenant patrols + Funding resident organizations to develop security and drug-abuse prevention programs.
Funding source: Applications for grants can be submitted pursuant to the annual Notice of Funding Availability (NOFA).
Eligible applicants: Public Housing Authorities and tribally designated housing entities (TDHEs).
* Drug Elimination Technical Assistance: The Public and Indian Housing Drug Elimination Technical Assistance Program provides grants to assist housing agencies and resident councils to respond to drug-related problems in housing developments.
Grants are made to consultants who can provide necessary training for assessing drug problems in the targeted housing developments and surrounding communities; designing and identifying appropriate anti-drug related practices and programs; training housing agency staff and residents in potential anti-drug related practices, programs and management techniques; improve overall agency management operations, and programming so the applicant can respond more effectively to drug problems in the targeted housing development(s).
Also, the funds are intended to fund consultants to conduct needs assessment, or to assist the applicant in a task such as program planning and development for future drug elimination strategies.
Funding: Funding is provided on an on-going basis.
Any eligible applicant may request up to $15,000 per activity being proposed
Eligible applicants: Public housing authorities, Resident Councils and Resident Management Corporations of PHA/IHAs may apply.
Follow this link to go Back to Top
The Housing Counseling Program (HCP) has three strategic goals:
* Improve the quality of renter and homeowner education, * Develop a reliable stream of funding and resources for counseling agencies, and * Enhance coordination among local housing providers.
HCP funds HUD-approved local housing counseling agencies; national, regional, or multi-state intermediaries; and State housing finance agencies that provide counseling services.
HUD-approved local housing counseling agencies or State housing finance agencies and their affiliates use the funds to provide advice to tenants and homeowners with respect to property maintenance, financial management, and other matters that relate to improving housing conditions and meeting the responsibilities of tenancy and homeownership.
In addition, HUD-approved counseling agencies are permitted and encouraged to conduct community outreach activities with the objective of increasing awareness of homeownership opportunities and improving access of low- and moderate-income households to sources of mortgage credit.
A portion of HCP funding is set aside for national, regional, and multi-state housing counseling organizations (that is, intermediaries or umbrella groups) and State housing finance agencies whose primary responsibility is to manage the use of HUD housing counseling funds by affiliated local housing counseling organizations.
The local affiliates of the intermediaries and State housing finance agencies must use the funds for affirmative marketing or actions to reduce concentrations of poverty and/or minority populations.
Funding source: Applications for grants can be submitted pursuant to the annual Notice of Funding Availability (NOFA).
Eligible applicants: HUD-approved local housing counseling agencies; national, regional, or multi-state intermediaries; and State housing finance agencies that provide counseling services.
Follow this link to go Back to Top
Fair Housing and Equal Opportunity Programs:
* The Education and Outreach Initiative (FHIP-EOI) is designed to increase the understanding of the general public and key housing market agencies regarding their rights and responsibilities under the Fair Housing Act through national, regional, local, and community-based activities.
EOI provides funding to State and local governments and other public or private nonprofit organizations for products and activities intended to explain what equal opportunity in fair housing means and what is required in the sale, rent, and/or financing of housing; other real estate related transactions; and accessibility requirements for new construction.
Eligible activities include: + Holding educational forums + Duplication of existing fair housing materials + Providing fair housing counseling services + Conducting outreach and providing information on fair housing through printed and electronic media + Developing or implementing Fair Housing Month activities
Funding source: Applications for grants can be submitted pursuant to the annual Notice of Funding Availability (NOFA).
Eligible applicants: State and local governments and other public or private nonprofit organizations.
* The Private Enforcement Initiative (FHIP-PEI)I provides funding to fair housing enforcement organizations for a broad range of activities related to enforcing fair housing laws.
These activities include: + Testing specific landlords suspected of housing discrimination + Testing for discriminatory patterns in an entire housing market + Developing Joint Enforcement Project partnerships to focus on systemic investigations of housing discrimination + Providing counseling and referral for persons alleging discrimination + Mediating allegations of housing discrimination + Producing training materials and events for housing consumers, providers, and enforcement officials + Other activities designed to promote awareness of fair housing rights and remedies.
Funding source: Applications for grants can be submitted pursuant to the annual Notice of Funding Availability (NOFA).
Eligible applicants: Fair housing enforcement organizations.
* The Fair Housing Assistance Program (FHAP) is designed to build a coordinated, intergovernmental enforcement effort to further fair housing.
It provides funding to State and local fair housing enforcement agencies to encourage them to assume a greater share of the responsibility for the administration and enforcement of their fair housing laws and ordinances.
FHAP funding is provided through a formula and can be used to cover the costs of processing dual-filed complaints, training under the Fair Housing Act and the agencies' fair housing laws, technical assistance, and the development and enhancement of other fair housing enforcement projects.
Funding source: Applications for grants can be submitted pursuant to the annual Notice of Funding Availability (NOFA).
Eligible applicants: State and local fair housing enforcement agencies
Content current as of October 1, 2003 Follow this link to go Back to top ---------- [logo: HUD seal] U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development 451 7th Street S.W., Washington, DC 20410 Telephone: (202) 708-1112 TTY: (202) 708-1455 Find the address of a HUD office near you [logo: Fair Housing and Equal Opportunity]
