Print this page.
Contact the CIP CLICK TO RETURN TO THE 1999 ARCHIVE OF CLIMATE-WEATHER IMPACTS
CLIMATE INFORMATION PROJECT: UPDATE OF CLIMATE-WEATHER IMPACTS REPORTED 01.18.99-01.22.99
(01.22.99)
ALGERIA, FIJI, JORDAN, LAOS, MOZAMBIQUE, SOMALIA, SOUTH AFRICA, THAILAND, UNITED STATES, VANUATU
ALGERIA (snow storm) Snowstorms have caused 8 reported fatalities in western Algeria.
Landslides have also occurred in Greater Algiers.
FIJI (cyclone Dani) Flooding, related to cyclone Dani, has reportedly displaced hundreds of people.
3 people were missing.
The flooding occurred in the main sugar growing areas.
Total impact on lives and agriculture has not been assessed, however 7 deaths have been reported.
The towns of Ba, Nadi, and Lautoka were affected.
Vanuatu was also affected by flooding -- no assessments yet..
On Friday, Fiji declared a natural disaster for parts of the country.
The flooding caused by cyclone Dani follows a severe drought which destroyed 60% of the country's cane crop.
Relief operations for the drought cost 25 million USD.
JORDAN (drought) The GOJ approved aid packages to help its farmers affected by the current drought.
Rainfall during December and January was reportedly well below normal -- some reports of only 2% in parts of the country.
LAOS (drought) As reported by the European Community Humanitarian Office (ECHO), the country of Laos recently suffered crop damage of nearly 70% in certain provinces.
Delayed rains have led to a drought that has crippled the main rice crop for this season.
In Sayaboury province an estimated 20,000 people are in need of assistance.
MOZAMBIQUE (flooding) Heavy rains caused flooding in central and southern Mozambique.
Fatalities numbered 3.
People have also been displaced and cropland inundated, but the exact extent of the damage has not been reported.
The road connecting Beira to Zimbabwe may be cut off by floodwaters.
The GOM has reportedly expressed concern about flooding along the Pungue.
SOMALIA (drought, famine threat, disease) The UN has warned that 300,000 people are at a very high risk of starvation.
The harvest of food this coming month has already been viewed with pessimism as late rains and drought conditions weakened this season's crop.
Last year's harvests were destroyed by El Nino related flooding.
Doctors Without Borders (Medecins Sans Frontiers) confirmed that water shortages have led to outbreaks of disease in southern regions of Somalia -- in particular cholera.
SOUTH AFRICA (storm) The AP reported that storms hit the villages of Mount Ayliff and Kokstad on Monday afternoon.
50 houses were destroyed.
21 fatalities occurred.
SOUTH AFRICA (La Nina) La Nina has reportedly caused 50 fatalities in storm related events throughout the country this season.
THAILAND (1997-98 El Nino related water shortage) Director of Thailand's agriculture ministry's climate division, Narong Piyabhan, was quoted for blaming the 1997-98 for lower than normal water reserves.
Water reserviors and dams are down nearly 3.69 billion cubic metres -- in 1997 for the similar period, reserves were at 7-8 billion cubic metres.
GOT surveys show that reserves can only support 608,000 hectares of paddy -- 704,000 hectares have been reportedly planted.
UNITED STATES (tornadoes/severe storms)(Tennessee) Severe storms and tornadoes affected parts of Tennessee during the evening of the seventeenth.
Fatalities have been tallied at eight while ~100 people were reportedly injured.
Damage from the storms included two UH-60 helicopters at the McKeller-Sipes Airport as well as damage to an estimated 600 homes throughout the state.
VANUATU (flooding, cyclone Dani) See FIJI
*The information provided in the RRP updates is gathered from a variety of wire and news sources as well as country and international agency reports.
It does not necessarily reflect the focus or interest of NOAA's Office of Global Programs and is meant only as source of condensed information.
This and other updates are not designed to be used in scientific or professional decisions.
Names of geographic locations do not infer political or economic recognition.
All reports of the RRP are archived at http://www.cip.ogp.noaa.gov
The RRP can be contacted at 301.427.2089x194 or Kelly.Sponberg@noaa.gov
