House Immigration and Claims Subcommittee Hearing on Interior Enforcement Summary of July 1, 1999 Testimony by Dan Stein, FAIR Executive Director The current hemorrhaging of the nation's borders, most obvious today in Arizona, but increasingly noted in new locations including the Canadian border, would not be happening if intending illegal aliens knew that jobs would be difficult if not impossible to get.
They would also be deterred by the knowledge that chances of apprehension would be high even if they did get across the border and find an employer willing to risk hiring them.
For that to happen, employers must have a way to screen employment identification documents of their new employees.
The sad fact is that the Congress and the Administration have ignored their responsibility to protect national sovereignty by adopting half-way measures rather than emphasizing interior enforcement.
The results were foreseeable.
The absence of reliable and even-handed worksite screening has led seasonal crop farmers to become dependent on an illegal workforce.
Meanwhile, wages and working conditions for workers in this sector have dropped while rising everywhere else.
That trend is now spreading into other sectors of the economy -- building maintenance, gardening, meat processing, and other assembly lines to point to just a few areas.
This is a vicious cycle that fuels the nation's growing wage disparity.
The trend must be stopped and reversed.
FAIR urges:
Deny Jobs to Illegal Aliens -- Make employer sanctions against hiring illegal aliens effective by providing employers the means to verify the identity and work eligibility of all new employees with the Social Security Administration and with the INS.
Protect the Integrity of Identity Documents -- Provide greater integrity for state-issued driver's licenses, by assisting the states to incorporate security features and collecting Social Security numbers of the applicants.
Implement IIRAIRA Section 110 -- Harness technology to the task of recording when alien visitors arrive in our country and when they leave.
Implement §110 of the 1996 Illegal Immigration Reform (IIRAIRA) legislation -- now under attack in the Senate.
Enable Local Law Enforcement Agency to Respond to Local Problems -- Promote IIRAIRA §133 that allows local law enforcement personnel to be trained by the Justice Department in immigration law enforcement.
Provide the Resources Needed to Regain Control -- Authorize and fund an effective deterrent to illegal entry and visa overstays.
That means continue to strengthen the under-manned Border Patrol, increase interior inspections personnel, and provide the detention space necessary to assure that detained illegal aliens are not released back into the community to find a new job rather than be removed from the country.
STATEMENT OF
DAN STEIN
EXECUTIVE DIRECTOR
FEDERATION FOR AMERICAN IMMIGRATION REFORM
FOR THE
IMMIGRATION AND CLAIMS SUBCOMMITTEE
OF THE HOUSE JUDICIARY COMMITTEE
Hearing on
Thursday, July 1, 1999
This statement sets forth FAIR's view of the current problem in interior enforcement of the nation's immigration laws and outlines an action agenda for remedying the problems.
"Credibility in immigration policy can be summed up in one sentence: Those who should get in, get in; those who should be kept out, are kept out; and those who should not be here will be required to leave."
"...for the system to be credible, people actually have to be deported at the end of the process."
- The Honorable Barbara Jordan, Chair, U.S. Commission on Immigration Reform,
Testimony to House Immigration Subcommittee, February 24, 1995.
INTRODUCTION
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for the opportunity to present the views of the Federation for American Immigration Reform (FAIR) on the crucial issue of interior enforcement.
My name is Dan Stein, and I am FAIR's executive director.
FAIR is a national, non-profit organization of concerned citizens nationwide pushing for better immigration controls and an immigration time-out to insure that today's policies serve the needs of the American people.
Ever since its founding twenty years ago, FAIR has insisted on the need to end the routine onslaught of illegal immigration; FAIR has supported substantial, permanent reductions in today's mass immigration.
An immigration time-out is the only way to achieve that objective.
It is the only way to reduce mass immigration from today's record rates.
FAIR does not receive any federal grants, contracts or subcontracts.
Mr. Chairman, FAIR congratulates this committee's efforts, under your leadership, to focus the attention of the nation's policymakers on the fact that the reform legislation of 1996 left a large agenda of needed changes in our nation's immigration law and its implementation.
In addition, we appreciate that you have held to a constant course of working for immigration policies in the nation's interest during a period when many were backing away from even the limited reforms that were adopted in 1996.
We recognize that the public support for a sensible, workable immigration policy is under constant assault by organized lobbies seeking to use the public immigration system for private purposes.
Those willing to take an enlarged view of the long-term national interest are too rare, and should be recognized.
Mr. Chairman, we feel that the American people, who are clear on the concept that the present mass immigration is not in their interest, owe you a debt of gratitude.
The reforms passed by the Congress in 1996 are worthy of support and oversight; you have been a leader in this process of insuring Congress has not lost sight of the public's interest in this function.
Your interest and superintendence in this oversight process has been of vital interest to the United States.
INTERIOR ENFORCEMENT -- INS'S SELF-IMPOSED TRIAGE
Today, nearly every day, the news media report smuggling rings or counterfeit document rings being exposed, or new routes for armies of illegal aliens sneaking into the country, or sweatshops discovered exploiting illegal aliens, or enterprises found to have substantial illegal alien workforces, or truckloads of illegals intercepted on the highways, or Border Patrol agents shot at or killed in the line of duty, or illegal aliens found dead near the border from drowning or exposure, while others tell stories of assault and rape while trying to illegally enter the United States.
Can anyone doubt that we are losing control of our borders, and thereby, our national sovereignty?
Why is this happening? In 1986 Congress adopted legislation intended to put an end to the growing problem of illegal entry and visa overstays by adopting sanctions against the employers of illegal aliens.
You and your colleagues, Mr. Chairman, in 1996 added new sanctions to penalize illegal aliens and to strengthen the Border Patrol.
Yet we still see no abatement of the problem.
It is tempting to simply blame the Administration for sending signals that encourage further illegal entry.
Examples of that encouragement include the suspension of deportation of illegal criminal aliens from Central America after Hurricane Mitch and the conferral of temporary protected status, even for illegal aliens from that area, bending the law to ease permanent residence for long-term illegal aliens from Central America, or the decision to cease requiring illegal aliens from Cuba to apply for asylum before they could become residents.
Perhaps the most blatant dereliction of duty by the Administration may be seen in the new interior enforcement strategy which lessens the threat of deportation for illegal alien workers, to which I will return shortly.
But responsibility for the on-going hemorrhage of the country's boundaries by illegal aliens and for the casualties of that invasion must be shared by the Congress.
I say this, Mr. Chairman, because the Congress in 1986 enacted a flawed employer sanctions system.
That law only gave momentary pause to intending illegal aliens until they figured out that the threat of enforcement would be a paper tiger so long as the employers could get away with accepting phony identity documents as proof of work eligibility.
In addition, the amnesty for illegal aliens adopted at the same time has proven to be not the "first and last" wiping clean of the slate, as was solemnly promised to the American people by the bill's sponsors, but rather simply the first of a developing pattern of throwing in the towel rather than enforcing the nation's immigration law.
The current hemorrhaging of the nation's borders would not have happened if intending illegal aliens had received the clear and consistent message beginning 15 years ago that the United States seriously would try to apprehend them coming across the border, that jobs would be difficult if not impossible to get, and that chances of apprehension would be high even if they did get across the border and find an employer willing to risk hiring them.
For that to have happened, employers had to have a way to screen the employment identification documents of their new employees.
That screening ability has been available for years for federal, state and local government agencies, but it was ignored in the 1986 legislation.
And, when that glaring loophole was highlighted by the reports of the U.S. Commission on Agricultural Workers and the U.S. Commission on Immigration Reform, the Congress looked at the problem again in the 1996 reforms and blinked by consigning action to further study.
Therefore, the Clinton Administration and the INS are not entirely to blame for the deteriorating conditions that have accumulated since 1986.
In fact, no administration since the Reagan Administration has demonstrated any leadership in attempting to deter illegal aliens.
THE INS RESPONSE
The current Administration has taken accommodation of the interests of illegal alien employers and alien support groups to a new level.
Three major changes typify the Administration's accomodationist policy.
The first of these was a change in operating procedures that tied the hands of INS enforcement personnel and limited their ability to conduct worksite raids on businesses employing illegal aliens.
The second is a new enforcement strategy that allows illegal aliens to play musical chairs with employers while downplaying the responsibility of the INS to apprehend and remove them from the country.
Finally, new directives from INS Headquarters have attempted to hide the erosion of the INS interior enforcement effort by reinventing the enforcement standards and the meaning of what constitutes success.
Limiting Worksite Enforcement - On December 31, 1996, INS Commissioner Meissner issued instructions to the field discouraging apprehension of illegal alien suspects for questioning during worksite investigations and specifying that the INS personnel should plan to interview and make determinations at the worksite whether aliens were in a legal work status.
At the same time, the instruction admonished the investigators that "Entry into the worksite should be conducted in a manner that minimizes disruption of the legitimate activities of the workplace."
With this instruction, INS investigations personnel were told that they should not just focus on enforcing the nation's immigration law against illegal aliens, but that they also should focus on not inconveniencing the employer of the illegal aliens.
But how could the investigators spend more time at a work establishment interviewing all of the illegal alien suspects without running the risk of disrupting the workplace? Commissioner Meissner thereby created a new "Catch 22."
The screws were further tightened on INS interior investigation operations in a May 22, 1998 memo.
INS Executive Associate Commissioner for Field Operations, Michael Pearson, issued instructions to all regional directors requiring that worksite raids henceforth must be undertaken with a public relations criteria as part of the planning.
This meant that enforcement personnel had to appoint one of their members to act as a public relations coordinator, alert the media and local interest groups about an impending enforcement action and invite participation, and then if the investigators considered that the action would generate media attention, the plans had to be sent to INS Headquarters for prior approval.
If the media were supposed to be briefed, how could a regional director expect that there would not be media attention.
Another "Catch 22."
The effect of the new instruction was to require that significant INS worksite enforcement operations would not be undertaken without Washington's approval.
In addition, the new rules virtually assured that there would be greater media coverage of INS operations.
And, by alerting "community based organizations" -- which operationally means alien rights groups that assist illegal aliens in avoiding deportation -- to an impending enforcement operation, the procedure virtually assured the presence at the enforcement site of persons who would decry to the media the cruelty of the INS for interfering in the rights of the "undocumented" aliens to work to support their families here and in their home country.
Musical Chairs - The new instruction also embodied a requirement that INS enforcement personnel share with employers the results of their employment records checks if they uncover employees who likely are illegal aliens.
This new approach is referred to as the Phoenix plan.
Since last year, the Phoenix plan has become more stylized, with INS asking employers to dismiss employees who appear to be illegal aliens unless they are sure that the employee is a legal worker.
This sham of enforcement operations has taken on the aspect of a Kabuki play with INS scheduling interviews with illegal alien suspects to determine their work status.
On the surface, it may seem reasonable to adopt a strategy that denies illegal aliens the employment that draws them to this country, but that would be true only if the loss of a job were accompanied by removal from the country -- the standard INS operation, mandated by law, that has been discarded from the new enforcement strategy.
An illegal alien who has lost employment as a result of being identified to the employer by the INS is left free to take his fraudulent documentation -- that the alien used to get the job -- to another employer and continue his illegal residence in the United States.
The alien does not even have to worry about being identified as a repeat border violator, because he is not removed from the country.
What clearer message could be sent to would-be illegal immigrants in the alien's home country? "If you can get past the Border Patrol, you have got it made, because the United States is not serious about enforcing its laws against illegal aliens."
Cynicism Reigns in INS Headquarters - For INS administrators the only misgivings with the Phoenix plan appears to be that it is likely to result in a reduced number of apprehensions and removals of illegal aliens.
This might be inconvenient to the INS managers if lawmakers and the public concluded from that fact -- correctly of course -- that the INS was falling down on the job in enforcing the nation's immigration laws.
To solve this dilemma, Executive Associate Commissioner for Policy and Planning, Robert Bach crafted a new Interior Enforcement Strategy that was released in January of this year.
Noted Bach, "Under this Strategy ... the success of INS enforcement activities in local communities will likely lead to a downturn in apprehensions."
Therefore, new indicators of success, other than apprehensions and removals, needed to be invented.
Bach's solution was this: "Accordingly, measures such as forcing alien criminal activity to change location...will be used to determine the effectiveness of this strategy."
Other tests of success included "customer satisfaction and reduction in local crime rates."
The latter provision -- local crime rates -- tacitly indicates an INS assumption that crime rates escalate with the number of illegal aliens in a community, and that by causing them to leave the community the crime rates may be reduced.
What this ignores, is that under the new INS strategy, the American public in general is not being protected from the incidence of illegal-alien-related crime, it is only being shifted from one community to a new unsuspecting community.
The same can be said with regard to public health.
Several contagious diseases have begun to surge in proportion to the increasing illegal alien population.
Tuberculosis is the most serious of the diseases, but other such as rubella and sexually transmitted diseases are also on the rise.
In the Midwest, health authorities are concerned because of a German measles outbreak among illegal alien workers.
Their concern is compounded by the new INS musical chairs strategy.
Because the INS is applying the Phoenix plan in meat processing plants in the area, workers with this highly-contagious disease are moving to other areas and spreading infection.
If the INS were pursuing their traditional worksite enforcement strategy with surprise raids and detaining and removing illegal aliens, the spreading of the disease would be abruptly curtailed.
The Bach strategy document appears to be confused on the concept of who is the customer whose satisfaction is sought.
Is the "service" in the INS name performed for the American public, or is it for the immigrant communities and their support groups? It is fair to conclude that the INS leadership is unclear on this concept.
THE NUMBER IS GROWING
Mr. Chairman, FAIR is convinced that enforcement of our immigration laws must be that which was expressed by Barbara Jordan to this subcommittee in 1995 on behalf of the U.S. Commission on Immigration Reform.
She said: "Credibility in immigration policy can be summed up in one sentence: Those who should get in, get in; those who should be kept out, are kept out; and those who should not be here will be required to leave."
She added: "...for the system to be credible, people actually have to be deported at the end of the process."
It is not difficult to imagine the scorn that she would heap on the new INS so-called "Interior Enforcement Strategy" if she were still among us.
WHY DOES IT MATTER?
Unfortunately, Mr. Chairman, there is a growing lobby of apologists for illegal aliens, which appears to have the tacit support of the INS political leadership.
They insist that illegal aliens enter or stay in the United States because the country benefits from their labor and secretly wants them to continue coming.
They argue that the illegal aliens do work that Americans won't do.
They say that illegal aliens are God-fearing, law-abiding, family-oriented, hard workers who pay taxes and that to send them home would be an unfair hardship and would break up families.
It certainly is true that a large number of employers, especially in seasonal crop agriculture rely heavily on illegal aliens.
Yet this fact is hardly a reason to conclude that illegal aliens have a legitimate role in our society on the basis of their "sweat equity."
It must be remembered that the growing presence of illegal aliens in agricultural labor has been developing for decades.
The large number of illegal alien workers was a major obstacle to Cesar Chavez' efforts to unionize these workers.
Over the past several years, the earnings of farmworkers have dropped in inflation-adjusted wages.
This could never have happened during a period where wages in every other sector were rising if it were not for the large presence of the illegal alien workers.
Now farmers say they need a new increasing supply of alien workers, and they have advanced various legislative proposals to accomplish that.
They argue that their workforce is dwindling because workers are leaving agriculture to go into higher paying jobs.
It does not take a great deal of analysis to come to the conclusion that the farmers have created their own dependence on an illegal workforce.
It would be difficult to sell a crop harvested with a workforce paid a decent wage while competitors are able to hire illegal alien workers for less.
What we should be asking is whether other sectors of our society, including high-technology employers, are now following the dead-end model of the seasonal crop farmers.
The high-tech employers are striving to hold down salaries through increased access to imported foreign labor rather than to let them rise to attract more Americans into that field.
In the long term, this trend has the potential of driving Americans into other more remunerative fields and creating another employment sector dependent on foreign labor because "they are jobs that Americans won't do."
The cleaning services industry and, more recently, meat processing industry offer other examples of this trend.
Employment in these sectors, that used to be unionized and well paying, now pay less because of the rapid penetration of these worksites by illegal alien workers.
The issue, Mr. Chairman, should not be whether to abandon responsibility for apprehending and removing these workers.
The issue that should be addressed is how best to do so.
A legitimate debate might address the merits and demerits of a "cold-turkey" approach as opposed to a forced gradual withdrawal of employers from the addiction to illegal, exploitable alien labor.
The advocates for the illegal aliens always fail to discuss the fiscal and social costs associated with an illegal workforce.
I have already indicated two of the costs: crime and disease.
Law enforcement personnel regularly point to a relationship between the size of an illegal alien population and a rise in crime, especially drug-related offenses.
One of the provisions of our immigration law is to protect the American public from exposure to contagious-disease carrying foreign travelers.
Illegal entry bypasses this screening mechanism and exposes the public to unnecessary risk.
Every reputable study of the costs of illegal immigration has arrived at the conclusion that the fiscal costs are in the billions of dollars every year with the greatest impact on the local level.
For example, a 1994 study by the Urban Institute of the costs in seven states of just three expense categories (incarceration, schooling and emergency medical services) found expenditures at about two billion dollars per year greater than taxes paid.
Other studies put the costs much higher.
Illegal immigration also increases the welfare population, especially children in poverty, and increases the growing income inequality in the United States.
This occurs especially because of our accommodation of illegal residents by the process of incorporating them as permanent residents through the 1986 amnesty, adjustment of status or the NACARA legislation, for example.
Several major studies, including the two-year study of the National Academy of Sciences, have documented that immigration of unskilled workers (mostly illegal aliens) has a negative impact on lower-skilled, less educated Americans.
Mr. Chairman, there is no need to debate the costs and negative effects of illegal immigration; but it is important to expose the arguments of the apologists for illegal aliens for what they are -- disinformation designed to weaken the resolve of the American people and their elected officials for defending the country's borders and for insisting that newcomers to our society enter the country legally pursuant to the provisions of immigration law that are designed to protect the interests of the American people.
CONCLUSION
Mr. Chairman, FAIR earlier was privileged to be able to set forth to this subcommittee our views on what further reforms are needed to create a truly effective interior enforcement strategy.
The measures that we have outlined include:
Deny Jobs to Illegal Aliens -- Make employer sanctions against hiring illegal aliens effective by providing employers the means to verify the identity and work eligibility of all new employees with the Social Security Administration and with the INS.
This system is working for federal, state and local governments now, and there is no reason for further delay.
In addition to deterring illegal migration to this country by decreasing the job magnet, implementation of this procedure will relieve employers of the burden of reviewing documents of new employees to determine whether they are eligible to work in the United States and place it where it belongs, i.e., on the government.
Protect the Integrity of Identity Documents -- Provide greater integrity for state-issued driver's licenses, by assisting the states to incorporate security features and collecting Social Security numbers of the applicants.
This will end the ease with which these vital documents are being undermined as a secure means of identification.
Implement IIRAIRA Section 110 -- Harness technology to the task of maintaining records on when alien visitors arrive in our country and when they leave.
Only by having that system -- that is now used for air and sea ports of entry -- extended to the nation's land borders can we have a sure way to determine the pattern of visa abuse that leads to two-fifths of our enormous and growing illegal alien population.
Besides being an invaluable means for fighting illegal immigration, it also will offer benefits in deterring terrorism.
Enable Local Law Enforcement Agency to Respond to Local Problems -- Promote the IIRAIRA §133 provision that allows local law enforcement personnel to be trained by the Justice Department in immigration law enforcement.
This will empower local jurisdictions to work cooperatively with the INS to deal with local illegal alien problems and strengthen the effectiveness of the INS in the interior enforcement;
Provide the Resources Needed to Regain Control -- Authorize the personnel and appropriate the funds necessary to provide an effective deterrent to illegal entry and visa overstays.
That means continuing to strengthen the under-manned Border Patrol -- including the neglected personnel needs on the U.S.-Canadian border; increasing the interior inspections personnel -- that has been largely ignored and diverted to border enforcement operations; and providing the detention space necessary to assure that detained illegal aliens are not be released back into the community to find a new job rather than be removed from the country.
Mr. Chairman, we increasingly hear from the career staff of the INS how frustrated they are with the crippling restrictions imposed by their political bosses.
This sense of malaise permeates the Immigration Service's public servants from Border Patrol to asylum adjudicators to investigators.
It is unfair to the American public and to these dedicated defenders of our communities to allow this erosion of immigration law enforcement to continue.
Assuring that our immigration law protects the American public is a complicated and troublesome responsibility which the majority of politicians prefer to avoid.
Yet there is no remedy to the seriously deteriorating situation without changes in the law and oversight exercised by this body.
For that reason, Mr. Chairman, we express our most sincere appreciation for your efforts to marshall support for needed reforms and offer our constant willingness to support those efforts.
I am ready to answer any questions you or any other member of the subcommittee may have at this time.
