American Embassy Islamabad Banner U.S. Department of State Seal U.S.-AFGHAN WOMEN'S COUNCIL PROMOTES FEMALE EDUCATION, EMPOWERMENT
What's New Press Releases Home Page
(Third meeting of U.S.-Afghan Women's Council held in Washington July 15)
July 25, 2003
By Stephen Kaufman Washington File Staff Writer
Washington -- The latest meeting of the U.S.-Afghan Women's Council has yielded a renewed commitment on the part of the Afghan government, the Bush administration and non-governmental organizations (NGOs) to work for the full and equal participation of women in Afghanistan's post-Taliban society.
In a briefing to NGO representatives following the third council meeting in Washington July 15, Afghan Minister for Women's Affairs Habiba Sarabi stated that the priorities for Afghan women remain education, economic empowerment and political participation.
Sarabi described the results of the council meeting as "very successful and very interesting."
Sarabi said that conditions for Afghan women have improved over the past two years, with renewed access to education and employment, and greater freedom to leave the confines of the home.
She said that many of the Afghan women delegates present at the council would have been prevented from traveling abroad in the past without being chaperoned by a husband or a close male relative
.
However, she warned, "the road that we are going is not a smooth road.
It is ... very rough and we have to pass the road very carefully and slowly."
Under Secretary of State for Global Affairs Paula Dobriansky, who co-chairs the council with Sarabi, announced that the U.S. Agency for International Development (USAID) and other donors will build six new provincial women's centers in the country, bringing the total to twenty.
The centers are designed to provide literacy classes, health care, job skills training and human rights education to women.
Dobriansky described the women's centers as "one of the best ways to reach out to the provinces and bring programs for women to locations throughout the country."
The United Nations Development Fund for Women (UNIFEM) and AOL Time Warner also have contributed funding for the centers.
The women's centers have the potential to play a "very important role" in Afghanistan's constitutional debates and 2004 elections, said Sarabi.
She said the centers were places where women "can come together and share their ideas" about political issues, as well as receive training and education about vital issues.
"We want very much to see women participating in this process," said Dobriansky, describing it as a "historic opportunity" for women to achieve equal rights in Afghanistan.
The under secretary said the women's council wants to ensure there will be security during the 2004 Loya Jirga elections not only for women who choose to run, but also for those who vote.
"We will try, in working with the Afghans, to ensure that that environment is as free-flowing in terms of participation as possible," she said.
Afifa Azim, coordinator and co-founder of the Afghan Women's Network, told a July 17 briefing at the Washington Foreign Press Center that efforts are being made to mobilize women throughout the country to voice their views in the constitutional process.
She said awareness needs to be raised among Afghan women, many of whom are illiterate, on both the constitution and the electoral process.
Teams of Afghan women are traveling the country to provide education and training, she said.
Minister Sarabi said the Afghan government has begun broadcasting information about the constitution via television and the Ministry of Women's Affairs plans to set up a "mobile video team" to visit outlying districts and villages "to give awareness on the constitution, on the literacy program, even for health education."
Another priority addressed at the council meeting was the need to promote the self-sufficiency of Afghan women through job skills training programs at the women's centers, and microfinance programs.
Through loans and donations to individual women entrepreneurs and farmers, many of whom are widows, Dobriansky said microfinance programs are "a most effective mechanism to empower some of the world's neediest women."
Pointing to the example of a USAID program to help women farmers, Dobriansky said that such targeted programs should be seen as being beneficial not only to the individual women, but also to the larger society through increased food production and general economic growth.
"The participation of women is key to developing an economically productive society," she said.
Afghan Foreign Minister Abdullah Abdullah, who spoke at the NGO briefing, praised the work of the council as "as another sign of the commitment by the government as well as the people of the United States to help Afghanistan in building their future and providing better opportunities for its citizens as well as better opportunity for the whole region."
He told the NGO representatives that their work in his country was "of historical impact" that gave hope to the Afghan people.
Dobriansky praised the NGO community for its "essential work," which began even before U.S. and coalition forces drove the Taliban regime from power.
"We felt it was essential to have an ongoing dialogue with you and to ensure that there are these ties and this type of synergy," she told the representatives.
"Many NGOs have come forward for resources from the United States government and we want to provide those resources."
The admiration appeared to be mutual, as Steve Moseley, President and CEO of the Academy for Educational Development commended the "very fruitful, warm and cordial relationship" between the NGO community and both the U.S. and Afghan governments.
Dobriansky said the genesis of the women's council itself came about because of "an outpouring of support by private American citizens."
"There are a lot of Americans, whether they have ties or they don't even have ties, they wanted to contribute, to help Afghan women, Afghan children, in particular and they came forward with some ideas, with some creativity."
However, Dobriansky stressed that the three-way cooperation between the two governments and the NGO community needed to be guided by priorities set by Afghans themselves.
"In this regard, it is a give and take, it is a dialogue," she said.
_________________________________________________________________
The U.S. Embassy homepage is maintained by the Office of the Public Affairs in Islamabad.
Links to other, non-U.S. Government Internet sites should not be construed as an endorsement of the views therein.
Blue Bar Last Updated: July 25, 2003
Sorry, you need a JavaScript capable browser to get the best from this page
