Newsroom Bob's Home Page Bob's Bio E-Mail Bob Constituent Services Current Issues Successes High Technology Interesting Links CONGRESSMAN BOB GOODLATTE'S WEEKLY REPORT: JANUARY 18, 2002 Putting a Stop to Spam The Internet has transformed the way we work, learn, shop, and communicate.
Corresponding through e-mail has become a quick, easy, and inexpensive way to keep in touch with friends and family whether they live across the street or across the country.
But just as our postal boxes sometimes contain unwelcome mail, our e-mail in-boxes can also collect unsolicited messages, also known as spam.
Often spam contains particularly offensive, and even pornographic, material.
Unwanted commercial e-mail, such as advertisements or solicitations, is the junk mail of the information age.
When unwanted mail is hand delivered to your home or post office box, you can ask the postmaster not to deliver it.
When telemarketers call you at home you may ask to be taken off their solicitation list.
But there is little recourse for citizens whose e-mail in-boxes are flooded with spam.
Currently, Internet Service Providers (ISPs) like AOL are developing programs that require the individual sending the unsolicited message to include a valid e-mail address, which can then be replied to in order to request that no further transmissions be sent.
Under these programs, once the individual sending the original e-mail receives a request to remove an address from their distribution list, they are required to do so.
However, offending spammers get around this requirement by using the e-mail address of an unsuspecting user to spam others.
To address this problem, I introduced the Anti-Spamming Act.
This legislation will give law enforcement the tools they need to prosecute individuals who send unsolicited e-mails that clog up consumers in-boxes.
The Anti-Spamming Act makes it a criminal offense to fraudulently use another individual's e-mail address to send spam.
An individual who does not comply with the law may be subject to a fine of up to $100,000 or one year in jail.
Consumers are not the only ones affected by spam.
In recent instances, unsolicited e-mail transmissions have paralyzed small Internet Service Providers by flooding their servers with unwanted e-mail.
This has the potential to do great damage to small ISP companies and the communities they serve.
When spam causes an ISPs server to crash, it requires extra manpower and cost to repair.
It hurts all the people and businesses whose activities are disrupted during the crash.
Costs must either be absorbed by the small business owners or by the consumers that they serve, but spam senders are not held accountable for their irresponsible transmissions.
Unsolicited e-mail messages burden consumers by slowing down their e-mail connections, and cause big problems for the small business owner who is trying to compete with larger companies.
