Opening Remarks by Congressman Darrell Issa Markup of H. J. Res. 114
October 2, 2002
Thank you Mr. Chairman.
Today, as a Committee, a Congress, and a country, we face one of the most difficult dilemmas in the human experience.
We are considering the question of war.
The debate has returned us to the fundamental questions all leaders need to face: when is it time to fight? Is it ever time to fight? And if we fight, how should we do it? Mr. Chairman, these questions need to be addressed, and I appreciate the opportunity we have today to debate this issue.
There are strategic reasons to remove Saddam Hussein.
Many critics of the President's position have asked if we have any "proof" of an "imminent threat" from Saddam.
Mr. Chairman, we have over 20 years of proof.
Since the early 1980's, Saddam has aggressively attempted to develop weapons of mass destruction, from nerve gas, to weaponized anthrax, to nuclear weapons.
He has used some of these weapons many times already, against Iranian civilians and soldiers in his decade-long bloodbath with Iran, and against Kurdish villages in 1988.
Many Kurds believe he attacked them out of retribution, but also as an experiment for a much larger attack against his true enemy, the United States.
The United Nations weapons inspectors did their best to track down Saddam's "special weapons," as he calls them, but they were unable to locate the most dangerous material.
According to Gary Milhollin, the Director of the Wisconsin Project on Nuclear Arms Control, inspectors could not find an estimated four tons of VX nerve gas; 600 tons of ingredients for VX; 3,000 tons of other chemical agents; and at least 550 artillery shells filled with mustard gas.
Inspectors were also not able to dismantle Saddam's nuclear weapons, which were being aggressively developed throughout the seven years of inspections.
When these weapons are combined with Saddam's support for terrorism, the result will be disaster, for us and for our allies.
We know that Saddam is at least harboring members of al-Qaeda in his country, if not supporting them altogether.
He may not have participated in the planning for the September 11 attacks, but he has gone out of his way to prop up anti-American terrorist regimes that will, if left alone, strike us again.
Saddam may not be planning to use weapons of mass destruction against us next week, but there is no doubt that he intends to attack us and our allies until we either acquiesce to his aggression, or defeat him.
Mr. Chairman, there are also moral reasons for removing Saddam.
Since he seized power in 1979 Saddam has built up one of the most brutal, merciless dictatorships in the history of the world.
He has embarked on a massive ethnic cleansing campaign against the Kurds, who he thought were not loyal enough to him in his war against Iran.
Aside from his chemical weapons attacks in 1988, Saddam has also attacked Kurds by forcing them into concentration camps and literally starving them to death.
He has recently engaged in cultural genocide against the Kurds.
Saddam's secret police have been forcing Iraqi Kurds to "correct" their identity documents by claiming that their birth records are false, and that they have always been Arab.
If they refuse, they are forced off their property to make room for Arab families.
Saddam is trying to erase the Kurdish past, to "cleanse" Iraq of this ethnic group he hates so bitterly.
A prominent Iraqi expert, Peter Galbraith, describes Saddam's persecution of the Kurds as "a policy of genocide, a crime of intent, destroying a group whole or in part."
Mr. Chairman, this regime is an Orwellian nightmare.
It cannot and will not be tolerated in a civilized world.
The rap sheet on Saddam is long and detailed.
If the international community applied a three strikes law to the world's tyrants, Saddam Hussein would have struck out long ago.
The simple fact is, there are plenty of reasons to go to war with Iraq, and very few reasons not to.
The going will be tough, particularly after Saddam is gone.
But the difficulty of the situation does not necessitate a head-in-the-sand approach to this problem.
Saddam will continue to defy any sort of inspections program as long as he is in power.
We have a vested interest in seeing the Iraqi people live prosperous lives in a fair and just democracy.
It is time to make that happen.
I urge my colleagues to support this resolution today and I yield back the balance of my time.
