[newlooksp.gif] Federal Transit Administration's International Mass Transportation Program Willard Inter-Continental Hotel Washington, DC September 15, 1999 Thank you, Rita, and good afternoon everyone.
This is not only an impressive and important agenda today, but an impressive audience.
As a former worker in the transit ranks, I am happy to see this kind of turnout and interest in FTA's international role -- a real sign of maturity in this agency and this industry.
While more transit is not the only answer to our transportation needs, it has become one vital solution to congestion both here in the U.S. and abroad.
We in the Department of Transportation are proud to partner with the Department of Commerce and other agencies to encourage the development of efficient and safe transit systems for cities and communities worldwide -- a key global economic and international issue.
Interagency, intermodal and public/private cooperation and collaboration that we expect to develop is also essential if we are to find success in the mass transit marketplace both domestically and internationally.
And we in DOT want to see such success.
Again, I think we have made an excellent start with the inauguration of our new International Mass Transportation Program (IMTP) and with this MOU we have just signed with the Department of Commerce.
As all of us know, the words "Intermodal" and Intermodalism are a very important for DOT and for transportation systems worldwide.
We believe that transportation planning should consider all modes of transportation and how they interconnect to move people and goods.
For that reason, Secretary Slater instituted ONE DOT several years ago, which is now our way of doing business.
All agencies under the DOT umbrella -- the FAA, FTA, FRA and FHWA -- communicate and work together so that our transportation system continues to be safe, efficient and world class.
The Benefits of International Cooperation
Secretary Slater and I believe it is vitally important for the Department -- all of our modal administrations included -- to be involved internationally.
We live in an age of global communication and international commerce.
Many large companies are multinational, and international trade drives our national and international economies.
The Department has long been involved in international efforts.
For example, the FAA is working closely with China to modernize its aviation infrastructure.
In Chile, the FAA is helping with that country's transition to satellite-based navigation and, in Africa, is helping several nations to identify aviation safety, security, and air traffic management needs.
Since President Clinton assumed office in 1993, the United States has achieved 70 new aviation agreements.
Each and every one of these agreements removes preexisting limitations on airline activity in the markets they cover or we would not have signed them.
Almost half of the agreements -- 33 of the 70 -- create completely open skies.
We now have 14 open-skies agreements with countries in Europe alone, providing the aviation industry many more market-oriented environments.
More open skies agreements mean that U.S. airlines can enter new markets and can improve and expand existing services.
Service is up, fares are down, and we see growth in the market continuing.
In rail transportation, we have worked closely with many nations, particularly European countries, on research, management and technical issues.
In June 1999, for example, at the request of Poland's Deputy Prime Minister Lescek Balcerowicz, the Federal Railroad Administration (FRA) provided the Minister in Warsaw with a detailed analysis of a Polish-prepared restructuring plan for its national railway (PKP).
A number of key recommendations were made by the FRA team and several are already being implemented.
In August 1998, at the request of the Brazilian Ministry of Transport, the Federal Railroad Administration (FRA) provided on-site advice and recommendations for the creation of an FRA-type rail safety function in Brazil.
Because we have been doing transit for almost as long as some of the oldest European cities, we have a lot to offer countries seeking to develop or upgrade their transit systems.
Since 1960, we have been known for our information technologies as well as our project management and technical expertise in transport systems development.
International partnerships and joint ventures are a being done in the power, auto and rail industries, so why not transit? These partnerships are also beneficial because they usually bring project costs down for all involved and they help to encourage commercialization of new technologies.
While our transit industry does not have the level of market share we enjoy in aviation, rail or other transportation products and services, we are moving in an upward direction.
Cooperative efforts like the one we will pursue with the Department of Commerce and other agencies, the World Bank and other international institutions will help us to meet our goal of a more globally competitive mass transit industry.
In addition to the economic gains from increased trade, there is also an information-sharing benefit of going global in mass transit.
In February of 1999, for example, a U.S. technology company, Spear Technologies, signed a multi-million dollar contract to provide transit maintenance software for the Romanian State Railway.
The software will be used to maintain a fleet of 4,400 locomotives and more than 100,000 passenger coaches and freight wagons.
Company executives said they believe the experience they have in vehicle maintenance and understanding business and transit industry best practices are factors that are leading to success of the Romanian rail system.
There is also a lot we can learn from our overseas partners and from international projects and cooperation that we are or could potentially be involved in.
In my experience with transportation, I know that other countries could show us how to do some things better.
DOT's International Mass Transportation Program
Congress gave DOT new authority to increase our international work in the area of transit under the Transportation Equity Act for the 21^st Century, signed into law a year ago last June.
As a result, you will see us getting involved in more international activities in mass transit, an effort which I think will benefit both the U.S. and the international community.
The IMTP helps further DOT's strategic goal of advancing U.S. economic growth and global competitiveness.
The program has four main areas of activity, and I'd like to decribe them briefly for you.
The first area is Intergovernmental Agreements.
Both the FTA and the DOT are parties to several intergovernmental agreements on science and technology exchange, but the new authority allows us to expand the number and scope of our mass transit international activities.
The IMTP will foster cooperation with other federal, state and local agencies as well as transportation industry groups, such as the American Public Transit Association and the Intelligent Transportation Society of America, which you heard from earlier in the program.
The second area is Technology and Information Exchange.
The rapid growth and commercialization of communications technologies promises to have a dramatic effect on the way transit services are operated and delivered.
This revolutionary change can be seen in the area of ITS applications, where Smart Cards are replacing traditional farecard, making systems more efficient and increasing ridership.
The IMTP's goal is to inform the transit industry about new technologies by improving access to international transportation databases and by creating a 2-way flow of information between the U.S. and other nations.
The third area of effort will be in human capacity building.
The program has two major goals: * To prepare the U.S. transit industry for global challenges by continuing its efforts to familiarize U.S. transit management officials with best practices from abroad through tours conducted by the Transit Cooperative Research Program and professional exchanges.
* To provide training for international public sector entities, including classroom instruction and hands-on experience.
This training is intended to showcase U.S. best practices and innovative transit technology.
We already have a few projects underway.
For example, we have been asked by the Inter-American Development Bank to develop a training module for transit operators and planners in Brazil, Mexico, and Central America.
The fourth area of work will be in the area of U.S.
Industry Trade Support, which is where the Department of Commerce, the Export-Import Bank and other federal partners will participate or lead various efforts.
The emphasis will be on assistance to small and medium-sized firms interested in doing business overseas.
The program will organize business workshops, provide training on international standards and regulations, and, as Gordon mentioned, produce resource guides on international markets in cooperation with Commerce and other agencies.
Though the program is in its infancy, we have already had some successes with our international transit partnerships.
We cooperated with the Commerce Department and Canada to resolve a tariff issue so that a bus manufacturer could export vehicles to Canada.
DOC specialists in Denver and Toronto helped the company develop a marketing plan.
As a result of this cooperation, information is available to all U.S. companies interested in selling buses and equipment in Ontario, Canada.
As a result of this and other efforts we have planned, we will be stronger players in the international transit marketplace.
Conclusion
I know that Administrator Linton and his staff are excited about the prospects for the International Mass Transportation Program, and we look forward to working with many of you in this room in the coming months and years to make it an effective program.
We envision our efforts as a supplement to those of the Departments of Commerce and State and industry groups.
Through partnerships, we can increase market share for American transit products and service and, at the same time, exchange valuable information and best practices with our overseas counterparts.
Thank you, and I'll turn the podium back to Administrator (Gordon) Linton.
### __________________________________________________________________
Briefing Room
