25th Anniversary of the Surface Mining Law Contents Introduction The Surface Mining Law Regulatory Program Abandoned Mine Land Reclamation Program Implementation Case Studies Solar Soruces, Indiana Bellaire Corporation, North Dakota Trapper Mining, Colorado Sunshine Reclamation Project, Indiana 25 Years at a Glance: 1977-2002 Glossary References, endnotes, and credits 2 6 8 10 14 20 26 32 38 40 43 About the 25th Anniversary On August 3, 1977, the Surface Mining Law1, which provides authoirty for regulating coal mining and reclamtion on public and private lands and reclaiming mines abandoned before that date, was signed by the President.
Since that time there have been many advances in mining and reclamtion techniques and on-the-ground coal mining reclamation accomplishments have been monumental.
In 1967, the Interior Department published a special report, Surface Mining and Our Environment2, describing the environmetal impacts of mineral production in the United States by surface mining methods.
In 1977, the Interior Department began the task of regulating surface coal mining reclamation following enactment of national legislation that year.
In 19873, 19924, and 19975acknowledging that much remained to be done, the Interior Department's Office of Surface Mining presented special reports describing how environmental protection and land reclamtion have been built into the process of coal mining in the the United States, as required by the Law.
Today, 25 years after Congress passed the Surface Mining Law, successful land reclamtion and environmental proteciton have become routine and national coal production is at record breaking levels.
During this 25-year period, more than 5.3 million acres of land was permitted and more than 23 billion tons of coal mined.
This Law has literally changed the face of the earth in America and coal remains a vital part of out nation's energy future.
Coal mine operators now reclaim land and protect the natural resources as they mine.
And, when mining and reclamation are completed the land closely resembles the landscape before mining.
Today, mining and reclamtion are a temporary use of the land and when properly done, productive long-term land uses are all that remains when mining is completed.
Surface Coal Mining Reclamation: 25 years of Progress, 1977-2002 A report on the protection and restoration of the Nation's land and water resources under the Surface Mining Law
United States Department of the Interior Office of Surface Mining Washington, D.C. 20240 www.osmre.gov January 14, 2003 1
Surface mining of coal involves removing overlying soil and rock in order to expose the coal, which typically is 30-90 feet underg round.
Compared to underg round coal mining, surface mining generally costs less, is safer for miners, and usually results in more complete recovery of the coal.
However, it also results in much more extensive, though temporar y, disturbance of the land, which can cause serious environmental problems unless controls are thoroughly followed and the mined land is carefully reclaimed.
The earliest commercial U.S. coal production began in the 1740's at the Richmond, Virginia coalfield.
Beginning in 1807, mining became important enough for the federal government to begin keeping statistics on annual production.
During those early years of coal mining, reclamation of mine sites was not required by law; however, in the 1930's, as surface mining became more widespread, the idea of mandator y environmental protection and reclamation star ted to grow.
In 1939, West Virginia enacted the first law to regulate the coal mining industr y. Similar laws were enacted by Indiana in 1941, Illinois in 1943, and Pennsylvania in 1945.
During that period, coal production accelerated g reatly and the surface mining of coal became much more prevalent.
During World War II, the demand for coal took priority over environmental concerns, with little consideration for reclaiming the land after mining.
Mining pits were not backfilled.
Dangerous highwalls were left exposed.
Trees and other vegetation were buried by waste material that was simply dumped down the slopes below mines.
Topsoil was buried or allowed to wash away.
Landslides for med on unstable hillsides.
Slopes eroded rapidly because of the lack of veg etation.
Polluted water collected in mine pits.
Streams became clog ged with sediment.
Streams and rivers were frequently polluted by acid mine drainage.
This vivid image of surface coal mining remains indelible in the minds of many Americans, who remain unfamiliar with modern surface coal mining methods and the changes brought about by the Surface Mining Law.
Introduction 2
The continuing lack of unifor mity among the state surface mining prog rams and the increase in unreclaimed land and associated pollution of water and other resources caused a growing demand for nationwide regulation of surface coal mining.
After many years of debate, Cong ress passed the Surface Mining Law, which was signed into law August 3, 1977.
The Law established a coordinated effort between the states and the federal g overnment to prevent the problems that had characterized surface and underg round coal mining in the past.
It also required a balance between the Nation's call for environmental quality and its need for energ y resources.
Two major prog rams were created by the Surface Mining Law: ! A regulator y prog ram that established standards and procedures for approving per mits and inspecting active coal mining and reclamation operations both surface and underg round; and ! A reclamation prog ram for abandoned mine lands, funded by fees that operators pay on each ton of coal mined, to reclaim land and water resources adversely affected by pre-1977 coal mining.
In 1990 Cong ress expanded the law to include reclamation of mines abandoned after passage in 1977.
The Office of Surface Mining was created by the Surface Mining Law as a new federal agency within the Department of the Interior.
The Office of Surface Mining was charged with the responsibility for preparing the regulations and for assisting the states financially and technically to car r y out on-the-ground regulator y activities.
Today, the Office of Surface Mining strives to maintain consistency among state prog rams and ensure compliance with the law and regulations through oversight of state prog rams.
The Surface Mining Law established a cooperative program between the states and the federal government to prevent the abuses of coal mining that had prevailed in many areas.
Prior to the Law, coal mining often left a barren, unreclaimed landscape such as this view in eastern Tennessee.
Although all active coal mines are now required to be reclaimed, many people incorrectly envision today's surface coal mining still looking this way.
During the 1950's and 60's, coal production continued to increase and more coal producing states instituted regulator y prog rams.
Many required per mits for mining.
Some included inspections.
A few made operators post perfor mance bonds to guarantee reclamation when mining was completed.
However, due to the variations in those individual prog rams, it cost less to produce coal in states with less stringent reclamation requirements, giving operators in those states an economic advantag e, generally at the expense of environmental quality.
With the 1970's came a surge in the demand for coal resulting from the nations need for increasing electric power generation, the uncertain supply, and increased cost of imported petroleum-based fuels.
The resulting increased coal production prompted a series of state laws, aimed at controlling the environmental effects of surface mining.
During this period Nor th Dakota, Wyoming, Colorado, and Montana passed laws to regulate mining and reclamation.
3
Reclamation of this 200-acre steep-slope contour mine in eastern Kentucky exemplifies the intent of the Surface Mining Law.
With proper planning and effective site management, both economical mining and successful reclamation can be achieved.
This view, five years after mining was completed and the site reclaimed, shows how natural plant succession has resulted in native trees and shrubs becoming established and reforestation quickly progressing.
4
Even after years of Cong ressional debate, the Surface Mining Law was considered unworkable by many people.
Further, some feared that the Law would be an economic disaster for the coal industr y because of the increased operational costs of environmental safeguards and of reclaiming surface mined lands.
Those fears, which actually delayed final approval of surface mining legislation until 1977, proved to be mistaken.
Instead, the coal industr y has met the challenge, using ingenuity and modern technolog y to operate successfully and responsibly within the law.
The result is clear: surface coal mining has tr uly become just a temporar y use of the land.
Reclamation begins even before mining ends in an area, so that without delay the land is either returned to its original use or is improved for new uses that benefit both landowners and communities.
So successful is the process in most instances that there is literally nothing to see when the process is complete, and the reclaimed land blends back into its sur roundings.
Successful implementation of the Surface Mining Law by state and federal agencies hasn't come easily.
The technical problems of reclaiming surface mined land are complex, and the law enacted to protect the environment during mining covers ever y aspect of coal mine operations.
Not every operator has complied.
During the past 25 years, and especially during the early part of that period, the problems created by a small number of irresponsible mining operators created virtually all the public attention, while there was comparatively little recognition for the majority of operators who achieved excellent reclamation and complied with the law.
The Office of Surface Mining and the corresponding state regulator y and Abandoned Mine Land Reclamation prog rams have for med an effective relationship that is fundamental to the implementation of the Surface Mining Law.
Early in the evolution of the prog ram the Office of Surface Mining focused its oversight activities on the states procedural compliance with processes and procedures.
Currently the evaluation focuses more on end results and on-the-g round success of meeting the Surface Mining Law's environmental protection and public participation g oals.
This report, which updates the Office of Surface Mining's 20th Anniversary prog ress report5, deals with the accomplishments of the regulator y and abandoned mine land reclamation prog rams after 25 years of mining and reclamation under the law.
Abundantly illustrated, this report presents a summar y of the Surface Mining Law requirements, Prog ram Implementation highlights, and short case studies showing active mining operations that have achieved or surpassed what the architects of the Surface Mining Law envisioned and a successful abandoned mine land reclamation project that is typical of the thousands of similar projects that have been completed throughout the countr y.
It is a view showing on-theg round conditions at the 25th anniversar y of the Surface Mining Law.
Statistical infor mation for implementation of the Surface Mining Law are provided in the Office of Surface Mining's Annual Reports which are all available in electronic for mat on CD-ROM and the Office of Surface Mining's web site (www.osmre.g ov).
This infor mation includes state and national statistics for: coal production, number of mines, enforcement action ­ inspections and citations issued, acreage per mitted, acreage of reclamation bonds released, funding and grants, and Abandoned Mine Land reclamation.
This report is available in both printed and electronic for mat (see www.osmre.g ov/25thanniversar yreport.htm for the electronic copy).
Additional infor mation or printed copies of this report may be requested electronically at the web site or by calling or writing to: Office of Surface Mining 1951 Constitution Ave., N .W. Washington, D.C. 20240 (202) 208-2719 getinfo@osmre.g ov Important ter ms commonly used to describe mining and reclamation conditions or techniques appear in boldface type in the text the first time they are used and are explained in the glossar y on page 40.
5
Regulatory Program The Surface Mining Law contains five principal regulator y provisions that for m the basis for protecting people and the environment during coal mining and ensuring prompt land restoration afterward.
These are car ried out by the 24 primacy states and the Office of Surface Mining in federal prog ram states and on Indian lands.
Performance Standards Perfor mance standards are intended to ensure that all surface coal mining is conducted in a way that protects the environment and the public and ensures that the mined land is restored to productive use following mining.
The standards provide a basic level of compliance during coal mining and reclamation.
Permits Before developing a surface or underg round coal mine, an operator must have a per mit issued under the Law.
An application for a per mit to conduct a coal mining operation is a detailed document that consists of text and numeric data describing the proposed mining and reclamation.
Infor mation must be fur nished on premining environmental conditions, existing land use, proposed mining and reclamation, how the perfor mance standards will be met, and the postmining land use.
This provides the regulator y authority with the infor mation necessar y to deter mine that the operation can be conducted in accordance with the regulations.
Performance Bonds Before a per mit can be granted, an operator must post a perfor mance bond sufficient to cover the cost of reclaiming the site in the event the operator does not complete reclamation.
The bond is not fully released until all perfor mance standards have been met and full reclamation of the site (including per manent reveg etation) has been deter mined to be successful ­ after five years in the East and Midwest, and after 10 years in the arid West.
However, the bond can be partially released as various phases of reclamation (backfilling, reg rading, revegetation) are successfully completed.
The Surface Mining Law 6
Inspection and Enforcement If a violation of the Surface Mining Law or of a state surface mining and reclamation law is obser ved, an inspector issues a notice of violation to the operator.
The violation must be corrected within a specific time, and the operator may also have to pay a fine based on the severity of the violation.
If the violation is not corrected, a cessation order is issued to stop active coal mining immediately until the infraction is corrected, and the operator must pay a fine.
If a violation is especially serious (for example, creates an imminent danger to public health or safety or causes significant damage to land, air, or water resources) the inspector immediately issues a cessation order.
An operator must cor rect all violations in order to continue work or obtain per mits for new mines.
Lands Unsuitable For Mining Congress recognized that certain coal deposits cannot be mined without per manent damag e to unique cultural or natural resources.
As a result, the Surface Mining Law protects those resources in two ways: ! It prohibits mining within the boundaries of national parks, forests, wildlife refuges, trails, wild and scenic rivers, wilder ness and recreation areas; in areas which will adversely affect sites listed on the National Register of Historic Places; and within a restricted distance of occupied dwellings, public roads, buildings, parks, schools, churches, and cemeteries; and ! Provides a process that allows anyone whose interests may be adversely affected by proposed mining to petition to have specific lands designated unsuitable for surface coal mining.
Mining requires the use of explosives to break up rock layers in the overburden and sometimes the coal itself.
To prevent damage to nearby dwellings and other structures, blasting must be carefully planned and carried out by qualified blasters.
Before the Surface Mining Law, blasting could be performed by untrained personnel and sometimes damaged nearby dwellings.
Now blasters must be state-certified.
A pre-blasting survey of dwellings within a half-mile of the mine is performed to identify any conditions that may require special procedures.
Signs and audible warnings are provided before blasting, and access within the blasting area by unauthorized persons is restricted.
This Office of Surface Mining inspector is checking the blasters certification during a mine inspection of a Tennessee surface mine.
7
Abandoned Mine Land Reclamation Program The Abandoned Mine Land Prog ram provides for the restoration of eligible lands mined and abandoned or left inadequately restored before passage of the Surface Mining law.
Fees of 35 cents per ton for surface mined coal, 15 cents per ton for coal mined underg round, and 10 cents per ton of lignite mined are collected on all active coal mining operations.
The fees are deposited in the U.S. Treasur y's interest-bearing Abandoned Mine Reclamation Fund, which is used to pay reclamation costs of abandoned mine land projects.
Expenditures from the fund are controlled through the regular congressional budgetary and appropriations process.
The Surface Mining Law specifics that 50 percent of the reclamation fees collected in each state with an approved reclamation prog ram, and from Indian lands where the tribe has an approved reclamation prog ram, are to be allocated to that state or tribe for use in its reclamation prog ram.
The remaining 50 percent is used by the Office of Surface Mining to fund emergency projects and highpriority projects in states without approved Abandoned Mine Land prog rams; to fund the Small Operator Assistance Prog ram6 ; to fund additional reclamation of abandoned mine problems directly through state reclamation prog rams; and to pay collection, audit, and administration costs.
In some states, par ticularly in the West, problems stemming from abandoned non-coal mines are more severe than those caused by coal mines.
The Office of Surface Mining may approve the expenditure of Abandoned Mine Land funds to abate hazards on those lands where the states certify that threats to public health and safety exist from non-coal sources and that all abandoned coal sites have been addressed.
Emergency Projects Emergency projects are those involving abandoned coal mine lands that present an immediate dang er to the public health, safety, or general welfare.
Typically, emergencies include landslides near homes and across roads, subsidence occurring under houses and public 8
Reclamation at this West Virginia Abandoned Mine Land site eliminated 6,000 linear feet of highwalls and sealed four mine openings.
To prevent future damage, an under-drain was placed along the length of the highwall to collect drainage from auger mining.
Since no topsoil was available, the spoil was direct-seeded with a special seed mix.
Today this landscape bears little resemblance to its appearance before the abandoned highwalls and spoil were reclaimed.
buildings, mine and coal waste fires, and open shafts discovered near populated areas.
Because public health, safety, and property can be seriously threatened by abandoned mine emergencies, the capability for rapid response is critical.
Reported emergencies are usually investig ated within 24 hours and abated in less than a month.
Emergencies are addressed through the Office of Surface Mining's three Coordinating centers (in Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania; Alton, Illinois; and Denver, Colorado) and by states which have established their own emergency reclamation prog rams (Alabama, Alaska, Arkansas, Illinois, Indiana, Kansas, Missouri, Montana, North Dakota, Ohio, Oklahoma, Virginia, West Virginia) During the 25 years under the Surface Mining Law more than 6,500 emergency projects have been completed.
High-Priority Projects The Law sets out six priorities of eligibility for reclamation funding.
The highest--priority projects protect public health, safety, general welfare, and property from the potential danger (as opposed to imminent danger, which categorizes them as emerg ency projects) and from the adverse effects of abandoned coal mining problems.
The Law requires that these priorities be reflected when selecting the order of reclamation projects.
Subsidence Insurance Program The Surface Mining Law authorizes states and tribes with approved reclamation prog rams to use Abandoned Mine Land funds to establish self-sustaining, individually administered prog rams to insure private property against damage caused by land subsidence resulting from abandoned underg round coal mines.
Such prog rams are in operation in Colorado, Indiana, Kentucky, Ohio, West Virginia, and Wyoming.
Clean Streams Program In 1995, the Clean Streams Prog ram7 beg an as a partnership to clean up acid mine drainage problems using private and governmental resources.
To date 76 projects have been completed and a g rowing number of citizen g roups are becoming involved with this unique stream restoration prog ram.
The Surface Mining Law requires the Office of Surface Mining to maintain an inventory of eligible abandoned coal mine lands that meet the public health, safety and general welfare criteria used to prioritize problems.
State and Indian Abandoned Mine Land Programs identify the sites, collect data, and enter it electronically into the inventory system.
The inventory currently contains 17,231 abandoned mine land problem areas.
At this abandoned Colorado mine site (above) a state reclamation specialist is collecting information that includes the number of open portals and their proximity to a nearby road.
This information is used when setting priorities for projects that will be reclaimed using the annual Abandoned Mine Land grant provided to the state.
Abandoned mine openings such as this adit in Kentucky (right) are extremely dangerous.
Partially caved in at the entrance, this example is typical of abandoned mine openings found throughout the country in areas where underground coal mining has taken place.
9
A primar y objective of the Surface Mining Law is to establish unifor m national regulator y standards for protecting the environment during mining and for reclaiming land after it is disturbed by cur rent and future coal mining.
In recognition of the wide range of climatic and geologic conditions in coal-producing areas, Congress provided that, with Interior Department approval, individual states could establish their own prog rams for regulating surface and underg round coal mining and reclamation on private land.
The standards for state prog rams must be at least as effective as the federal standards.
Initial and Permanent Regulatory Programs Congress recognized the importance of establishing regulations to implement the Law as quickly as possible, while recognizing that the preparation of such complex regulations would be a lengthy process following enactment.
Consequently, a two-phase schedule was established.
An abbreviated initial prog ram was put in place immediately, followed by a more extensive and detailed per manent regulator y prog ram The initial prog ram regulations were published in December 1977, and mine per mits issued by states after Febr uar y 1978 were required to confor m with those regulations.
Regulator y provisions contained in the initial prog ram included 12 basic perfor mance standards, continuation of existing state per mitting, bonding, and enforcement processes (although if those features did not already exist, they did not have to be added), a federal inspection frequency of once ever y six months, joint state and federal inspection and enforcement in states that had existing prog rams, and the prohibition of mining in the specific areas listed for special protection in the Surface Mining Law.
Per manent prog ram regulations were published in March 1979, following extensive review and comment from the public, including the coal industr y and environmental groups.
The regulator y provisions in the per manent prog ram expanded those in the interim prog ram by including the implementation of all perfor mance standards contained in Surface Mining Law, a new per mitting process, a requirement for perfor mance bonds, an increased inspection frequency (one per month), a new enforcement process, and a process for designating lands unsuitable for surface mining.
The regulations for the per manent prog ram have been revised several times since 1979; more revisions can be made as needed or when new mining and reclamation techniques are developed.
Such changes were anticipated by Congress; in fact, a provision in the Law for experimental practices encourages advances in mining and reclamation techniques, and people can petition the Office of Surface Mining to consider additional regulations they think are needed.
Program Implementation 10
! Establish a process for the effective implementation, maintenance, and enforcement of a per mit system for all coal mining operations.
Once a state's prog ram is approved by the Secretary of the Interior, the state has primacy ­ that is, the state becomes the regulator y authority for surface and underg round mining of coal on private (non-federal and non-Indian) lands within its borders.
From Februar y 1980 to March 1983, 25 states passed legislation and developed regulations consistent with the federal requirement and thus attained primacy.
The expenses primacy states incur in operating their approved regulator y prog rams are shared by the Office of Surface Mining on a 50-50 basis.
Federal Regulatory Programs The Surface Mining Law encourag es state authority over mining and reclamation.
However, if a state chooses not to develop its own prog ram, the Office of Surface Mining is required to regulate all surface and underg round coal mining and reclamation operations within that state.
The Office of Surface Mining is also required to regulate all such operations if the state does not implement, enforce, or maintain its prog ram adequately.
Eleven states with coal reser ves elected not to establish their own regulator y prog rams.
Of these, only Washington has active coal mining.
Tennessee repealed its regulator y prog ram in 1984, and there are cur rently 12 states (Arizona, California, Georgia, Idaho, Massachusetts, Michig an, Nor th Carolina, Oreg on, Rhode Island, South Dakota, Tennessee, and Washington) with federal prog rams in effect.
The Office of Surface Mining also regulates coal mining on Indian lands and is assisting four Tribes (Crow, Hopi, Navajo, and Northern Cheyenne) in developing prog rams for regulating coal mining operations on Indian lands, in anticipation of future authority from Congress to approve Indian primacy prog rams.
The first permanent program mining permit under the Surface Mining Law was issued in December 1980 by the Montana regulatory authority.
The permit authorized mining of a 1,738-acre site by the Western Energy Company, Colstrip, Montana.
Seven years later, with mining completed, the site was returned to grazing land and is being used by a local rancher.
State Regulatory Programs States have the principal role in implementing the Law.
For a state to have primacy (authority to regulate coal mining operations within its borders) it must enact a prog ram that demonstrates its capability to carr y out the provisions of the Law.
Specifically, states are required to: ! Establish laws that are no less stringent than those standards contained in the Surface Mining Law and that regulate all critical aspects of surface coal mining and reclamation operations; ! Provide penalties for violations of the laws, regulations, and per mit conditions; ! Create an agency with sufficient administrative and technical personnel and adequate finding to operate the prog ram; and
11
Secretary of the Interior to regulate coal mining and reclamation on federal lands within the state.
Cur rently twelve states (Alabama, Colorado Illinois, Montana, New Mexico, North Dakota, Ohio, Oklahoma, Utah, Virginia, West Virginia, and Wyoming) have signed cooperative ag reements to regulate mining and reclamation operations on federal land.
State 
Beginning with Texas in 1980, the Office of Surface Mining has approved state reclamation prog rams so that currently all primacy states except Mississippi have approved Abandoned Mine Land reclamation prog rams.
In addition, during 1988 and 1989 the Navajo, Hopi, and Crow Tribes received approval for their Abandoned Mine Land prog rams.
Once states gain approval of their reclamation prog rams, funds are distributed through grants to correct abandoned mine problems through reclamation.
By September 30, 2002, more than $6.5 billion had been collected for the Abandoned Mine Reclamation Fund, with more than $3.2 billion distributed to states/ tribes for completion of reclamation projects.
Top soil is important in reestablishing native vegetation and crop, forage, and timber production.
Subsoil and weathered rock overburden beneath the topsoil supply additional nutrients and moisture for plant growth.
The removal and replacement of all topsoil is required by the Surface Mining Law unless it is demonstrated that selected subsoil or spoil is better suited to grow plants.
Topsoil is removed as a separate layer before mining and is either spread on nearby regraded areas or, if necessary, temporarily stockpiled.
Topsoil is spread to the appropriate depths for the approved postmining land use.
Prime farmland topsoil and subsoil may be handled with special care by using spreading techniques that minimize compaction that would hinder root penetration and water absorption by new seedlings.
At this Midwest reclaimed mine site top soil was carefully handled and the crops continue to yield above average production levels.
Federal Lands Programs The Surface Mining Law requires the Secretar y of the Interior to implement a prog ram for all surface and underg round coal mining and reclamation on federally owned land ­ a feature that is significant because the federal g overnment owns vast coal reser ves.
In the West, 60 percent of the 234 billion tons of identified coal reser ves is federally owned.
However, any state with an approved regulator y prog ram may enter into a cooperative ag reement with the 12
Federal Reclamation Program Until states had approved Abandoned Mine land reclamation prog rams, the Office of Surface Mining completed both highpriority and emergency reclamation projects.
Cur rently work done under the Federal Reclamation Prog ram is principally high-priority reclamation projects in non- primacy states and tribes, and emergency problems in states and Indian reser vations that do not operate their own emergency prog rams.
For many years the trees used for the National Christmas Pageant of Peace treelighting ceremony on The Ellipse in Washington, D.C. were grown on tree farms located on reclaimed mine land.
One year they came from this Christmas tree farm in Garrett County, Maryland that was previously a reclaimed coal mine.
Following the monthlong pageant, the balled-and-burlaped trees were transported to permanent locations at parks throughout the Washington, D.C. area.
13
In 1991, Solar Sources, Inc., a Midwest coal mining company established in 1974, received an Office of Surface Mining Award for reclamation at its Sky-Point Mine near Lynnville Indiana.
In 2002, this operation was awarded the Gold 25th Anniversar y Award ­ the highest award ever presented by the Office of Surface Mining.
The company has been widely recognized as a leader in mine reclamation.
This outstanding work had its roots during the mid-1970's in Gibson County, Indiana where they reclaimed mine land to approximate original contour standards and reestablished ag ricultural and recreational land uses before passage of the Surface Mining Law.
Solar Sources' Sky-Point Mine is most likely the finest example of restoration to the original contour and soil replacement for ag ricultural land uses achieved under the Surface Mining Law.
The mine, one of three conducted by Solar Sources in Warrick County, Indiana since 1979; produced over five million tons of coal; and considering the nine different landowners involved at Sky-Point, the intertwining network of public roads and streams, close proximity of occupied houses, and long histor y of productive ag riculture, one might describe this as ver y difficult mining and reclamation.
Historically the Sky-Point Mine had been a ver y slow moving operation prior to Solar's acquisition from Four Rivers Coal Co. in 1984.
The mine beg an in June, 1979 under an Interim Prog ram per mit and by the time of the acquisition had mined only about forty acres.
Solar Sources began mining under a contractual ag reement with Four Rivers Coal Company while neg otiating for the final transfer of the properties and application to place the mine under a Solar Sources per mit.
Solar Sources Llynville, Indiana 14
15
The first priority in reactivating the mine was to begin soil removal ahead of the mining to insure reclamation to equal or better ag ricultural conditions.
A large amount of the mine land contained soils that are exempted by the Regulator y Authority from soil recover y operations because they are either nor mally wet or steep and an alter nate material can be substituted.
However, Solar Sources has removed and replaced these difficult soils without using alternate materials.
Additionally, the soil has been replaced to prime far mland depths on all mined areas even though nearly 600 acres of the 900 per mitted acres are nonprime far mland and could have been replaced at the 12 inch replacement depth required for non-prime pasture and hay.
The close tie with the landowners using ag reements of both written and "handshake' variety have been a key to the success of this mining and reclamation.
Some of the landowners had been far ming their property for more than 50 years and expected to continue far ming after the mining and reclamation.
The company's outstanding landowner policy has been of g reat benefit in avoiding conflicts and getting the landowners involved and quickly back onto their land.
The effectiveness of Solar's outstanding landowner policies can be seen at the on-site bond release inspections where no landowners objected to any part of the proposed releases.
An important element of the mine operator/ landowner ag reements include soil preparation by the mining company and tillage and seeding by the landowner, with the landowner retaining the crop produced.
The Nora Schumacher residence (above) was adjacent to the mining and reclamation operation and other than a temporary disturbance of the land surrounding the property there were no problems.
The company worked closely with the residents near the mine site before, during, and after the mining.
This progressive "good neighbor" policy resulted in the kind of mine operator/land owner relationship that was envisioned by the architects of the Surface Mining Law.
Permanent impoundments included in the reclamation provide farmers with water for livestock, greatly add to the wildlife habitat, and increase recreational value of the land.
This large permanent impoundment at the reclaimed Sky Point Mine (right), provides a lake setting for the surrounding residential property.
16
Solar's work in preparing the land for far ming included, g rading and stabilizing drainage though the fields where inter mittent or ephemeral streams previously ran; building riprap check dams, placing fiber and plastic erosion control matting; g rading and leveling slopes to prevent low spots that would hinder far ming, and constr ucting temporar y and per manent erosion control ter races.
Soil preparation included 6 tons of ag ricultural lime per acre and 1,000 lbs./acre of fertilizer.
Medium depth tillag e was completed by a chisel plow that incorporated the lime and fertilizer into the top 14 - 16 inches of soil in a unifor m manner.
Chisel plowing nor mally brings a variety of undesirable objects to the surface, such as rocks, fence wire, stumps, as well as bricks from old house foundations.
These objects are removed by hand picking them from the fields.
Solar employs two or three temporar y workers each summer and fall who clean the reclaimed areas of debris which could har m far ming equipment.
Following at least one chisel plowing and 17
sometimes two, the reclaimed fields are fur ther cultivated by a field cultivator.
Using a g rain drill, a star ter mix of fertilizer containing nitrog en is then applied with the seed mix.
Straw dams were installed in some areas of concentrated water flow and machine mulch using a bale mulcher was applied on larger areas prone to sheet or rill erosion.
Mining the Nora Schumacher property was a challenge.
Solar had to mine and blast within 63 feet of the Schumacher residence, 20 feet of the barn, and to the right of way of the state road.
There were no problems and following mining and reclamation the property was seeded in the fall and now produces three cuttings of high quality alfalfa and orchard g rass hay.
The success of topsoil handling is measured by the land's crop productivity after reclamation.
Crops grown on this reclaimed farm land have consistently been above required yields (right).
18
In 1991, the mining operation was in close proximity to surrounding homes.
This area had been family owned since the 1920's and contained deep erosion ditches, the old homestead and barnyards, and an old tire dump filled one of the creek beds.
When mining was completed this land was also reclaimed to prime far mland soil standards though many areas of the far m were not prime soils before mining.
Today, the landowner enjoys drainage ter races and cropland that has continually produced high cor n, soybean and wheat yields.
The final property mined at SkyPoint is owned by Solar Sources.
This provided a unique opportunity in what could be called land-use banking and an g ood solution to a problem raised by two of the mine's actively far ming land owners.
Because reclamation improved the land for far ming, two landowners did not want to replace their forest and wildlife acreage.
Solar offered to accept those land-uses on its own property and distribute its acreage of prime far mland among the far ms not reestablishing the forest and wildlife uses.
The ag reement was a win-win situation for ever yone.
The far m operators did not have to receive their premining tree acreage and none of the acreage of prime far mland soils was lost.
And, although Solar's land was reestablished with tree planting it was reclaimed to prime soil replacement standards.
Solar Sources has reclaimed the Sky-Point Mine to the diverse land uses of cropland, pasture and hay, forest land, wildlife habitat, and water impoundments.
The operation restored prime far mland soil depths throughout the entire mine area resulting in reclaimed land that has the capability to support a variety of future uses.
The end product at this coal mine has been efficient recover y of the coal resource and reclamation that has resulted in ag ricultural land that is superior to conditions before mining.
This is mining and reclamation that was originally envisioned by the architects of the Surface Mining Law.
The two aerial photographs (top) show this site being mined and following reclamation.
Today, this rural landscape looks just as it did before mining began.
Successful soil replacement can also be seen in the hardwood trees planted on the reclaimed land (center).
There was minimum loss at planting and the tree seedlings have quickly become established.
The economic benefits of this mining operation can also be seen on the reclaimed land.
New roads were constructed as part of the reclamation and farm buildings have been improved and modernized -- a direct result of royalty money paid to the landowners for mining their property.
Today, this is a prosperous agricultural community that has benefited from the temporary coal mining that took place here (bottom).
19
The Bellaire Corporation, an affiliate company of the North American Coal Corporation, Indian head Mine was one of the oldest surface mines in the country.
Production beg an in 1922 when it was known as the Zap Collier y Company.
Surface mining was done using a steam operated 2 ½ cubic yard dragline which was moved on skids and large wooden rollers.
A one yard steam shovel that was mounted on wooden wheels was used to load the coal in rail cars that went to the company tipple.
At that time the mine produced 500 to 600 tons of lignite coal per day.
When mining ended in 1992 production had grown to 1.2 million tons per year.
The Indian Head Mine has received six Office of Surface Mining awards for its outstanding mining and reclamation ­ three National Awards, a Best-of-the-Best Award, a 20th Anniversar y Hall of Fame Award, and in 2002 the Silver 25th Anniversar y Award.
Since 1977, the Indian Head Mine has completed some of the most outstanding reclamation in the countr y and today with mining and reclamation finished the land is indistinguishable from the premining landscape.
Bellaire Corporation Beulah, North Dakota 20
21 21
The undisturbed wooded draws contain one of the largest diversities of wildlife in the mine area.
The shr ubby habitat provides ample shelter, food, and protection for many wildlife species.
These wooded stands are now surrounded by reclaimed native rangeland that is used for cattle g razing and in addition to the wildlife benefits they provide, draws offer the cattle protection for m the hot summer sun.
The company's recognition A major accomplishment at of the wooded draws' the Indian Head Mine was the unique value, and its preser vation of wooded innovative handling of draws.
Wooded draws are a them, has ensured the natural feature of the North vegetation remains in its Dakota landscape that pristine state.
The extra provide critical habitat for work needed to accomplish wildlife and a unique this reclamation has character to the natural eliminated environmental landscape.
Traditionally impacts and provided mining operations mine reclamation that is already through these draws and then part of the sur rounding reclaim them.
Although this unmined North Dakota has met with success, the landscape.
Indian Head Mine took a new look at working with these unique natural features ­ they left the wooded draws alone.
22
The mine contained a 2,909acre per mit area under the Surface Mining Law and about 2,184 acres were disturbed.
All of this disturbed acreage has been reclaimed to ag ricultural land, and is now being used for small grain production, livestock g razing, and haying.
The reclaimed lands resemble the natural surroundings and are virtually indistinguishable ­ an important value to many people in the community since the mining occur red within one mile of the cities of Beulah and Zap, Nor th Dakota, and adjacent to a major state highway.
Instead of mining through them, they mined around them.
The aerial views of the site during mining and following reclamation show the undisturbed wooded draws, the extent of the land that was mined around, and reclamation that was immediately part of the natural landscape (above).
Another outstanding feature of the Indian Head Mine reclamation is the reestablishment of cropland and native g rassland.
At the Indian Head Mine all the land was reclaimed for ag ricultural use, just as it was before mining.
This reclaimed land has consistently exceeded the required standards for reveg etation success.
For example, cropland has exceeded the required standard by 20 percent, prime far mland by about 22 percent, hay and pasture land by 45 percent, and native grassland by about 35 percent
Preserving the wooded draws eliminated the years necessary to reestablish mature vegetation.
Wildlife found in the wooded draws includes a broad range of small mammals, big game animals, and birds.
Today, the wooded draws are integral part of the land use, with cattle grazing on the surrounding reclaimed rangeland and using the wooded draws for shelter.
23
The Indian Head Mine incorporated many features into the reclamation efforts and manag ement of the reclaimed land that are not typically done and are above the requirements of the Surface Mining Law.
Some of these included: implementation of full scale livestock g razing and cropping early in the liability period, cooperative landowner involvement (especially considering 93 percent of the reclaimed land at the Indian Head Mine was privately owned), improved topog raphy, careful post mining landscape design and land use planning, constr uction of per manent fencing and stockpond facilities, and replacement of shelter belts.
The sloping topography, marginal soils, and semiarid climate made reclamation difficult; however, the land is being returned to the landowners better than it was before mining.
(right).
Today, with the mining and reclamation completed, the only reminder that this land is not just another section of natural North Dakota landscape is a company sign by the side of the highway (far right).
24
25
The Trapper Mining Inc., Trapper Mine is located in Northwester n Colorado.
The mine beg an in 1977 and is operating under a 10,300 acre per mit.
Mining operations are conducted along the Norther n side of the Williams Fork Mountains and recover multiple seams of high-quality low-sulfur subbituminous coal for use in the adjacent Craig Station power generating facility.
This is a high elevation mine, with ranges of 6,300 to 7,400 feet above sea level.
The predominant vegetation at the mine site is mountain shr ubs in the lower elevations and aspen in the higher areas.
The average annual precipitation is 16.7 inches, with roughly one-third of this occurring as snowfall.
During the initial per mitting process and for many years after starting the mining operation, grave concerns were raised asserting the potentially devastating effects of mining on wildlife populations in the area.
Twentyfive years later, those concer ns have proven to be completely unfounded.
Trapper Mining Inc.
Craig, Colorado 26
27
Baseline aerial winter sur veys of big game animals in the Trapper Mine area were conducted before mining beg an in the 1970's.
Aerial sur veys were again car ried out in the mid-1980;s and ag ain during the winters of 2000 and 2001.
Sur vey results indicate that overall big game use within the per mit area has increased dramatically.
Elk numbers have increased by an order of magnitude, while pronghor n antelope have increased from zero animals before mining to their current status as a significant presence in the mine area.
While these populations have increased, mule deer numbers have remained stable since mining beg an.
Not only have big game animals increased in numbers on the mine and sur rounding areas; but, the animals are preferentially selecting reclaimed lands as a forage base.
An aerial count of nearly 4,000 head of elk was documented on the Trapper Mine reclaimed lands during December 1999, a number that was more than the entire elk populations for some western states.
Populations of the Colombian sharp-tailed g rouse in the Western states have diminished significantly.
The species cur rently occupies less than 10 percent of its for mer range.
Numerous factors, primarily related to habitat deg radation resulting from land use changes, have contributed to this decline in population.
On Trapper Mine reclaimed lands however, sharp-tailed g rouse populations are thriving.
In 2001, the averag e sharptail str utting g round density documented in northwestern Colorado was 0.07 str utting g rounds/1,000 acres.
On Trapper Mine reclaimed land there were 1.07 str utting g rounds/1,000 acres, 14 times greater than the averag e.
A recent Trapper mine big game aerial survey data convincingly refutes the concerns voiced before mining operations began that big game species would move away from mining activities and habitat would be lost until mining activities ceased.
To the contrary, this reclamation has proven to be a magnet for big game species and has become a highly preferred foraging area (above).
Even in areas of low rainfall sedimentation ponds are important in preventing offsite impacts of sedimentation.
At the Trapper Mine sedimentation ponds are constructed below the active mining operation and collect all water before it leaves the mine site (right).
28
Columbian sharptails tend to establish dancing g rounds on elevated knolls called leks, with low-g rowing vegetation and g ood visibility.
At the Trapper Mine engineers and wildlife professional are focusing on the oppor tunity to incorporate similar land for m features into the reclaimed landscape during reg rading operations to accommodate the growing population of these birds.
Vigorous reclaimed plant communities anchor the reclamation achievement experienced at the Trapper Mine.
Standard methodologies for reclaiming significantly disturbed lands are employed along with sitespecific enhancements developed to maximize revegetation success.
For example, Trapper uses diverse seed mixtures of native forbs, g rasses, shr ubs.
Much research and planning g oes into the selection of seed mixtures and seeding methods that will result in the most diverse reclaimed plant communities possible.
29
A primar y Trapper Mine reclamation goal is the successful establishment of native shr ubs on reclaimed areas for wildlife use.
Mature shr ubs are transplanted using front-end loaders from areas in advance of the mining operation and placed on areas that have been recontoured and topsoiled following the mining.
Using these native shr ubs, islands or g roupings of about 250 plants have been established on the reclaimed land approximately 1,400 feet apart.
Forage planted between the shr ub islands on the reclaimed rangeland averages five times greater than that available in undisturbed mountain br ush habitats.
In the final analysis, wildlife species may well be the primar y direct beneficiaries of the reclamation at the Trapper Mine.
Mine lands are being rehabilitated into stable and productive condition suitable for a variety of uses, including wildlife habitat, grazing, recreation, and crop production.
However, the g rowing population of wildlife should continue to flourish the for years to come.
30
At the Trapper Mine Sharp-tailed grouse and their habitat are studied to determine the importance of special landscape features during reclamation.
Results of the study will include guidelines for identifying, enhancing, and preserving critical habitat for these birds in Colorado (near left).
Public tours of the mining and reclamation operations are encouraged and hundreds of visitors have toured the site.
Visitors can see each step in the mining operation, land reclamation process, and use of the coal in the adjacent Craig Electric Generating Station (below left).
Shrubs are an important part of many natural plant communities and have particular value as food and cover for wildlife.
A front-end loader was used at the Trapper Mine to transplant shrubs from land that will be mined to areas being reclaimed.
This transplanting method results in moving large plants with few losses of shrubs.
Large deer and elk herds inhabiting the permit area and surrounding lands make extensive use of these shrub areas (far left).
31
The Sunshine Mine was located in Knox County, Indiana in the northwest corner of the city of Bicknell.
Historical records indicate that Bicknell, established in 1869, had a population of about 4000 by 1907.
The first local commercial coal mine was started in 1873, and by 1920 there were approximately 20 shaft mines in the area providing jobs for over 2,000 men.
The need for coal during this period was fueled by the industrial demands of World War I.
The Sunshine Mine was an underg round shaft mine, which beg an operation in 1936 and continued until 1959.
Records indicate that three different companies operated this mine during its life-span.
During the life of the mine approximately 2.8 million tons of coal were removed from the Hymera coal seam, which was approximately five feet thick and located at a depth of 128 feet.
The processing operations associated with the Sunshine Mine left behind 25 acres of gob, slur r y, abandoned and derelict preparation plant and other buildings, trash, and other debris.
This abandoned mine was adjacent to State Highway 67, a heavily traveled cor ridor connecting Bicknell and other outlying communities to Vincennes, the county seat.
The east side of the site adjoined the Knox County Fairg rounds, which seasonally hosts the county fair and other community activities.
The site is bounded on the west by Indian Creek, a small tributary of the White River and ag ricultural far mland is located to the north.
This abandoned mine site had been a detriment to the town of Bicknell.
Travelers often referred to Bicknell as "the city on Highway 67 that had the ugly old coal mine at the edge of town."
Notoriety of this sort makes it ver y difficult to project a positive imag e of what is otherwise a ver y industrious community.
Sunshine Abandoned Mine Reclamation Project Bicknell, Indiana 32
33
Indian Creek receives all of the drainage from this abandoned mine site.
Since the mine was abandoned in 1959, the creek has been neg atively impacted by the presence of the coal refuse.
Chemical deg radation included not only the acid mine drainage derived from the pyritic coal refuse, but also the associated precipitation of heavy metals in the stream.
Physically, the creek received heavy loads of sediment, washed from the bar ren, loose coal refuse material.
This site also sustained periodic occur rences of fire in the g ob material.
Gob pile fires are a significant source of air pollution and unpleasant odors.
The objectives of the reclamation project included: reducing the adverse off site contamination (chemical and physical) caused by the bar ren coal refuse area, eliminating air pollution and the dangerous abandoned str uctures, improving the aesthetic value of the area, and restoring the property to a productive land use.
34
Reclamation consisted of demolition and disposal of buildings, excavation and burial of coal refuse, covering the graded constr uction area with excavated bor row material, installing erosion control features, and reveg etation of all disturbed areas.
At a cost of $896,000 the reclamation of the Sunshine Mine was not a large project, but the difficulty of the work makes this site worthy of recognition.
The extremely close working quarters required a high deg ree of coordination on the part of the contractor, and a design that was flexible enough to accommodate unforeseen discoveries during excavation.
Before reclamation the abandoned mine known as "the ugly old coal mine at the edge of town" contained derelict buildings, coal refuse that was causing sedimentation, and acid mine drainage pollution of nearby streams.
In addition, frequent coal fires at the site were the source of significant air pollution and danger to unsuspecting visitors to the site (above).
Today most drainage from the reclaimed site and the immediate surrounding area is directed into a small manmade wetland.
This wetland improves aesthetics, eliminates offsite sedimentation, and enhances the water quality of adjacent Indian Creek (right).
The coal refuse excavation and hauling operation was an integ ral part of this project.
Approximately 232,000 cubic yards of coal refuse were disposed of in the excavated borrow pit.
During the course of the project, approximately 207,000 cubic yards of borrow material were excavated to provide the necessar y space for the gob disposal.
This was enough material to place a four foot thick soil cap over the resulting 32 acres of disturbance.
A total of 3,429 tons of lime were applied to provide an alkaline bar rier between the acid for ming materials and the soil cover.
The four foot deep soil cap is thick enough to significantly reduce infiltration of rainwater into the gob material.
This will reduce the potential for production of acid mine drainag e that could leave the site via seeps or groundwater flows.
35
In addition to the soil cap, 4,985 linear feet of various erosion control features were installed.
These included g rass waterways, rock lined ditches, and ter races.
Most drainag e from the site and the immediate sur rounding area is directed into a small wetland.
This wetland improved the site aesthetics, eliminated offset sedimentation, and has enhanced the water quality of adjacent Indian Creek.
This project also included the demolition and burial of two concrete buildings.
Pre-reclamation water sampling of Indian Creek just downstream from the site revealed pH levels of less than 3.0.
The evaluation of water quality will deter mine the deg ree of success that has been achieved on this site.
Early analysis of post reclamation water quality show values for pH have g one from a low of 2.7 to a high of 6.9.
Reduced levels of total suspended solids, total dissolved solids, iron, manganese and sulfates are good indicators that the site is already on the mend as a result of the reclamation.
36
Reclamation has eliminated the dangers associated with the buildings and the health and safety problems of past g ob fires.
Infiltration of precipitation into the gob has been reduced and drainage is directed away from the site more quickly and efficiently, thus reducing acid mine drainag e and off site sedimentation.
The aesthetics have been greatly improved and the site now has potential for productive use.
Reclamation at this abandoned mine site has eliminated the dangers associated with the derelict buildings and health and safety problems of past gob fires.
Water infiltration into the coal refuse has been reduced and drainage is directed away from the site more quickly and efficiently, thus reducing acid mine drainage and off site sedimentation.
The aesthetics have been greatly improved and the site now has potential for productive use (above).
The wetland above this rock gabion dam filters all the water before it flows down stream into Indian Creek.
Since reclamation of the site was recently completed, there are no long-term measurements of the effects of the project.
However, current post reclamation analyses of water quality have been positive and are a good indication that the reclamation will provide long-term improvement of nearby streams (right)
37
1978
1979
1980
1981
1982
1983
1984
1985
1986
1987
1988
Regulatory Program State Regulatory Grants* Annual Budget Total* Acreage Permitted Number of Mines Coal Production* 9 8
$8,600 $30,880 173,815 5,308 417,188
23,900 53,939 358,008 5,635 747,558 22,662 5,823 62,499
36,680 84,687 341,342 5,132 803,821 38,281 8,262 62,937
35,000 89,679 379,862 4,978 760,179 73,477 6,998 78,352
24,432 58,515 291,946 5,260 893,304 93,436 9,485 129,253
32,150 60,878 445,386 5,101 769,833 145,112 15,469 91,118
38,100 70,695 584,747 4,755 847,395 168,430 13,700 167,813
36,734 80,347 328,684 4,805 871,551 196,186 12,019 114,715
35,387 80,774 310,226 4,365 869,721 174,215 12,993 60,153
45,110 100,003 221,465 4,082 867,962 176,592 12,572 106,710
44,044 102,125 225,485 3,827 925,023 174,246 10,652 140,332
10
Inspections Completed Citations Issued12
11
9,433 1,028 13
Acreage of Bonds Released
32,054
Abandoned Mine Land Reclamation Fund Collections* 14
$156,757 15
190,567 2,754 21,835 10,128 10,000 61,451
205,312 7,651 39,376 10,106 10,000 94,843
204,844 11,749 29,364 10,280 5,000 82,483
215,044 89,732 41,680 18,339 0 115,333
195,945 162,880 23,064 6,155 0 213,079
223,115 237,976 26,452 10,582 (11,499) 271,228
214,262 238,128 39,371 9,800 (2,000) 296,941
213,841 124,963 28,715 9,019 2,949 197,277
216,963 157,237 24,592 9,400 0 203,720
169,372 121,289 13,662 15,000 0 199,380
Reclamation Grants*
$0 16
Federal Reclamation Program* RAMP Transfers* 17
$15,875 $5,000 $10,000 $36,657
Small Operator Assistance Program* Annual Budget Total* * In thousands.
25 Years at a Glance: 1977-2002 38
1989
1990
1991
1992
1993
1994
1995
1996
1997
1998
1999
2000
2001
2002
Total
46,335 101,095 203,617 3,625 936,948 169,000 10,840 107,482
45,682 101,228 197,399 4,584 971,935 163,318 13,333 79,127
48,562 109,350 131,973 4,186 967,256 165,906 12,444 60,003
48,481 109,700 147,980 4,186 967,256 113,082 10,807 36,946
51,661 111,716 105,787 3,809 954,174 138,400 9,744 50,106
51,661 110,552 135,790 4,007
51,562 109,695 143,076 4,561
50,762 95,470 125,132 4,269
50,676 94,172 95,233 4,150
50,176 91,774 86,594 4,265
51,156 93,032 55,720 4,215
52,156 95,585 75,952 4,235
55,574 100,578 108,715 4,198
56,575 102,759 115,089 3,644
1,071,156 2,239,228 5,389,023 NA 23,055,392 2,989,344 221,566 2,025,882
955,957 1,005,681 1,023,820 1,063,008 1,085,586 1,092,773 1,074,669 1,094,207 1,082,794 137,277 12,171 67,032 119,095 9,896 64,465 100,591 5,367 50,399 112,107 6,097 86,912 113,534 5,293 86,394 103,800 4,233 72,749 99,211 4,232 63,071 91,111 3,802 81,853 90,842 4,306 73,407
238,134 187,167 19,005 12,000 0 193,160
243,560 123,546 22,264 12,000 2,000 192,772
243,759 139,602 25,238 11,933 1,492 198,958
241,953 124,376 27,154 11,848 1,851 187,803
238,153 143,541 25,137 13,385 1,760 187,930
244,289 158,610 26,555 13,233 1,760 190,107
255,423 144,579 24,829 7,853 1,757 182,386
256,450 135,397 23,000 0 0 173,887
266,783 149,856 23,145 0 1,500 177,085
273,038 142,695 23,785 0 1,500 180,787
276,674 140,159 24,888 0 1,500 185,391
274,297 158,409 26,217 0 1,500 195,873
284,044 184,677 27,584 0 1,497 215,038
287,066 163,255 27,112 0 1,497 203,437
5,829,656 3,176,749 649,899 196,061 44,064 4,437,006
39
Acid-for ming materials.
Rock or coal layers containing significant amounts of pyrite or other minerals which, if exposed by coal mining will cause acid mine drainage to occur when acted upon by air and water.
Acid mine drainage.
Any water with a pH less than 6.0 draining from a coal mine.
Water is often orangecolored because of the presence of oxidized iron.
Adit.
An underg round mine entr y at sites where coal seams are exposed at g round level.
Anthracite.
Coal which is commonly called "hard coal" and contains a high percent of carbon.
Anthracite is mined mostly in Eastern Pennsylvania.
Approximate original contour.
The surface configuration achieved by backfilling and g rading the mined area so that the reclaimed land closely resembles the general premining surface configuration and blends into and complements the drainage pattern of the surrounding ter rain.
Area mining.
A surface mining method that is car ried on in level to gently rolling topog raphy on relatively large tracts of laud.
Active area mine pits may be several miles long.
Auger mining.
A mining technique often used by surface mine operators when the overburden becomes too thick for the coal to be mined economically using traditional surface mining methods.
Large-diameter (usually 2-4 feet) horizontal holes are drilled as much as 300 feet into the vertical face of the coal bed by an auger.
Like a bit used for boring holes in wood, coal augers consist of a cutting head with a screw-like extension.
As the auger turns, the head breaks up the coal and the screw car ries it back into a conveyor that loads it directly into a tr uck, Backfilling.
The operation of refilling an excavation using material removed during the mining process.
Bar row Material.
Soil and rock fill that was dug from a nearby pit to furnish fill or soil cover for an earth moving project.
Glossary 40
Bituminous.
Coal which is commonly called "soft coal," is high in carbon, and ranked between anthracite and lignite.
Bituminous coal is most abundant in the Eastern states.
Cessation Order.
Order to cease mining issued to a coal operator by the regulator y authority due to severity of violations.
Contemporaneous reclamation.
Restoration of mined land that occurs as soon as practical after coal removal.
Contour mining.
A mining method commonly used in eastern mountainous topog raphy where coal is removed in a nar row strip around the hillside.
The extent of the cut into the hillside is deter mined by the depth of overburden at the highwall compared with the thickness of the coal seam.
Fund (Abandoned Mine Land).
Fees collected from active mining operations, contributions, late payment interest, penalties, administrative charges, and interest earned on investment of the fund's principal that are deposited in the U.S. Treasur y, and used to pay for reclamation of abandoned mine land hazards.
Grading.
The process of smoothing the disturbed areas of the mine site, after the coal is removed, to closely approximate the pre-mining ter rain.
Gob.
A pile of loose waste, coal, and other minerals extracted from a mine that are not marketable.
Gob may be left piled in underg round workings or at the surface of the mine.
Highwall.
The cliff-like excavated face of exposed overburden and coal in a surface mine, Landslide.
Unconsolidated material that becomes unstable due to overloading or water saturation and slides down-slope.
Lignite.
Color coal that is commonly called "brown coal," ranked between peat and subbituminous, and having less than 8,300 BTU's.
Lignite is commonly found in Western states.
Notice of Violation.
Notice presented to coal mine operators by inspectors when perfor mance standards or per mit conditions are not being met.
Overburden.
Rock material overlying the coal deposit, but excluding soil.
Soil is generally removed separately for use in reclamation.
Perfor mance bond.
A financial guarantee posted by a mine operator to ensure faithful perfor mance of the reclamation requirements of the Surface Mining Act.
Bonds are returned to the operator upon successful completion of reclamation.
If the operator does not complete the required reclamation, the bond is forfeited and the money is used to reclaim the site.
Per mit.
A document issued by the regulator y authority that gives approval for the operation of a surface coal mine under conditions set forth in the Surface Mining Law and the implementing regulations.
Per mit area.
The area of land and water within the boundaries specified in the mining and reclamation per mit.
At a minimum, this includes all areas that will be directly affected by the surface coal mining operation during the ter m of the per mit. Pits.
The active part of a strip mine where active excavation and mineral extraction is being done.
Preparation plant.
A facility at which coal is cleaned or processed before being shipped or used.
Primacy.
A joint state/federal relationship where states have elected to develop, administer, and enforce approved prog rams for regulating coal mining and reclamation under the Surface Mining Law.
Cur rently there are 24 primacy states.
41
Prime far mland.
A special categ ory of highly productive cropland that is recognized and described by the U.S. Department of Ag riculture's Soil Conser vation Ser vice and receives special protection under the Surface Mining Law.
Priority.
Eligibility of abandoned mine land projects for fund expenditures based on the deg ree of adverse effects on health and safety.
The priority of projects is as follows: 1.
the protection of public health, safety, general welfare, and property from extreme danger of adverse effects of coal mining practices; 2.
the protection of public health, safety, and general welfare from adverse effects of coal mining practices; 3.
the restoration of land and water resources and the environment previously deg raded by adverse effects of coal mining practices including measures for the conser vation and development of soil, water (excluding channelization), woodland, fish and wildlife, recreation resources, and ag ricultural productivity; 4.
the protection, repair, replacement, constr uction, or enhancement of public facilities such as utilities, roads, recreation, and conser vation facilities adversely affected by coal mining practices; and 5.
the development of publicly owned land adversely affected by coal mining practices including land acquired as provided in this title for recreation and historic purposes, conser vation, and reclamation purposes and open space benefits.
Pyrite.
A yellowish mineral, iron disulfide (FeS2). commonly found in coal beds and associated rocks, that results in acid drainage when it comes into contact with air and water.
Regulator y authority.
The state agency, or Office of Surface Mining.
which has responsibility for administering the Surface Mining Law in a given geog raphic area.
Riprap.
Large pieces of broken or crushed durable rock or concrete placed on earth dams and in drainag e channels for protection ag ainst water erosion.
Sedimentation pond.
An impoundment constructed on the mine site to remove suspended solids from surface water before the water leaves the per mit area.
Semiarid regions.
Lands, generally west of the 100th meridian, where water use by native veg etation equals or exceeds that supplied by natural precipitation, and rainfall is insufficient to support traditional ag riculture.
Annual precipitation is nor mally 20 inches or less, Slur r y. Fine coal and other materials washed from marketable coal during the cleaning process Spoil.
The rock overburden, not including the soil layers, that has been removed in surface mining to gain access to the coal seam.
Subsidence.
Surface caving or sinking of a part of the earth's cr ust due to underg round mining excavations.
Sub-Bituminous.
Black lignite or coal ranked between lignite and bituminous with a BTU range of 8,300-13,000.
Subbituminous coal is commonly found in Wester n states.
Ter race.
A depression across the face of a steep hillside that slows the f low of surface water and minimizes soil erosion.
Topsoil.
The dark, fertile upper most layer of the soil.
42
1.
Public Law 95-87, Surface Mining Control and Reclamation Act of 1977 (SMCRA) [Copies available on request www.osmre.gov/order1.htm, or used on-line at www.osmre.gov/smcra.htm] 2.
U.S. Department of the Interior.
Surface Mining and Our Environment.
Washington, D.C. 1967.
124pp.
[Out of print] 3.
U.S. Department of the Interior, Office of Surface Mining.
Surface Coal Mining Reclamation: 10 Years of Progress, 1977-1987; Washington, D.C.
August 3, 1987.
48pp.
[Out of print] 4.
U.S. Department of the Interior, Office of Surface Mining.
Surface Coal Mining Reclamation: 15 Years of Progress: 1977-1992; Part 1.
Washington, D.C.
August 3, 1992.
53pp.; Part 2: Statistical Information 78pp.
[Out of print] 5.
U.S. Depar tment of the Interior, Office of Surface Mining.
20th Anniversar y: Surface Mining Control and Reclamation Act, A repor t on the protection and restoration of the Nation's land and water resources under the Surface Mining Law, Part 1.
Washington, D.C.
August 3, 1997.
36pp.; Part 2: Statistical Infor mation.
Washington, D.C.
June 1, 1999.
82pp.
[Electronic copies available at ww.osmre.gov/annivrep.htm] 6.
The Small Operator Program, authorized by Section 401(c)(11) of the Surface Mining Law, authorizes up to $10 million annually of the fees collected for the Abandoned Mine Reclamation Fund to be used for technical assistance to help qualified small mine operators obtain technical data needed for permit applications.
Operators who produce fewer than 300,000 tons of coal per year are eligible for assistance.
7.
The Clean Streams Program began as a broad-based activity to eliminate acid drainage from abandoned coal mines.
Today the prog ram is more focused, with a clear goal of cleaning up acid drainage problems using a combination of private and governmental resources.
The success of cooperative solutions to acid drainage problems has been building from the grassroots level in recent years.
Watershed associations, community g roups, and recreation associations are working together, with funding from g overnment (federal, state, and local) and private sources.
This cooperative approach supports greater efficiency and gets better results from the expenditures of public funds.
The Clean Streams Prog ram is an opportunity for a partnership to solve one of the major environmental problems facing the ecosystems of the coalfields.
8.
Acreage Per mitted: Acreage per mitted data was compiled from annual reports developed by Office of Surface Mining field offices and historical field office records.
The acreage listed includes only new per mits during the year shown and is not the total acreage under per mit during that year.
References, Endnotes, and Credits 43
9.
Number of Active Mines: The number of mines was compiled from Office of Surface Mining Fee Collection System data described in footnote 1 above.
This infor mation was reported by mine operators on the For m OSM-1 when submitting their fees.
10.
Coal Production: Under Section 402 of the Surface Mining Law (Public Law 95-87), coal operators are required to pay a fee when coal is sold, used, or transfer red.
These fees are deposited in the U.S. Treasur y as the Abandoned Mine Land Fund.
Infor mation about the tonnage is tabulated on For m OSM-1 and submitted with the fee, which is paid quarterly to the Office of Surface Mining.
The coal production data presented in this report was compiled from infor mation stored in the Office of Surface Mining Fee Billing and Collection System computer data base.
Collection of the fee beg an with the last quarter of 1977.
Fee and tonnage infor mation remittance is required 30 days after the end of the quarter.
The coal production data in this report details actual fee and tonnage infor mation in the fiscal year in which they were received.
Therefore, 1978 data includes the last quarter of 1977 and the first two quarters of 1978.
Subsequently, 1979 data includes the last two quarters of 1978 and the first two quarters of 1979.
Infor mation for each successive year follows the same tabulation pattern.
11.
Inspections Completed: These statistics were compiled from annual reports developed by Office of Surface Mining field offices and historical field office records.
The data presented are all inspections completed by both the state regulator y authority and the Office of Surface Mining, and included oversight inspections.
Citations issued are the sum of Notice of Violations (NOVs) and Cessation Orders (COs), including oversight citations.
12.
Citations Issued: The number of citations was compiled from annual reports developed by Office of Surface Mining field offices and historical field office records.
The annual data presented are the sum of Notice of Violations (NOVs) and Cessation Orders (COs), issued by both the state regulator y authority and the Office of Surface Mining, and includes oversight citations.
13.
Acreage of Bonds Released: Acreage of reclamation bonds released was compiled from annual reports developed by Office of Surface Mining field offices and historical field office records.
These numbers include the sum of final Interim Regulator y Prog ram bonds and Phase III (or final release) bonds and indicates the land area where reclamation is complete and has been released by the regulator y authority.
14.
Fund Collections: Total Abandoned Mine Land Fund collections -- all Abandoned Mine Land fees paid by active coal mine operators and audit collections (including interest, administration, penalty, etc.) 15.
State Reclamation Grants: Annual Abandoned Mine Land state/federal share net obligations.
16.
Federal Reclamation Project Costs: Obligations for reclamation projects completed by the Office of Surface Mining.
This includes all emergency and non-emergency (high priority) Abandoned Mine Land reclamation projects.
17.
RAMP Transfers: Annual amounts transferred to the U.S. Department of Ag riculture to administer the Rural Abandoned Mine Land Prog ram.
Photo Credits Photographs used in this report were taken as follows Page 3: Roger Betson, Tennessee Valley Authority, Knoxville, Tennessee Page 19: (center) Larr y Greene, Office of Surface Mining Page 20 and 22: Donn Steffen, P.E., The Coteau Properties Company, Beulah, North Dakota Page 28 and 31: Mar vin Cattoor, Craig, Colorado Page 34: Indiana Department of Natural Resources, Division of Reclamation All others: Chuck Meyers, Office of Surface Mining 44
Looking much like highway construction projects, current surface coal mining disturbs the land for a short time and is reclaimed.
During the mining, blasting, machinery noise, increased truck traffic, and loss of well-known landscape views are constant problems for citizens living near active operations.
However, mining companies are becoming more involved with the public and property owners in planning and operating the mining and reclamation activities.
This interaction helps everyone understand the problems and what needs to be done to minimize the impact of mining on the community.
And, in the end results in positive benefits for everyone.
5 2 Surface Mining Law
1977
Office of Surface Mining
2002
Office of Surface Mining 1951 Constitution Ave., N.W. Washington, D.C. 20240 202-208-2719 getinfo@osmre.gov
