Maryland Medical Programs ABOUT OUR PROGRAMS HEALTHCHOICE SEARCH OUR HEALTHCHOICE PROVIDER DIRECTORY MARYLAND CHILDREN'S HEALTH PROGRAM MARYLAND PHARMACY PROGRAM LONG TERM CARE SPECIALTY MENTAL HEALTH SERVICES WAIVER PROGRAMS LISTING OF LOCAL HEALTH DEPARTMENTS LISTING OF LOCAL DEPARTMENTS OF SOCIAL SERVICES MEDICAL PROGRAMS HOME MARYLAND MEDICAID ADVISORY COMMITTEE Updated August 29, 2002 Long Term Care Medicaid Nursing Home Program Medicaid Nursing Home Program There are 240 nursing homes enrolled in the Maryland Medicaid Nursing Home Program, resulting in approximately 30,000 nursing home beds available to the program.
To apply for the program contact the local Department of Social Services.
Qualified applicants must meet both the Medicaid Programs financial and medical requirements.
The local Department of Social Services determines financial eligibility.
The Medicaid Programs utilization control agent determines medical eligibility, with input from the applicants physician.
The Maryland Medicaid nursing home rate setting system was established in 1983.
The formula used to reimburse nursing homes is complex, and is based in part upon a patients need for care, including the following five activities of daily living: bathing, dressing, eating, mobility and continence; and behavioral management.
For more information regarding the Nursing Home Program, call 410-767-1444.
Frequently Asked Questions --FAQs
I need to place a loved one in a nursing facility under Medical Assistance.
What do I need to do?
First, apply for Medical Assistance through the local Department of Social Services in the county where the applicant resides (if the applicant is already in a nursing facility, the county in which the facility is located).
Generally, the applicant (or authorized representative) must apply in person.
The applicant must be certified as medically eligible for nursing facility services.
If the applicant is already in a nursing facility converting to Medical Assistance or in a hospital prior to being admitted to a facility, the facility or hospital will apply for medical eligibility.
If the applicant is in another setting, the applicant or representative must have the applicants physician complete the Medical Eligibility Review Form, DHMH 3871 and mail it to Delmarva Foundation for consideration.
The physician must also complete the MR/MI Screen Form as required under PASRR and contact the Adult Evaluation and Review Services (AERS) unit if necessary.
What does medically eligible mean? What are the medical eligibility criteria for Medicaid nursing facility benefits?
The Maryland Medical Assistance Program pays for nursing facility services only when it is medically necessary, that is, when a persons health condition is such that he requires care under the full-time supervision of a licensed nurse.
The need for intermittent, part-time services (for example, home health nursing) does not qualify one as medically eligible for nursing facility services, nor does the need for unlicensed care (e.g., personal care) even if care is needed full-time.
If a persons health condition is such that full-time care under licensing nursing supervision is needed, that person is said to be medically eligible for nursing facility services.
What is PASRR?
PASRR stands for Pre-Admission Screening and Resident Review.
Congress instituted PASRR in 1987 in an effort to ensure that individuals with mental retardation (or related conditions) and mental illness receive services in the least restrictive appropriate setting.
PASRR is also designed to make sure that these individuals get the services they need to meet their unique needs.
Under PASRR, nursing facilities cannot admit or retain an individual who has a serious mental illness, mental retardation, or a related condition unless the Developmental Disabilities Administration (DDA) or the Mental Hygiene Administration (MHA) has determined that a nursing facility placement is appropriate for the individual.
PASRR applies to all new admissions to nursing facilities that participate in the Medicaid Program, regardless of how the individuals nursing facility stay is being paid for.
During the admission process, the discharging hospital or admitting nursing facility screens potential new admissions using the MR/MI Screening Form.
If the individual has a serious mental illness, mental retardation or a related condition (also known as a positive screen), the hospital or nursing facility will contact the Adult Evaluation and Review Services (AERS) unit to evaluate the individual.
The AERS team consisting of a nursing and a social worker will evaluate the individuals medical and functional condition and special needs.
The team will send its findings to DDA or MHA, who will determine whether nursing facility admission is appropriate and what, if any, specialized services the individual requires.
Once admitted, if the residents condition changes, the nursing facility will contact AERS for a new evaluation and determination regarding continued stay in the nursing facility.
How much does Medical Assistance pay nursing facilities?
Maryland pays its nursing facilities under a case-mix system.
This means that, rather than paying all facilities one set rate, Medical Assistance calculates separate sets of rates for each facility.
These rates depend on the individual facilitys operating costs; the amount and type of care that each resident needs, and other factors.
How can I lodge a complaint about the care my loved one is receiving in a nursing facility?
If you have reason to believe that an individual is not getting the proper care, you may do one or more of the following: * Contact the long-term care ombudsman in the Department of Aging office in the county in which the facility is located.
The ombudsman will investigate the complaint.
* File a complaint with the Office of Health Care Quality.
This Office will investigate your complaint.
If your complaint is found to be valid, the Office may take sanctions against the facility.
My loved one needs more care than I can give, but I do not want to admit him/her to a nursing facility.
Can we have help taking care of him/her at home?
Maryland Medical Assistance pays for many long-term care services in the community.
These include:
Home and Community Based Services Waiver for Older Adults - Medical Assistance pays for services in a licensed assisted living facility (not including room and board), personal care, adaptive equipment, home-delivered meals, and other services to qualified individuals age 50 and older who would otherwise be eligible for nursing facility benefits.
To learn more and to see if you qualify, contact the local aging office in your county or call 1-800-AGE-DIAL.
Living at Home: Maryland Community Choices - under this program, Medical Assistance pays for attendant care and related services to qualified individuals ages 21 - 59 who would otherwise be eligible for nursing facility benefits.
To learn more and to see if you qualify, contact the Department of Human Resources Office of Personal Assistance at (410) 767-7479.
For additional information on this site, see Living at Home: Maryland Community Choices.
The Program for All-Inclusive Care for the Elderly (PACE) - Medical Assistance pays for day health care and other services through PACE, a model of care in which all medical and nursing services (including day health and home care) are provided by a single entity.
The PACE site in Maryland is Hopkins ElderPlus (HEP) located on the campus of Johns Hopkins Bayview Medical Center.
PACE is only available to people who live in certain areas of Baltimore City.
To learn more about this program and to see if you qualify, contact Karen Armacost at (410) 550-7124.
Medical Day Care - Medical Assistance pays for medical day care services for Medical Assistance recipients who qualify as medically eligible for nursing facility services.
See Adult Day Care Services for more information on this program.
Personal Care - Medical Assistance pays for personal care for qualified Medical Assistance recipients.
To see if you qualify and to apply for personal care services, please contact the health department in the county in which you live.
See Personal Care Services for more information on this program.
Contact nursing facility staff specialist at 410-767-1736 for more information.
Suggested Links to other resources: * Delmarva Foundation for Medical Care www.dfmc.org * Maryland Department of Aging www.mdoa.state.md.us * Maryland Department of Human Resources www.dhr.state.md.us * Other Organizations located within the Department of Health and Mental Hygiene
External Links Disclaimer: This site contains links to other Internet sites only for the convenience of World Wide Web users.
DHMH is not responsible for the availability or content of these external sites, nor does DHMH endorse, warrant or guarantee the products, services or information described or offered at these other Internet sites.
Medical Care for You and Your Family | About Our Programs |
Services for Medical Care Providers | Search Our Site | Contact Us
Links marked with This is a .pdf file and requires Acrobat Reader are PDF. Download Adobe Acrobat Reader for viewing .pdf files Search Our Site | Contact Us | Help | Visit DHMH | Medical Programs Home
Terms of Use And Privacy Policy for Content Issues contact holcombp@dhmh.state.md.us MD Relay Number: 1-800-735-2258 Copyright © 2002 Maryland Department of Health and Mental Hygiene (DHMH)
