Department of Revenue Division 50--Missouri Horse Racing Commission Chapter 50--Class C Licenses Title Page Rules of 12 CSR 50-50.010 General Provisions for Class C Licenses ..................................................3 12 CSR 50-50.020 Specific Licenses ......................................................................
.........3 12 CSR 50-50.030 Fees ......................................................................
........................4 12 CSR 50-50.035 Prohibited Acts ......................................................................
...........5 12 CSR 50-50.040 Duties of Specific Licensees .................................................................5 MATT B LUNT (5/31/01) Secretary of State CODE OF STATE REGULATIONS 1 Chapter 50--Class C Licenses 12 CSR 50-50 Title 12--DEPARTMENT OF REVENUE Division 50--Missouri Horse Racing Commission Chapter 50--Class C Licenses 12 CSR 50-50.010 General Provisions for Class C Licenses PURPOSE: This rule establishes criteria for issuance of Class C (occupational) licenses.
(1) Every individual participating in horse racing in any capacity is required to have an occupational license from the commission authorizing him/her to be employed on the licensed premises to practice his/her business, profession or skills, except for public officers and public employees engaged in the performance of their official duties and other individuals exempted by the commission.
(2) As a condition of licensing, all applicants for occupational licenses are required to be fingerprinted and photographed.
(3) The applicant must demonstrate that his/her experience, reputation, competence and financial responsibility are consistent with the best interests of horse racing and the provisions of Missouri and United States Statutes.
(4) The commission may refuse an occupation license to any individual-- (A) Who has been convicted of a crime; (B) Who is unqualified to perform the duties required of the applicant; (C) Who fails to disclose or states falsely any information called for in the application; (D) Who has been found guilty of a violation of sections 313.500313.710, RSMo or of the rules of the commission; (E) Whose license has been suspended, revoked or denied in any racing jurisdiction for just cause; (F) Who is a past or present member or participant in organized crime as such membership or participant may be found or determined by the commission; (G) Who is an illegal alien; (H) Who is an employee of the commission or any spouse, child, brother, sister or parent of any employee or member of commission; (I) Who is financially irresponsible; (J) Who is not of good moral character; or (K) For any other just cause.
AUTHORITY: section 313.640, RSMo 1986.* Emergency rule filed June 20, 1986, effective June 30, 1986, expired Oct. 13, 1986.
MATT B LUNT Original rule filed Oct. 3, 1986, effective Jan. 12, 1987.
*Original authority: 313.640, RSMo 1986, amended 1987.
12 CSR 50-50.020 Specific Licenses PURPOSE: This rule requires standards of applicants for specific licenses.
(1) Owners.
Owners must own a horse(s) eligible to race in Missouri.
(2) Multiple Ownerships.
(A) Partnerships and Syndicates.
1.
Partnerships and syndicates shall be registered with the commission.
Each partnership and syndicate shall file papers with the commission which contain, among other things, the following: A.
The name and address of every person having any interest in the horse(s) involved; B.
The relative proportions of those interests; C.
To whom the winnings are payable; D.
In whose name the horse or horses shall run; E. With whom the power of entry and declaration rests; F.
The terms of any contingency, lease or any other arrangement; and G.
The names of the horse(s) involved.
2.
Except in the case of a limited partnership, any partner or member transacting business on behalf of a partnership or syndicate shall own an interest in the partnership or syndicate at least equal to that of any other partner or member.
The general partner shall transact business on behalf of the partnership.
3.
When authorizing any person to act as agent for a partnership or syndicate, a majority ownership interest shall so authorize.
4.
All partnership and syndication papers shall be signed by all of the parties or by their authorized agent.
5.
Any alteration in a recorded partnership or syndication shall be reported in writing to the commission and signed by all the partners or members or their authorized agent.
6.
Except in the case of a limited partnership, all the parties in a partnership or syndicate and each of them shall be jointly and severally liable for all stakes, fees and other obligations.
(B) Corporations.
CODE OF STATE REGULATIONS 1.
Corporations shall be registered with the commission.
Each corporation shall file papers with the commission which contain, among other things, the following: A.
The name and address of each of the registered and beneficial owners of the stock of the corporation; B.
The number of shares of stock held by each stockholder; C.
The names and addresses of all corporate officers and members of the board of directors; D.
The stable name of the corporation; E.
The names of the horses involved; and F.
Any and all changes in either the corporate structure or the respective interest of the stockholders.
2.
Stockholders who bear to each other the relationship of husband and wife, parent and child, grandparent and grandchild or sister and brother shall be regarded collectively as one (1) stockholder, as the case may be.
(C) In any case of multiple ownership, whether by partnership, syndication, corporation, or otherwise, not more than four (4) individual persons may be licensed as owners of a single horse.
(D) In any case of multiple ownership, the members may designate, in writing, the members of the partnership, syndicate, corporation or otherwise who will represent the entire ownership and be responsible for the horse as the licensed owner.
Each person designated as representing the entire ownership of a horse shall be licensed.
The agreement or lease designating the member to represent the entire ownership of the horse shall accompany the application for an owner's license.
(E) The commission may deny, suspend or revoke the license of any owner whose ownership of a horse is qualified or limited in part by rights or interests in the horse being held or controlled by another person who would be ineligible to be licensed as an owner.
(F) In any case of multiple ownership, horses may be raced under lease, provided the lease agreement is annexed to the horse's registration certificate and is approved by the stewards.
A lease may not be approved by the stewards for racing purposes unless-- 1.
The lessee is licensed as an owner; 2.
Each signature of the lessor and lessee to the lease agreement is notarized; 3.
The term of the lease is not less than one (1) year unless sooner terminated by claim or retirement of the horse; 4.
The agreement contains a statement on whether the horse involved can be entered in a claiming race and if so, the minimum 3 (5/31/01) Secretary of State 12 CSR 50-50--REVENUE Division 50--Missouri Horse Racing Commission price for which the horse can be entered and the name of the payee of the claiming price; and 5.
The agreement completely divests the lessors of further control or direction of the racing performance of the horse while under lease.
(3) Trainers.
(A) The applicant for a trainer's license must be eighteen (18) years old.
(B) The applicant who has never been licensed in Missouri or any other jurisdiction shall have at least two (2) years' experience in an occupation that indicates a knowledge of horsemanship and racing practices.
(C) The first time applicants shall pass a written examination administered by the stewards covering such areas as rules of racing, horsemanship and use of equipment.
The applicants shall also pass a practical test of horsemanship administered by the stewards.
(D) The applicant may be licensed if currently or previously licensed in another racing jurisdiction.
(4) Jockeys.
(A) The applicant for a jockey's license must be at least sixteen (16) years old.
(B) The applicant must have been licensed previously as a jockey.
(C) The applicant must pass a physical examination by a licensed physician within a year prior to the first Missouri race in which the applicant intends to ride.
(5) Apprentice Jockeys.
(A) The applicant must be at least sixteen (16) years old.
(B) The applicant must have been licensed previously by the commission or another racing jurisdiction as an apprentice jockey or exercise rider or have comparable experience.
(C) If licensed previously as an exercise rider or with comparable experience, the applicant must-- 1.
Demonstrate the ability to break a horse from the starting gate in company with other horses under the observation of a starter; and 2.
Ride in at least two (2) races under observation of the stewards before licensure.
(D) The applicant must pass a physical examination by a licensed physician within a year prior to the first Missouri race in which the applicant intends to ride.
(6) Drivers.
(A) The applicant must be at least sixteen (16) years old.
4 (B) The applicant must have been licensed previously as a harness driver by the commission or another racing jurisdiction.
(C) If the applicant has never been licensed as a harness driver, s/he must demonstrate to the stewards the ability to drive a horse at training speeds.
(D) The applicant shall be licensed by the U.S.T.A. (7) Veterinarians.
The applicant must be currently licensed or certified to practice veterinary medicine in Missouri.
(8) Farriers.
(A) The applicant must have been licensed previously by the commission or another racing jurisdiction.
(B) The applicant must pass a practical test, administered by the stewards, relating to the shoeing of race horses.
(9) Exercise Riders.
(A) The applicant must have been licensed previously as an exercise rider by the commission or by another racing jurisdiction.
(B) The applicant must pass a test, administered by the stewards, demonstrating his/her ability to gallop a race horse.
(10) Jockey Agents.
(A) The applicant must have been licensed previously as a jockey agent by the commission or by another racing jurisdiction.
(B) The applicant must pass a test demonstrating the applicant's knowledge of the duties of a jockey's agent.
(11) Authorized Agents.
The applicant shall submit a notarized application as prescribed by the commission defining the powers, limits and terms of the agency agreement.
(12) Mutuel Clerks.
The applicant shall indicate on his/her application that s/he is not indebted to any association.
(13) Stewards.
The applicant shall have satisfactorily passed an optical examination within one (1) year, prior to the race meet, evidencing corrected twenty/twenty (20/20) vision and ability to distinguish colors correctly.
(14) Assistant Trainer.
A trainer who has in his/her care a substantial number of horses or who is actively participating in more than one (1) race meeting at one (1) time, may employ an assistant trainer with the approval of the stewards.
Prior to the issuance of an assistant trainer's license, the applicant shall comply with all the requirements prescribed for a CODE OF STATE REGULATIONS person applying for a trainer's license.
The assistant trainer shall be the absolute insurer of all horses that s/he may enter and is subject to all rules prescribed by the Missouri Horse Racing Commission.
The name of the assistant trainer shall be shown on the official program along with that of the employing trainer.
AUTHORITY: section 313.640, RSMo 1986.* Emergency rule filed June 20, 1986, effective June 30, 1986, expired Oct. 13, 1986.
Original rule filed Oct. 3, 1986, effective Jan. 12, 1987.
*Original authority: 313.640, RSMo 1986, amended 1987.
12 CSR 50-50.030 Fees PURPOSE: This rule establishes fees for Class C (occupational) licenses.
(1) The following fee schedule is adopted for Class C licenses: (A) Assumed/stable name $50.00; (B) Vendor $50.00; (C) Veterinarian $50.00; (D) Farrier $50.00; (E) Owner $25.00; (F) Trainer, trainer/driver $25.00; (G) Driver/jockey $25.00; (H) Jockey agent $25.00; (I) Assistant trainer $20.00; (J) Exercise rider $15.00; (K) Mutuel employee $10.00; (L) Veterinarian assistant $10.00; (M) Farrier assistant $10.00; (N) Official $10.00; (O) Association employee $ 5.00; (P) Vendor/concession employee $ 5.00; (Q) Stable employee $ 5.00; and (R) Others $10.00.
(2) The fee for replacing lost, stolen or damaged licenses is four dollars ($4).
(3) Licenses shall be valid for one (1) calendar year.
AUTHORITY: section 313.640.2, RSMo 1986.* Emergency rule filed June 20, 1986, effective June 30, 1986, expired Oct. 13, 1986.
Original rule filed Oct. 3, 1986, effective Jan. 12, 1987.
Amended: Filed Oct. 13, 1987, effective Jan. 14, 1988.
*Original authority: 313.640, RSMo 1986, amended 1987.
(5/31/01) MATT B LUNT Secretary of State Chapter 50--Class C Licenses 12 CSR 50-50 12 CSR 50-50.035 Prohibited Acts PURPOSE: This rule prohibits certain types of conduct by Class C licensees.
(1) The commission may suspend or revoke a license or impose a fine on the following grounds: (A) Offering, promising, giving, accepting or soliciting a bribe in any form to or by any person having any connection with the outcome of a race or failure to report knowledge of a bribe immediately to the stewards; (B) Entering a horse ineligible or unqualified for the race entered; (C) Participating in any improper, corrupt or fraudulent act or practice in relation to racing or failure to report this act to the stewards immediately; (D) Causing or participating in any prearrangement or in any attempt to cause the pre-arrangement of a race result or failure to report knowledge of same to the stewards immediately; (E) Committing or participating in the commission of a criminal act while on the grounds of any racing association under the jurisdiction of the commission; (F) Using profane, abusive or insulting language to racing officials; (G) Failing to cooperate with association or commission security; (H) Fighting or disorderly conduct; (I) Being cruel to animals; (J) Using or possessing on the grounds of any association under the jurisdiction of the commission of-- 1.
Controlled substances as defined in chapter 195, RSMo (1986), unless the substance was obtained directly or pursuant to a valid prescription from a licensed physician.
It shall be the responsibility of the licensee to provide proof to the stewards that the use or possession is pursuant to a valid prescription.
A.
On any day racing is conducted on the grounds of a licensed association, any licensee shall be deemed to have consented to a urine and/or breathalyzer test or other noninvasive drug and/or alcohol detection test which shall be conducted in a manner prescribed by the commission.
B.
Any Class C licensee who refuses to take the drug detection or breathalyzer test may not be permitted to continue his/her duties on that racing day and shall be subject to disciplinary proceedings as provided in the commission's rules.
C.
A licensee whose sample is positive may be subject to disciplinary action, may not be permitted to participate in any racing program until a negative test is shown or may be required to undergo a supervisory MATT B LUNT drug treatment program approved by the commission or all of these.
A licensee whose test shows a reading more than .05 percent alcohol in the blood may be subject to disciplinary actions and may not be permitted to continue his/her duties on that racing day.
D.
The presence of cannabinoid metabolites of the drug tetrahydrocannabinol shall be considered a positive test; 2.
Hypodermic syringes, hypodermic needles or other devices which could be used for injection; 3.
Drug paraphernalia or devices for illegal use of controlled substances as defined in chapter 195, RSMo (1986); 4.
Battery, buzzer, electrical device or other appliances, other than an ordinary whip which would be used to alter the speed or performance of a horse in a race or workout; and 5.
Firearms; (K) Smoking in areas designated as nonsmoking areas; (L) Employing unlicensed persons; (M) Driving or riding a horse while on the grounds of an association without a properly fastened protective riding/driving helmet of a type satisfactory to the commission.
For purposes of this rule satisfactory shall be deemed to require any helmet used, be manufactured in compliance with the 1984 Snell Harness Racing Standard or in compliance with any other safety standard as approved by the commission; (N) Betting on any race by any official; and (O) Engaging in any conduct deemed by the commission to be detrimental to the best interest of horse racing.
AUTHORITY: section 313.640, RSMo 1986.* Original rule filed Oct. 3, 1986, effective Jan. 12, 1987.
*Original authority: 313.640, RSMo 1986, amended 1987.
ing until his/her application is filed and the license fee paid.
(B) Owners shall be responsible for providing individual racing colors and shall register the racing colors with the commission.
(C) Owners shall record each transfer of horse ownership with the Jockey Club.
(2) Trainers.
(A) The trainer is responsible for and is the absolute insurer of the condition of the horses in his/her care and custody and for the condition and contents of stalls, tack rooms, feed rooms, sleeping rooms and other areas which have been assigned by the association to him/her.
The trainer is liable for the presence in the horse during the race of any drug, medication or any foreign or prohibited substance.
(B) Each trainer shall report any unusual sickness of any horse in his/her care to the commission veterinarian.
Each trainer shall report any alteration of the sex of a horse in his/her care to the racing secretary.
(C) Each trainer shall attend his/her horse in the paddock and shall be present to supervise its harnessing, unless s/he has obtained the permission of the stewards to send another licensed trainer as a substitute.
(D) No trainer may take or keep on his/her charge a horse owned or controlled wholly or in part by a person unlicensed as an owner.
No trainer shall assume responsibility for a horse not under his/her active care and supervision, except as provided in the commission's rules.
(E) Trainers shall be responsible for horses entered and/or raced as to eligibility, weight and conditions.
(F) Each trainer shall provide a list of all persons in his/her employ to the commission within twenty-four (24) hours of employment or termination and shall ensure such persons are licensed by the commission.
(G) Each thoroughbred or quarter horse trainer shall furnish the name of the jockey engaged to ride each horse entered if possible at the time of entry, but in no event later than scratch time.
If no jockey has been named to ride a horse entered to race by scratch time, the stewards shall select the best rider available to ride the horse.
(H) If a trainer engages two (2) or more jockeys for the same race, s/he shall pay the losing fee for each engaged jockey not riding the race, as well as the proper fee to the jockey who does ride.
No trainers may employ a jockey for the purpose of preventing him/her from riding in any race.
(3) Jockeys.
5 12 CSR 50-50.040 Duties of Specific Licensees PURPOSE: This rule establishes duties and responsibilities of specific categories of Class C (occupational) licensees.
(1) Owners.
(A) The stewards in their discretion may allow an owner to race a horse one (1) time while awaiting the receipt of the owner's license.
An owner who so races, but does not complete his/her application for a license and pay the appropriate fee within a reasonable period of time, shall be precluded from racCODE OF STATE REGULATIONS (5/31/01) Secretary of State 12 CSR 50-50--REVENUE Division 50--Missouri Horse Racing Commission (A) A jockey shall not be the owner of any race horse.
(B) A jockey shall not bet on any race or cause a wager to be placed on his/her behalf on any race except on his/her own mount and then shall bet only through the owner or trainer of that horse.
(C) A jockey shall ride under his/her legal name.
(D) A jockey shall exert every effort to ride his/her horse to the finish in the best and fastest run of which the horse is capable and shall not ease up or coast to a finish without adequate cause.
(E) Every jockey shall fulfill his/her riding engagements, but shall not be forced to ride a horse s/he believes to be unsound, nor over a racing surface s/he believes to be unsafe.
(F) No jockey shall ride in any race against a starting horse belonging to the jockey's contract employer unless the jockey's mount and the contract employers' horse are both trained by the same trainer.
(G) No jockey shall compete in any race against any horse which is owned, trained or ridden by the jockey's spouse.
(H)
An apprentice jockey shall ride with a five pound (5 lb.) weight allowance beginning with his/her first mount and for one (1) full year from the date of his/her fifth winning mount.
If after riding (1) one full year from the date of his/her fifth winning mount, the apprentice jockey has failed to ride a total of forty (40) winners from the date of his/her first winning mount, s/he shall continue to ride with a five pound (5 lb.) weight allowance for one (1) more year from the date of his/her fifth winning mount or until s/he has ridden a total of forty (40) winners, whichever comes first.
If an apprentice jockey is unable to ride for a period of fourteen (14) consecutive days or more after the date of his/her fifth winning mount because of service in the armed forces of the U.S.A. or because of physical disablement, the commission may extend the time during which the apprentice weight allowance may be claimed for a period not to exceed the period the apprentice jockey was unable to ride
Thereafter, s/he shall not leave the jockey room, except by permission of the stewards, until all of his/her riding engagements of the day have been fulfilled.
Once a rider has fulfilled his/her riding engagements for the day and has left the jockeys' quarters, s/he shall not be readmitted to the jockeys' quarters until after the entire racing program for that day has been completed, except upon permission of the stewards.
A jockey is not allowed to communicate with anyone but the trainer or his/her agent while s/he is in the room during the performance except with approval of stewards.
On these occasions, s/he should be accompanied by a security guard.
(I) Interference.
1.
When the way is clear in a race, a horse may be ridden to any part of the course, but may not weave nor cross in front of other contenders so as to interfere with their course or threaten their safety.
No jockey shall jostle another horse or jockey.
No jockey shall strike another horse or jockey or ride so carelessly as to cause injury or possible injury to another horse in the race.
If a horse or jockey interferes with or jostles another horse, the aggressor may be disqualified, unless the interfered or jostled horse or jockey was partly at fault or the infraction was wholly caused by the fault of some other horse or jockey; 6 2.
In a straightaway race, every horse must maintain position as nearly as possible in the lane in which s/he starts.
If a horse is ridden, drifts or swerves out of his/her lane in such a manner that s/he interfers with or impedes another horse, it is a foul.
(J) Jockey Weighed Out.
1.
Each jockey must be weighed for his/her assigned horse not more than thirty (30) minutes before the time fixed for the race.
A jockey's weight shall include his/her clothing, saddle, girth, pad and saddle cloth.
A jockey's weight shall not include the number cloth, whip, head number, bridle, bit or reins, blinkers, helmet, tongue strap, tongue tie, muzzle, hood, noseband, shadow roll, martingale, breast plate, bandages, boots and racing plates or shoes.
No jockey may weigh more than two pounds (2 lbs.) over the weight his/her horse is assigned to carry unless with consent of the owner or trainer and unless the jockey has declared the amount of overweight to the clerk of the scales at least forty-five (45) minutes before the time of the race.
However, under no circumstances shall a horse carry more than five pounds (5 lbs.) overweight.
The overweight shall be publicly announced and posted in a conspicuous place both prior to the first race of the day and before the running of the race.
(L) Weigh In.
1.
Upon completion of a race each jockey shall ride promptly to the winner's circle and dismount.
S/he shall then present him/herself to the clerk of scales to be weighed in.
If a jockey is prevented from riding his/her mount to the winner's circle because of accident or illness either to him/herself or his/her horse, s/he may walk or be carried to the scales unless excused by the stewards.
.
Each jockey, upon completion of a race, must return to the winner's circle and must unsaddle his/her horse, unless excused by the stewards.
3.
No person except the valet-attendant for each mount is permitted to assist the jockey in removing the horse's equipment that is included in the jockey's weight, unless the stewards permit otherwise.
To weigh in, each jockey shall carry to the scales all pieces of equipment with which s/he weighed out.
Thereafter s/he may hand the equipment to the valet-attendant.
4.
When any horse places first, second or third in a race, or is coupled in any form of multiple exotic wagering, and then the horse's jockey is weighed in short by more than two pounds (2 lbs.) of the weight of CODE OF STATE REGULATIONS which s/he was weighed out, his/her mount may be disqualified and all purse monies forfeited
.
5.
No jockey may be weighed in more than two pounds (2 lbs.) over his/her declared weight but consideration shall be given for excess weight caused by rain or mud.
If s/he is overweight, his/her mount may be disqualified and all purse monies forfeited.
(M) Contracts
. .
A jockey may contract with an owner or trainer to furnish jockey services whenever the owner shall require and in that event a jockey shall not ride or agree to ride in any race for any other person without the consent of the owner or trainer to whom the jockey is under contract.
2.
No person other than an owner, trainer, jockey agent or authorized agent of an owner in good standing shall make engagements for an apprentice jockey or jockey.
However, a jockey not represented by an agent may make his/her own engagements.
(N) Whenever two (2) or more licensees claim the services of one (1) jockey for a race, first call shall have priority and any dispute shall be resolved by the stewards.
(O) No jockey shall have a valet-attendant except one provided and paid for by the association.
(P) Jockey Agent.
1.
No jockey shall have more than one (1) agent.
2.
All engagements to ride other than those for the jockey's contract employer shall be made by the agent.
3.
No revocation of a jockey agent's authority is effective until the jockey notifies the stewards in writing of the revocation of the agent's authority.
(Q) Every jockey shall attend the video replays as directed by the stewards.
(R) The fees to be paid jockeys for mounts shall be-- Purse $400 and under $500 $600 $700$900 $1000$1400 $1500$1900 $2000$3400 $3500$4900 $5000� $9900 $10,000$14,900 $15,000$24,900 $25,000$49,000 $50,000$99,000 $100,000 and up Win 27 30 36 10% 10% 10% 10% 10% 10% 10% 10% 10% 10% 10% 2nd 19 20 22 25 30 35 45 55 65 5% 5% 5% 5% 5% 3rd Unplaced 17 16 17 16 17 16 22 20 25 22 30 28 35 33 45 35 50 40 5% 45 5% 50 5% 60 5% 75 5% 100 MATT B LUNT (5/31/01) Secretary of State Chapter 50--Class C Licenses 12 CSR 50-50 (S) The fees shall be paid except when the jockey rides a horse owned in part or solely by his/her contract holder.
1.
A jockey's fee shall be considered earned when the jockey is weighed out by the clerk of scales and shall not be considered earned if the jockey takes him/herself off of his/her mount.
2.
Jockeys finishing a race or a dead heat shall divide equally the totals they individually would have received had one (1) jockey alone won the race.
(4) Apprentice Jockeys.
(A) Unless excepted under these rules, apprentices are subject to all commission rules governing the conduct of jockeys and racing.
(B)
An apprentice jockey shall ride with a five pound (5 lb.) weight allowance beginning with his/her first mount and for one (1) full year from the date of his/her fifth winning mount.
If after riding (1) one full year from the date of his/her fifth winning mount, the apprentice jockey has failed to ride a total of forty (40) winners from the date of his/her first winning mount, s/he shall continue to ride with a five pound (5 lb.) weight allowance for one (1) more year from the date of his/her fifth winning mount or until s/he has ridden a total of forty (40) winners, whichever comes first.
If an apprentice jockey is unable to ride for a period of fourteen (14) consecutive days or more after the date of his/her fifth winning mount because of service in the armed forces of the U.S.A. or because of physical disablement, the commission may extend the time during which the apprentice weight allowance may be claimed for a period not to exceed the period the apprentice jockey was unable to ride
.
(C) No apprentice jockey may ride for a licensed owner or agent unless with the consent of the apprentice's contract employer.
Owners or trainers and apprentices who are parties to contracts for apprentice jockey services shall file a copy of the contract with the commission and, upon any transfer, assignment or amendment of the contract, immediately shall furnish a copy to the commission.
The contracts are subject to the review and approval of the commission.
(D) No apprentice jockey shall acquire his/her own contract.
(5) Drivers.
(A) Every driver shall participate when programmed or assigned by the judges, unless excused by the judges.
(B) Each driver shall drive each race so as to win and shall not ease any horse without adequate cause.
MATT B LUNT (C) No driver shall wager on any horse in a race except the horse s/he owns, trains or drives.
(D) Drivers shall appear dressed in colors in all races and any pre-race warmup, post parade or time trial.
(E) A driver under contract of employment may not drive for any person other than his/her contract holder in any race in which a horse owned or trained by his/her employer, in the same stable or under the same management as his/her employer is entered.
(F) In the absence of a contract or other arrangement, driver's fee shall be twenty dollars ($20) or five percent (5%) of the purse earned, whichever is greater.
A driver's fee shall be considered earned when the horse the driver has been engaged to drive leaves the paddock for the post.
(6) Veterinarians.
(A) Licensed veterinarians practicing at any meeting are prohibited from any ownership interest in any horse racing during the meeting.
(B) Licensed veterinarians are prohibited from placing any wager of money or other things of value directly or indirectly on the outcome of any race conducted at the meeting at which s/he is furnishing professional service.
(C) No veterinarian, within the association grounds, shall furnish, sell or loan any hypodermic syringe, needle or other injection device, or any drug, narcotic or prohibited substance to any person within the grounds of a licensed association.
(D) Whenever a veterinarian has used a hypodermic needle or syringe, s/he shall destroy the needle and syringe.
(E) Whenever a veterinarian prescribes or administers any medication or drug to a horse on the grounds of a licensed association, s/he shall file a report of the services with the stewards.
These reports shall be filed within twenty-four (24) hours of the services.
(F) Every licensed veterinarian practicing on association premises shall maintain records showing all medications purchased, and for each horse treated, the name of the horse and its owner, the medication, its method of administration and its date of administration.
Veterinarians shall retain duplicate copies of bills or statements to trainers or owners which shall be retained for at least three (3) years and made available to the commission upon request.
(G) Each veterinarian shall report immediately to the stewards and the commission veterinarian any illness in a horse entrusted into his/her care presenting unusual or unknown symptoms.
CODE OF STATE REGULATIONS (7) Jockey Agents.
(A) No jockey agent may serve as agent for more than two (2) jockeys.
No agent shall make or assist in making any riding engagement for a jockey with whom the agent has no contract.
(B) Every jockey agent shall have in his/her possession at all times engagement books, subject to examination by the stewards at any time.
All engagements made for jockeys shall be recorded in the engagement book.
(C) No jockey agent shall give more than two (2) calls per race for any jockey and shall designate one (1) engagement as first call.
(D) No agent shall withdraw from the representation of any jockey until notice has been provided to the stewards.
(8) Authorized Agents.
(A) Authorization of agents shall expire at the end of the license year unless earlier revoked by the owner or commission, or renewed.
An owner may appoint only one (1) person at a time to act as his/her agent.
(B) When an authorized agent enters a claim for the account of the person for whom s/he is licensed as agent, the name of that person and the agent shall appear on the claim slip.
AUTHORITY: section 313.640, RSMo 1986.* Original rule filed Oct. 3, 1986, effective Jan. 12, 1987.
Amended: Filed Oct. 13, 1987, effective Jan. 14, 1988.
Amended: Filed Dec. 28, 1987, effective June 11, 1988.
*Original authority: 313.640, RSMo 1986, amended 1987.
(5/31/01) Secretary of State 7
