U.S. Department of Energy 1996 Pollution Prevention Awards Program Program Description July 26, 1996
The U.S. Department of Energy (DOE) honored winners of eleven national pollution prevention awards in a ceremony July 10, 1996, in Chicago, Illinois.
Associate Deputy Secretary for Field Management Donald W. Pearman, Jr. presented awards to DOE employees and contractors as part of the 12th annual DOE Pollution Prevention Conference.
Pearman presented awards signed by Under Secretary Thomas Grumbly.
The awards honored work preventing waste and pollution performed by DOE employees and contractors in calendar year 1995.
The awards support an ongoing commitment by Secretary of Energy Hazel O'Leary toward pollution prevention.
In a May 3, 1996 memo, the Secretary stated "The Department of Energy pollution prevention strategy is to reduce the generation of all waste streams and thus minimize the impact of departmental operations on the environment."
Awards were presented in eleven categories ranging from solid waste recycling to source reduction to affirmative procurement.
DOE Headquarters Defense Programs was honored for its work facilitating procurement of ozone-friendly, energy-efficient chillers in cooperation with Systematic Management Services and the General Products Commodity Center of the General Services Administration.
Four awards were given to DOE operations in Richland, Washington.
Five employees at the Pacific Northwest National Laboratory were honored for the laboratory's environmental sustainability communications program.
Five employees at the PlutoniumUranium Extraction (PUREX) Facility were recognized for integrating the goals of waste minimization, risk reduction, and mortgage reduction into ongoing facility environmental restoration activities.
Two employees at the Hanford 242-A Evaporator were recognized for modifying the process to recycle a portion of the process condensate effluent, which should generate cumulative savings of $10 million over the projected operating life of the equipment.
Two employees of the ICF Kaiser Hanford Company machine shop were recognized for modifying shop processes to save $121,000 annually.
The Kansas City Plant received two awards.
The plant was honored for its success reducing the use and disposal of hazardous chemicals and for its partnership with Hewlett Packard in developing a non-hazardous precision cleaning agent.
Five employees at the Formerly Utilized Remedial Action Program (FUSRAP) General Motors Site in Oak Ridge, Tennessee were honored for cost-effective, integrated program planning resulting in significant waste reduction and savings of over $1.6 million.
The Y-12 Plant in Oak Ridge received recognition for its comprehensive solid waste recycling program.
Two Lawrence Berkeley Laboratory employees in Berkeley, California received an award for their 99% reduction in the generation of tritiated mixed waste in DNA synthesis experiments.
A special national achievement award was presented to the Albuquerque, Savannah River, and Oak Ridge Operations Offices for their management of a pilot project developing and implementing financial incentives for sites to reduce waste generation.
DOE Operations Offices across the country participated in the awards program, receiving nearly 100 nominations that were evaluated in a two-step judging process.
Sixty-seven of those nominations advanced to a second round of judging, from which the final winners were selected.
The awards program was designed to meet DOE pollution prevention incentive and technology transfer goals identified in the 1994 Waste Minimization/Pollution Prevention Crosscut Plan, signed by the Secretary on February 28, 1995.
This was the third year of the formal awards program.
Federal Environmental Executive Fran McPoland presented awards last year in Knoxville.
Deputy Secretary Bill White presented awards at the 1994 conference in Denver.
Award program categories were chosen to support the pollution prevention programmatic activities identified in the 1994 Crosscut Plan and in the 1996 Pollution Prevention Program Plan, signed by the Secretary on May 3, 1996.
The special plaques designed for the awards program were constructed from ground computer circuit boards by the Kansas City Plant in a process developed in conjunction with a Texas-based firm.
The awards program is open to DOE employees and contractors performing pollution prevention work for any DOE site.
2
1996 DOE Pollution Prevention Awards Program Abstracts of Nominations Selected for National Awards Affirmative Procurement Category "Development of a Basic Ordering Agreement (BOA) for the procurement of ozone-friendly, energy efficient chillers."
Nominees (Submitted by DOE Headquarters): Roger E. Snyder Systematic Management Services, Inc General Services Administration, General Products Commodity Center Other Participants: Robert W. Carden James E. Coyle Mark B. Ginsberg John R. Guice, Jr.
Defense Programs and the General Services Administration have developed an affirmative procurement process for replacing chlorofluorocarbon refrigerants.
Chlorofluorocarbons destroy the ozone and production is banned.
Significant benefits gained by replacing chillers under this BOA include: Reducing the use of ozone depleting substances; Reducing energy usage by replacing older, inefficient chillers with highly efficient chillers as recommended by the Federal Energy Management program; Reducing polluting emissions from the generation of electricity; Expediting cost-effective procurements for Federal agencies Use of the BOA will potentially lead to reductions of 24 million tons of power plant emissions and 6 million tons of chlorofluorocarbons.
Environmental Restoration Category "PUREX Facility Demonstration - A Waste Minimization Project."
Nominees (Submitted by the Richland Operations Office): Douglas G. Hamrick John Hayfield Waste minimization, risk reduction, and mortgage reduction are primary goals of the Plutonium Uranium Extraction Facility (PUREX) deactivation project.
Successes to date include the sale of 187,000 gallons of slightly radioactive nitric acid for reuse as a product; elimination of approximately 200,000 gallons of radioactive rinsate through reuse of tank flush waters; elimination of approximately 60,000 gallons of radioactive waste water through concentration; redeployment of approximately 3,000 cubic feet of laboratory equipment, 2.5 million pounds of chemicals, batteries, oil, and office supplies; strict inventory and project management controls to minimize wastes; and disassembly and removal from use of twelve HEPA filters, thereby reducing 1
the total amount of mixed waste generated by 169 cubic feet.
Information Sharing Category "Environmental Sustainability Program Communications at the Pacific Northwest National Laboratory."
Nominees (Submitted by the Richland Operations Office): Sandra Cannon Brooke Hill No single source of up-to-date information existed at the Pacific Northwest National Laboratory (PNNL) to help the staff of the U.S. Department of Energy and numerous contractors reduce/reuse/recycle office waste, purchase recycled products, and access regulatory information.
As a contractor-operated research facility of the U.S. Department of Energy, PNNL developed a centralized pollution prevention communications office as part of the Environmental Sustainability Program (ESP).
The ESP communications office inspires employees to perform pollution prevention and supports pollution prevention activities by serving as a centralized source of "howto," cost savings, and regulatory information.
Integrated Planning and Design Category "Up Front Planning and Design Provide Savings at the General Motors Site."
Nominee (Submitted by the Oak Ridge Operations Office): FUSRAP GM Team Participants: James Kopotic Gerry Palau Joe Wood A cost-effective program for integrated planning, hazard assessments, waste management, and use of an innovative technology was implemented at the Formerly Utilized Sites Remedial Action Program (FUSRAP) General Motors (GM) site resulting in savings of over $1.6 million.
By aggressively looking for opportunities in a number of key areas in the remediation process, waste volumes were reduced from 1,500 cubic yards to 175 cubic yards, wastewater was disposed at a savings of over $20 per gallon, and the impact of the cleanup on ongoing plant operations at the site was minimized.
Outstanding National Achievement Category "Pollution Prevention Generator Set-Aside Fee Pilot Demonstration."
Nominees (Submitted by the Albuquerque Operations Office): Jocelyn Siegel Catherine Schidel Sherri Johnson 2
Other Generator Set-Aside Fee Pilot Demonstration Team Members: Christine Gelles Ron McHugh John Marchetti Bob Fleming Andy Szilagyi Kent Hancock At its February 23, 1995 meeting, the Pollution Prevention Executive Board decided to pilot test a generator set-aside or "chargeback" program to encourage waste generator accountability, promote waste reduction, and provide a limited source of funds for actual pollution prevention implementation projects.
The generator set-aside initiative will have significant impact on how sites and waste generators do business.
Implementation of the Executive Board directive was delegated to a team lead by the Albuquerque Operations Office.
The decision to delegate implementation of such an important national program to the field was a significant expression of confidence.
The successes of the team show the confidence was justified.
1) The team has demonstrated the ability of the field to manage a national, headquarters pilot demonstration cutting across DOE program and funding lines while creating a high degree of ownership and responsibility among participants for the success of the program due to their continued active involvement in the process, 2) The team has demonstrated the ability of the field to work together to successfully resolve issues and obstacles including disparate financial accounting structures and waste tracking systems, generator resistance, and determinations of appropriate uses for collected funds.
3) Each of the sites participating in the pilot has been able to design site-specific programs addressing their particular circumstances while maintaining consistency with the overall pilot plan, cohesively merging site-specific requirements with those of headquarters.
4) This pilot demonstration will serve as the template for potential implementation throughout the complex, and has developed different approaches that could be used to set up similar set-aside programs at other sites.
5) Most importantly, this pilot creates a system whereby generators become more accountable for their waste generation, and pollution prevention projects are more easily funded and implemented.
Public Outreach and Partnership Category "Synergy CCS(TM) Precision Cleaning Agent: A Successful Government/Industry Partnership."
Nominee (Submitted by the Albuquerque Operations Office): U.S. DOE Kansas City Plant Participants: Tom Hand George Bohnert Mike Powers Synergy CCS (TM) is an environmentally derived, surfactant-free, recyclable Critical Cleaning 3
Solvent.
The Kansas City Plant, a Department of Energy facility, formulated the solvent to solve a problem of a small manufacturer.
The solvent was further developed and adopted by HewlettPackard, and then licensed to a world leader in alternative solvent technology, Petroferm, Inc.
Synergy CCS (TM) provides a wide range of cleaning capabilities for electrical and mechanical components.
Its ingredients are listed by the EPA as "approved" and biodegradable.
It is derived from naturally and annually renewable sources, can be distilled after use, and is compatible with most existing cleaning equipment.
Radioactive/Hazardous Waste Recycling Category "Process Condensate Recycle Project at the 242-A Evaporator."
Nominees (Submitted by the Richland Operations Office): Dave S. Haring Shaun P. Biglin The 242-A Evaporator facility is part of the Tank Waste Remediation System used at the Hanford Site to reduce the volume of radioactive waste stored in double-shell tanks.
Filtered raw water was used in the 242-A Evaporator process, contributing to condensate eventually requiring treatment.
A modification to the 242-A Evaporator replaced the use of filtered raw water by recycling a portion of the process condensate effluent, reducing both raw water usage and process condensate requiring further treatment.
Cumulative savings over the projected operating life of the 242-A Evaporator should exceed $10 million, greatly exceeding the original $230,000 cost of the modification.
Return on Investment Category "Machine Coolant Recycling at ICF Kaiser Hanford Machine Shop."
Nominees (Submitted by the Richland Operations Office): Todd Grabner Candice Marple During machining processes at the ICF Kaiser Hanford Company machine shop, a hazardous waste stream is created from dirty machine coolant.
The stream is designated as a Washington state dangerous waste with WP02 (persistence), D007 (chromium) and D008 (lead) waste codes.
As a result there was 13.5 cubic meters of hazardous waste generated per year at a cost of $138,000.
A pollution prevention opportunity assessment was completed.
In December, 1994 the company received ROI funding from the Department of Energy, Richland office.
A coolant recycling system was selected and installed in July 1995 for a total cost of $61,000.
The annual cost savings exceeded $121,000 for an ROI of 188%.
Solid Waste Recycling Category 4
"Solid Waste Recycling at Y-12."
Nominee (Submitted by the Oak Ridge Operations Office): Y-12 Plant, Lockheed Martin Energy Systems, Inc.
Y-12 uses a number of techniques to reduce landfill usage.
Source reduction of waste streams is performed wherever feasible.
Y-12 has also established a goal to achieve total recycling of waste streams such as paper, aluminum, and scrap wood.
The Y-12 recycling program was designed to 1) increase the longevity of the Y-12 landfill, 2) reduce costs to Y-12, 3) conserve energy and natural resources, and 4) comply with federal waste minimization regulations.
Due to the success of the plant-wide paper and aluminum recycling program, additional waste streams have been identified and targeted for recycling.
These streams include coal ash, automotive wastes from the Y-12 garage, fluorescent bulbs, and toner cartridges as well as surplus materials re-routed from disposal to the Y-12 Swap Shop.
TRI/33-50 Category "Toward Zero Discharge: 33/50 Chemicals Reductions at the Kansas City Plant."
Nominee (Submitted by the Albuquerque Operations Office): U.S. DOE Kansas City Plant Participants: Bryan E. Adams Gary A. Becka Mary Anne Benton George W. Bohnert Milton G. Bryant The Kansas City Plant, a major generator of pollution in the Kansas City area, has reduced the releases and transfers of its four EPA 33/50 Program reportable chemicals by 98.4 percent since 1988.
This has been accomplished in cooperation with the Defense Programs Design Agencies and the Department of Energy by redesigning processes and substituting less hazardous or toxic materials.
As of December 31, 1995, the use of dichloromethane and 1,1,1-trichloroethane has been essentially eliminated.
Trichloroethane and toluene usage have been reduced by 99 and 96 percent, respectively.
Zero Generation/Source Reduction Category "Reduction of Tritiated Mixed Waste by 99% in 1995."
Nominees (Submitted by the Oakland Operations Office): Mary H. Barcellos-Hoff Shraddha A. Ravani The principal investigator and staff scientist nominated for this award worked together in 1995 to 5
eliminate their use of tritium in DNA synthesis experiments.
In 1995, these two researchers began conducting experiments with the non-radioactive Luciferase assay method, which resulted in a 99% reduction of tritiated mixed waste compared to the generation rates in 1994.
This effort resulted in savings of radio-isotope purchases, waste generator assistance, waste and chemical management, and treatment costs.
6
1996 DOE Pollution Prevention Awards Program Nominations/Nominees Awarded Certificates Recycled Paper at the Kansas City Plant Robert E. Beauchamp Gregory M. Colletti Gary R. Haglund Recycling at the Kansas City Plant Kansas City Plant The Chemistry and Metallurgy Research Facility Upgrades Project: Los Alamos National Laboratory Dennis Basile Bill Belvin Al Bridge Michelle Burns Theresa Cull Russ Durrer Dwayne Ethridge Cheryll Faust Joe Gonzales Juan Griego John Harvey Larry Haynes Kristine Horpedahl Los Alamos National Laboratory Decomissioning and Environmental Restoration Projects Larry Byars Tommy Hernandez Value Engineering for Waste Reduction in Decomissioning Projects: Los Alamos National Laboratory Michelle Burns Chemical Exchange Assistance Program and External Recycling (CHEAPER) at Los Alamos National Laboratory Michelle Burns Dual Phased Liquid and Vapor Treatment System: Pantex Plant Jim Rogers Rechargeable Batteries: Pantex Plant Kenny Steward Digital Photographic Equipment: Pantex Plant Kevin Brown 7
Thermal Decontamination of Tritium Contaminated Materials at the Pantex Plant Tamara Criste Reuse of Weapon Components for Other DOE Sites: Pantex Plant Mike Lee Solvent Substitutions: Pantex Plant Kevin Brown Recycling Program at Pantex Plant Kenny Steward Recycling of Asphalt and Concrete at Pantex Plant Mike Luhman Toner Cartridge Recharging: Pantex Plant Kenny Steward Waste Reduction Information Exchange: Pantex Plant Tamara Criste Lamp Replacement and Recycling at Sandia National Laboratory-New Mexico Max Saad Radioactive/Hazardous Waste Recycling at the Pinellas Plant Angela D. Bolds The Los Alamos National Laboratory Pollution Prevention Reporter Greg Erpenbeck Type A Disposable Molecular Sieve Bed (DMSB) Redesign: Princeton Plasma Physics Laboratory Robert J. Cislo Scott B. Larson Dedicated Low-Flow Ground Water Monitoring Pumps: Princeton Plasma Physics Laboratory Robert S. Sheneman Liquid Scintillation Vial Crusher at Princeton Plasma Physics Laboratory Robert J. Cislo Design of Alternate Cleaning Systems for Ultra-High Vacuum System Components: Brookhaven National Laboratory Conrad Foerster George Goode
8
Brookhaven National Laboratory Solid Waste Recycling Program Fred Altrui Claire Appleton Oscar E. Blevins Kathy Boggi Diane Carlson David Comstock April Donegain Joel Errante Tony Fuoco Dick Giesler Donna Grabowski Conversion of the Experimental Boiling Water Reactor to a Waste Storage Facility: Argonne National Laboratory Chuck Fellhauer Gail MacMillan Airlie House Pilot Pollution Prevention Technology Transfer Project: Argonne National Laboratory Randy Lansberg Jennifer McHenry WMin and P2 Initiatives Associated with the Building 212 H-Wing Restoration Project: Argonne National Laboratory David Eichholzer Kevin Klosowski Argonne National Laboratory Building Maintenance and Crafts Glycol and Equipment Oil Conservation Richard Pagel Wmin/P2 at Argonne National Laboratory's Vehicle Maintenance Facility (Building 46) James Huggins WMin/P2 Initiatives within Argonne National Laboratory Boiler House Operations Allen Carbaugh Getting the Word Out: DOE's Leadership Role in Federal Agency Pollution Prevention: DOE Headquarters Jane Powers DOE High Return on Investment Team: DOE Headquarters Christine Gelles
9
DOE's Pollution Prevention Information Clearinghouse (EPIC): DOE Headquarters Arnold Edelman Susan Henson Biological Treatment of Produced Water at Naval Petroleum Reserve No. 3 John Brodrecht Clint Edwards Cardboard Recycling at Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory Saving Money in Environmental Restoration at Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory Lawrence Livermore National Laboratory - Environmental Restoration Program Green Team Culture Change and Community Outreach: Lawrence Berkeley Laboratory Shaun Fennessey Anne Kumaranayagam On-Site Vegetation Management: Lawrence Berkeley Laboratory Robert Berninzoni DOE and TVA Combine Resources to Plan Waste Reductions: Oak Ridge K-25 Site John Dries Gerald Melton Recycling of Radioactively Contaminated Metal from DOE Uranium Enrichment Plant: Oak Ridge K-25 Site Jeff Gilbert Suzanne Herron FUSRAP In-situ Radiological Survey of Underground Piping Marty Keller James Kopotic FUSRAP Rock Crusher - Recycling Material in Environmental Cleanups James Kopotic Gerry Palau Innovative Approach to Design and Remedial Action at the Chapman Valve Site Jerry Blust Marty W. Davis Jim Jones Preparation and Distribution of the publication Pollution Prevention Guide for Oak Ridge Reservation Employees Belgin D. Barkenbus Janet Michel 10
In-Line Solvent Recycling at the Pacific Northwest National Laboratory Scott A. Clauss Eric W. Hoppe Expanded Office Recycling Program at the Pacific Northwest Laboratory Sandra Cannon Darrick Dietrich Affirmative Procurement Practices at ICF Kaiser Hanford Company Ann Langevin Recycling Activities at ICF Kaiser Hanford ICF Kaiser Hanford Environmental Services South Rodney Bell Ed Lamm Ryan Ollero Partnering with the City of Richland to Expand City Drop Box Recycling Program: Hanford Site Kim McDowell Software Recycling at the Hanford Site Kim McDowell Chemical Commodity Management Center Savannah River Site Asset Recovery Team Savannah River Site Tritium Facilities "Go For the Green" Housekeeping Day Savannah River Site Partners with Commercial Nuclear Plants Savannah River Site Hazardous Waste Reduction in Environmental Restoration Savannah River Site Solid Waste Recycling Initiatives Savannah River Site
11
U.S. Department of Energy Pollution Prevention Awards program Round Two Judges Team #1 Information Sharing, Public Outreach and Partnership categories Othalene Lawrence - Team Leader Angelia Adams Priscilla Halloran Team #2 Radioactive/Hazardous Waste Recycling, Solid Waste Recycling, Affirmative Procurement categories Stephen Warren - Team Leader Team #3 Environmental Restoration, Zero Generation/Source Reduction, TRI/33-50 categories Robert Fleming - Team Leader Carol Parker David Sarokin Team #4 Integrated Planning and Design, Return on Investment categories Stuart Altman - Team Leader Pete Ritzcovan Thomas Sachar
12
