APPLYING FOR YOUR LICENSE You can apply for your license anywhere, not just in the county where you live.
For a complete list of driver license stations, see the list of stations on last two pages of this handbook.
This chapter describes what you need to do to apply for your license.
For a quick overview, see the following checklist.
Table: 2.1
Proof Of Identity At A Glance Table: 2.2
Original License
Two pieces of identification.
You must provide positive proof of your full name and full date of birth.
Items we consider positive proof include: · The original, certified birth certificate · Your military ID · A license issued from another state · Adoptive decree · Your passport · Marriage certificate Supportive documentation may include such pieces of identification as: · Your own child's birth certificate · Social Security card ALSO, if not a U.S. citizen: · Resident alien card, or passport with I-94
Tips To Help You Get Your License Faster Bring the Right Documents (No photocopies or carbon copies) EVERYONE: · Proof of your age and identity (examples on next table) · Proof of any name changes since birth certificate · Proof of social security number PLUS, IF UNDER AGE 18: (Before July 1, 2001) · Parent to sign Minor/Teenage Affidavit form · Proof of School Attendance/Progress · Proof of previous driving experience (driver education certificate, learner permit for 3 months, or out-of-state license held for 3 months) If under age 18 after July 1, 2001, see Table: 2.4.
Clear Up Outstanding Problems You May Have In Any Other States Tennessee is linked to all of the other states through a computer system known as the Problem Driver Pointer System.
Until all problems elsewhere are cleared up, Tennessee cannot issue you a driver license.
Duplicate, Lost License
Two pieces of identification, including any of the above, or such items as: · Vehicle registration · School records · Health or life insurance documents · Work ID
Bring The Proper Fees Common fees are listed in the next section.
We can take cash, checks, or money orders payable to the Tennessee Department of Safety.
Come During Our Least Busy Hours Generally, before 11:00 a.m. our lines are shorter.
AVOID LUNCH HOUR OR RIGHT AFTER SCHOOL OR WORK IF YOU CAN.
Renewal
Your current license or the same identification as for a duplicate · Your current license, or two pieces of identification as required for original license Proof of the change, such as: · Original, certified court order · Marriage certificate or · Divorce decree
What Do You Need To Bring? To reduce the potential for fraud, and to protect you, it is necessary for us to be able to determine that you are "who you say you are."
This is why it is necessary for you to bring us positive proof of your name and date of birth, and why we require original or certified documents, not photocopies.
If your current name is different than the one shown on these documents, you must be able to show all of the links between your name currently on file with the department and the name you currently desire to have shown, with each link supported by original, certified legal documents.
We cannot accept name changes through the mail.
New residents
Change of Name NOTE: Applies to any of above if any primary documents have name different than your current name
REMEMBER -- NO PHOTOCOPIES! Tennessee Driver Handbook 10 Applying For Your License
More On The Social Security Number Tennessee law requires the social security number for all applications.
The department is also required to maintain this information on each applicant's record.
However, you can choose whether or not to have it printed on your license.
Tennessee has a computer link with the Social Security Administration, so most applicants will not have to present proof of the social security number.
The computer will simply return a message indicating that the number matches (or not).
However, to make sure the examiner accurately records the number, you could bring one of the documents listed below.
These documents may also serve as a second piece of identification, which you will need any way, so it makes sense to bring them along when you can.
· Your original Social Security card · The Internal Revenue Service W-2 Wage and Tax Statement form · A computer generated payroll check or bank statement · Health insurance card with both name and Social Security numbers
If Under Age Eighteen First License or Learner Permit (Before July 1, 2001) Tennessee begins issuing a Graduated Driver License on July 1, 2001.
This means that if by June 30, 2001 you are under age 18 and do not have a full Class D license, the new law will apply to you.
This new law is explained in the next section.
Meanwhile, under the current law, when applicants under the age of 18 apply for a driver license, proof of previous driving experience is required.
They must either: 1.
First obtain a learner permit for at least three (3) months; 2.
Bring a certificate of successful completion for an approved driver education course offered by a public school, public institution of higher learning, or a licensed commercial driver training school; or 3.
Have been licenses to drive in another state for at least three months.
License Fees At A Glance Tennessee licenses now expire every five years on the driver 's birthday evenly divisible by five (age 30, 35, 40 . . .
55, 60, 65, etc.).
This makes it easier for drivers to remember when it is time to renew, and means they have to renew less often than before.
To get you on the "Drive for Five" cycle, your first license may be for a shorter or longer period than five years.
If so, fees will be pro-rated.
Everyone pays the same fees PER YEAR for each license.
The fees shown below as "standard fees" are calculated for a 5-year license and include an application fee.
Table: 2.3
CLASS D -- Operators D w/For Hire Adding For Hire PD -- Learner Permit H ID Only ID Only M -- Motorcycle DM A B, C Duplicate -- D or M Duplicate -- CDL As of July 1, 2001 Intermediate Restricted Intermediate Unrestricted "Graduating" to Class D Tennessee Driver Handbook
MINIMUM AGE 16 18 18 15 14 Under 18 Over 18 14 16 21 21 -- -- 16 17 18 11
STANDARD FEES $19.50 $22.00 $4.50 $5.50 (for 1 year) $9.00 $5.00 $9.50 $20.50 $38.00 $46.00 $41.00 $8.00 for first, $12.00 for subsequent $12.00 for first, $16.00 for subsequent $24.50 $2.00 $8.00 Applying For Your License
Graduated Driver License (Effective July 1, 2001) Under the new law, the rules for getting a driver license change for those under age 18.
These rules are summarized in Table 2.4.
Motor vehicle crashes are the major cause of death for young people between the ages of 15 and 20.
By requiring more supervised practice, the State of Tennessee hopes to save lives and prevent tragic injuries.
Second Level - Intermediate Unrestricted License · To obtain this license you must be 17 years old.
· You must have held an Intermediate Restricted License for one (1) year.
· You cannot have accumulated more than six points on your driving record.
· You cannot have had a traffic accident that was your fault.
· You cannot have 2 seat belt violations.
Passengers between 4 and 17 years of age must be wearing a seat belt.
You may obtain a Class D (Regular Driver License) when you are 18 years of age.
The word "Intermediate" will be omitted, however, the license will still appear as "Under 21".
Changes for Learner Permit You must be 15 years old and pass the standard written and visual exams.
· As of July 1, 2001, under the new law, you have to hold a learner permit for six (6) months instead of three (3) months.
(If you obtain a learner permit before July 1, 2001 but it was not issued six (6) months prior to July 1, 2001, you will have to keep the learner permit for six (6) months or until age 16.)
· As of July 1, 2001, you may drive a car when accompanied by a license driver 21 years or older.
· As of July 1, 2001, you may not drive between the hours of 10 P.M. and 6 A.M.
Passengers between 4-17 years of age must wear a seat belt.
Minor/Teenage Affidavits (Applies to old and new laws) Applicants not yet eighteen years old must have an adult sign a Minor/Teenage Affidavit and Cancellation form, available at all driver license stations.
This form confirms that the adult signing the form joins in the application for the license and will be responsible for the actions of the minor driver.
It must be signed by a parent, a step-parent living at the same address as the applicant, legal guardian, or a grandparent authorized by the parent, step-parent or guardian.
If adults cannot accompany the minor to the driver license station to sign the form, it may be picked up ahead of time and signed before a notary public.
If the grandparent is assuming financial responsibility for the youth, the grandparent must bring a notarized statement authorizing this, signed by the parent, step-parent, custodian or guardian, as appropriate.
The statement is not on a department form, but should be in the following general format: "I do hereby authorize __________________________________ (name of grandparent)
Intermediate License As of July 1, 2001 there will be two (2) Intermediate License levels for those who are under 18 years of age.
The first level is the Intermediate Restricted License and the second level is the Intermediate Unrestricted License.
First Level - Intermediate Restricted License · You must be sixteen (16) years old and pass the driving test.
· You must have held a learner permit for six (6) months.
· You cannot have more than six (6) points on your record during the immediate 180 days preceding your application.
· You must have verification from a parent, legal guardian or license instructor stating you have fifty (50) hours (ten (10) hours at night) of driving experience.
(Note: Verification certificates can be obtained at the Driver License Stations.
to sign for a driver license for __________________________." (name of minor)
Signed: ______________________________________________ (name and relationship of adult granting authorization)
(Notary certificate)
Restrictions of the Intermediate Restricted License You may not drive between 11 P.M. and 6 A.M.
· Unless accompanied by a parent, legal guardian or license driver 21 years or older.
Your parents or legal guardian must designate this person.
· Unless you are driving to or from work, school or school activity (you should have in your possession written permission from a parent or guardian relative to your activity).
· Unless you are driving to or from a hunting or fishing destination between 4 A.M. and 6 A.M. (you must have in your possession a valid hunting or fishing license).
· You may not have more than one passenger in the car, unless one or more passengers are 21 years of age or older, or the passengers are siblings being driven to and from school.
Passengers between 4 and 17 years of age must wear a seat belt.
Tennessee Driver Handbook 12
Proof of School Attendance/Progress (Applies to old and new laws) Applicants under the age of 18 must prove they are either enrolled in or have already graduated from high school.
If they have graduated, they must bring their high school diploma or G.E.D. certificate with them when they apply.
If not, they need to ask their school to complete a Certificate of Compulsory School Attendance and take the original part of this form with them to a driver license station.
The form is valid for only one month.
If a student fifteen years old or older drops out of school, the school is required to notify the Department of Safety which suspends the student's driving privileges.
The first time a student drops out, he or she may regain the privilege to drive by returning to school and making satisfactory academic progress.
There is no second chance, however.
The second Applying For Your License
time a student drops out he or she must wait to turn 18 years old before being eligible to apply.
If a person who dropped out does return to school, the appropriate school official can certify the student has returned by completing a different section of the Certificate of Compulsory School Attendance.
They will give the student a pink copy of the form to take with them to a driver license station.
The student will be required to pay a $20 reinstatement fee on top of the appropriate application and license fees.
Other fees may be added as well, depending on the individual's history.
several ways to renew a driver license, which will be explained on your notice.
· If you have a current valid photo license, you may renew by mail, or by Internet.
You will receive a sticker to put on the back of your license, extending your license for another renewal cycle.
· If you have already received a sticker, or have certain types of licenses, your renewal notice will direct you to go to your nearest driver license station to have a new photograph made.
· If you are 60 years old or older and choose to have a non-photo license, you may obtain this by mail.
You will be sent a new non-photo license to replace your old license.
Other Applicants New Residents People who move to Tennessee must obtain a Tennessee driver license no later than thirty days after establishing residency.
After passing the required tests, they must surrender all out-of-state driver licenses.
Tennessee law does not allow a resident of this state to hold more than one valid license or ID.
If the new resident presents an out-of-state driver license that has not expired, only the vision test is required, unless otherwise deemed necessary by the Examiner.
However, if the license has expired over six months, all tests are required.
Military Personnel If a person holds a valid Tennessee license and is in or enters into the United States armed forces, that license shall remain valid as long as the person remains on active duty, and is based outside this state.
Members of the National Guard and family members of military personnel are not eligible for this provision.
While on active duty the military person may have a "Code 30" placed on the license to indicate that the license does not expire.
To add this code, bring a copy of your military orders to the driver license station and pay the appropriate fees.
Note, after you have been honorably discharged or separated from the military, or reassigned to a duty station back in Tennessee, you have sixty (60) days following the date of separation on the DD214 form to renew your license without any penalty or added tests.
R
Your Tennessee Driver License
ENEW O NL
INE
Don't Let Your License Expire.
No matter how you renew, the important thing is to do so before your license expires.
If you let 30 days go by after your expiration date, there will be a five-dollar late fee.
After six months, the late fee doubles to $10.00.
If you let five years go by without renewing, not only will you have to pay the $10.00 late fee, you will also have to pass vision, knowledge, and skills test.
NOTE: These are not "grace periods."
When your license expires, you are no longer entitled to drive, and will be subject to the same penalties as someone who has never been licensed.
It is your responsibility to maintain the validity of your license.
If you do not receive your renewal notice, you may simply take your current license to any driver license station.
The renewal notice itself is not necessary for you to be able to renew your license.
Q: How Do I Change My Address? It is important to notify the department of safety! If your residence address changes (even though you may not have moved) you are required by state law to notify the Department of Safety within ten (10) days of this change.
Sometimes addresses are changed without people actually moving.
For example, if your area installs an emergency "911" system, your address may be changed with the Post Office.
But simply notifying postal authorities will not provide the information to us.
By failing to notify us, you could miss the renewal date of your license, or even have your driving privileges suspended or revoked unnecessarily.
The law does not require the address to be changed on your actual license, just on our files.
If you want to have your 13 Applying For Your License
Other Common Questions Q: How Do I Replace a Lost License? If your driver license or learner permit is ever lost, stolen or destroyed, you may obtain a duplicate by applying at any driver license station.
You must apply in person, present two pieces of proper identification, and pay the appropriate fee.
This fee may vary depending upon the number of duplicates applied for during the current renewal cycle of your license.
Q: How Do I Renew My License? The department mails every driver a courtesy renewal notice from four to six weeks before their licenses expire.
READ YOUR RENEWAL NOTICE CAREFULLY.
There are Tennessee Driver Handbook
Table: 2.4
PD
At least 6 months
Level 1
At least 12 months
Level 2 INTERMEDIATE UNRESTRICTED
Until age 18
Level 3 REGULAR CLASS D Must be at least 18 years of age Optional: can apply for a duplicate of license, without the word "Intermediate" on its face
LEARNER PERMIT CLASS PD Requirements: Must be 15 years old Vision Exam Knowledge Test SF 1010 Form (Proof of Compulsory School Attendance and Satisfactory Progress)
INTERMEDIATE RESTRICTED Must be 16 years old Held a valid PD for 6 months Certification of 50 hours behind-the-wheel experience, including 10 hours at night Cannot have: six or more points on driving record during the 180 days immediately preceding application [this would add a 90 day waiting period to the 6 month PD duration]
Parent or Legal guardian must sign Teenage Affidavit of Financial Responsibility Birth Certificate* Social Security Number **
At least 17 years old Held a valid Restricted Intermediate for 1 year Cannot have: six or more points on driving record have been at fault in a traffic crash have been convicted of a 2nd seatbelt violation [these would add a 90 day waiting period to the 1 yr Intermediate Restricted duration]
Driving Test Fees: $10.50, any age Age 16 = $24.50 Age 17 = $21.00 Age 18 = Eligible for regular driver license Age 17 = $2.00 Age 18 = Eligible for regular driver license ($8 duplicate fee if had Intermediate license) Same expiration date @ age 21 Seatbelts mandatory for all passengers age 4 thru 17 (or child restraint device if under age 4) No additional restrictions, however, license still states "Intermediate" prominently on the face of the license $8.00 or $12.00, regular duplicate fee depending upon if 1st or subsequent duplicate
Issued for: Restrictions:
12 months Must have licensed driver age 21 or older in front seat Cannot drive between 10:00 PM - 6:00 AM Seatbelts mandatory for all passengers age 4 thru 17 (or child restraint device if under age 4)
until age 21 Only one passenger Cannot drive between 11:00 PM - 6:00 AM Seatbelts mandatory of all passengers age 4 thru 17 (or child restraint device if under age 4)
Same expiration date @ age 21 No restrictions and license looks like regular "Under 21 license"
* See Chapter 2, page 10 for information on acceptable forms of identification ** See Chapter 2, page 11 for more information in SSN requirements 1 May have more than one passenger IF (1) one or more passengers is age 21 or older and has a valid, unrestricted license, or (2) passenger are siblings residing in same house as driver and going to and from school IF the license holder has written permission from parent or guardian 2 May drive during prohibited hours IF: (1) accompanied by a parent or guardian: (2) if accompanied by a licensed driver 21 or older who has been designated by parent or guardian in writing, with note in possession of the teen driver; (3) driving to or from work and have in their possession written permission from a parent or guardian identifying place of employment and authorizing driver to go to and from work: or (4) hunting or fishing with valid hunting/fishing license
record updated, write to us and give us your name (as it appears on your license), date-of-birth, Social Security number and, of course, your driver license number.
You may do this by letter, by picking up a change-of-address form at any driver license station, or by emailing us at our website.
If you want a new license issued that reflects this change, you may go to a driver license station, pay the appropriate fees, and have a new license issued.
When giving us your new address, remember that by law, your license must show your legal resident address: a house, Tennessee Driver Handbook 14
and/or apartment number and the street or number.
The city along with the correct required.
A post office box alone will not mailing address.
For on-line service visit http://www.state.tn.us/safety
a route and box zip code is also be accepted as a our web site at:
Q: How May I Choose to Release Personal Information From My Record? The Federal Driver Privacy Protection Act (DPPA) prohibits the dissemination or disclosure of personal Applying For Your License
information from a motor vehicle record without the "express consent" of the person to whom such information pertains.
Therefore, in order to comply with the act, as of June 1, 2000 the personal information contained in your driver license record is protected.
Without your express consent, we will not release your personal information to people wanting
a mailing list or individuals who ask for your record for an unspecified purpose.
If you want us to release your information you should visit the local Driver License Station to file your request or visit our website at http//www.state.tn.us/safety/dl/privacy.html
Tennessee Driver Handbook
15
Applying For Your License
