GENERAL INFORMATION Thank you for the opportunity to tell you about Civil Air Patrol and our Cadet Program--a program especially designed for America's youth.
Civil Air Patrol, the official auxiliary of the U.S. Air Force, is a non-profit, aviationoriented, civilian volunteer organization.
Our volunteers have three main purposes-- Emergency Services, Aerospace Education, and the Cadet Program.
So, what does all of this have to do with you? W ell, we think you'll find Civil Air Patrol has much to offer.
For example, if you have an interest in aviation or the military, or if you just want to sharpen your leadership skills and associate with other young people providing humanitarian service to your community, you will find these opportunities in Civil Air Patrol.
Many cadets make friends for life through Civil Air Patrol's numerous youth activities.
Civil Air Patrol cadets also enjoy identification with the Air Force and are authorized to wear the Air Force uniform with distinctive Civil Air Patrol insignia and devices.
CADET ELIGIBILITY Young men and women who are U.S. citizens aliens "lawfully admitted for permanent residence" may become Civil Air Patrol cadets.
Additionally, prospective cadets must be in school or, if graduated from high school, not be married or in the active military service.
To join, a new cadet must be attending the sixth grade or be 12 years old.
The maximum age for entering the Cadet Program is 18.
Those who enter before age 19 may elect to remain a cadet until age 21 or become a senior member at age 18.
Becoming a Civil Air Patrol cadet does not obligate you to join any of the United States armed forces.
TRAINING
The Cadet Program helps develop thousands of young men and women to become leaders of the future.
Training includes, but is not limited to flying, military drill and ceremonies, aerospace education, wilderness survival skills, rescue and first aid, radio communications, as well as the study of navigation, weather, and aviation.
Hundreds of Civil Air Patrol cadets each year are given orientation flights in many different types of military aircraft and gliders.
Also, cadets may compete for flying and academic scholarships as they advance in the program.
Cadet membership dues vary from state to state so check with your local Civil Air Patrol unit.
ACTIVITIES In addition to the training program, Civil Air Patrol cadets are eligible to attend exciting local, national, and international activities each year.
Some of these events include U.S. Air Force pilot and space program familiarization training; education at Air Force and other Department of Defense installations; summer encampments on military installations across the nation; pararescue orientation courses; flight training through solo with Civil Air Patrol instructors; competition for Civil Air Patrol scholarships; attendance at Cadet Officer School and Cadet Leadership School; participation in Civil Air Patrol's National Cadet Competition; assistance in community events and more.
Increased rank, responsibility, and public recognition are also available based on advancement in the Cadet Program.
WORLD-WIDE TRAVEL Each year approximately 100 Civil Air Patrol cadets along with senior member escorts are selected to travel to 14 foreign countries as part of the International Air Cadet Exchange (IACE).
This program fosters understanding, good will, and friendship among the world's youth who have a mutual interest in aviation.
Civil Air Patrol IACE participants visit nations around the globe, from Europe to the Orient.
Also, Civil Air Patrol units across the nation host aviationoriented cadets from participating foreign countries.
AIR FORCE RECOGNITION In some cases, free uniforms are provided (depending on availability), but in all cases cadets are authorized to purchase uniform items from the Army Air Force Exchange Service at the same prices as active duty military members.
Read on for information about Civil Air Patrol's many exciting adventures and opportunities.
The Air Force gives preferential treatment to certain cadets who excel in the program.
Cadets who earn the General Billy Mitchell Award in the Cadet Program are eligible to enlist in the Air Force, Air Force Reserve, or the Air National Guard in an advanced pay grade.
The Mitchell Award also entitles cadets to training credit when applying for entry into the Air Force Reserve Officer Training Corps.
Additionally, the Air Force may give Civil Air Patrol cadets who have earned the General Carl A. Spaatz Award preference when applying for Air Force commissioning or entry into the Air Force Academy.
You should visit your local unit for information about Civil Air Patrol in your area.
FIND YOUR FUTURE WITH...
CIVIL AIR PATROL For more information, go to our website www.mnwg.cap.gov.
Headquarters, MN Wing Civil Air Patrol United States Air Force Auxiliary P.O. Box 11230 St. Paul, MN 55111-0230 (651) 291-0462 AVIATION AND MILITARY CAREERS Civil Air Patrol is an excellent way to explore careers and opportunities in both the military and aviation fields.
Cadets have many opportunities to see how the military works on a daily basis, as well as the inner workings of the civilian aviation industry.
In addition, CAP participation is looked upon favorably by service academy admission boards and in some cases may waive some ROTC training requirements.
FOR ADDITIONAL INFORMATION AMERICA'S AIR FORCE AUXILIARY! SERVING AMERICA SINCE 1941 COUNTRY - YOUTH - COMMUNITY In this short brochure it's impossible to tell you about all the exciting and challenging programs you can be a part of as a Civil Air Patrol cadet.
Since this is a private organization conducted by volunteers, programs and activities will vary from unit to unit, depending on the interest and involvement of the citizens in your community.
CADET PROGRAMS
