Biological Control Sends Scurrying Scourge Scrambling L ike the industrious ant in one of entomologist Doug Streett, began a 5contain baits alone as a control group, Aesop's fables, the imported fire year project in 2001 to assess the impact for comparison.
This helps researchers ant thrives because it's diligent.
of biological control agents used along learn whether the biological control The fictional ant in the famous with chemical bait toxicants in keeping agents slow reinfestation by the ants.
The story worked hard to prepare for the onimported fire ants at manageable levels.
baits are highly effective and achieve 90 set of winter while the grasshopper "The ants are more than a simple to 95 percent control with a single appliplayed.
But a modern retelling of the old annoyance," Vogt says.
"If disturbed, cation, but baits aren't enough if used tale might have ARS scientists working they sting.
They're called `fire' ants alone because ants reinfest areas after equally as hard to gain the upper hand because their sting causes an intense treatments.
T. solenopsae and the flies, over troublesome fire ants. burning sensation.
Some people are on the other hand, are sustainable Although the red imported fire ant, hypersensitive and react strongly, and solutions.
Solenopsis invicta, is more well-known some even die."
Fire ants also reduce ARS researchers are working with to most Americans because it infests a populations of native ants, other insects, Alabama A
Tennessee State University (TSU) to S. richteri, actually arrived here first, In cooperation with the Mississippi study phorid fly effectiveness.
Cooperaback in 1918.
They are currently found Agricultural and Forestry Experiment tors at these institutions released flies in only in Mississippi, Alabama, and Station, Stoneville researchers estab2002 in an effort to reduce fire ant probTennessee. lished four demonstration sites in the lems over large, low-value areas such as A hybrid fire ant--a cross between a state to explore the feasibility of a biopastures, where baits are not practical.
red and a black--was first identified in logical control program.
Cattle producers find it too expensive to 1985 by ARS scientists at the Imported Two of the four sites contain T. treat with baits every year and are inFire Ant and Household Insects Research solenopsae and phorid flies in comterested in self-sustaining alternatives, Unit at Gainesville, Florida.
No one is bination with bait toxicants, and two sites such as phorid flies.
Long-term projects entirely sure why different species are under way to assess the flies' SCOTT BAUER (K10387-1) of fire ants predominate in certain impact as they're introduced and regions.
established.
The abundance of black imMass-rearing technology enported fire ants in the Mid South sures a steady supply of flies for provides James "J.T." Vogt, an research, release, and establishentomologist at the Biological ment in the United States.
Vogt Control of Pests Research Unit in established a rearing facility at the Stoneville, Mississippi, with the Biological Control and Mass opportunity to evaluate control Rearing Research Unit in Starkagents against them as well as the ville, Mississippi, for one biotype red ones.
One agent under study of a specific species of phorid fly is Thelohania solenopsae, a singlecalled Pseudacteon curvatus that celled protozoan parasite first especially favors black imported isolated by ARS scientists at fire ants and hybrids.
Gainesville.
(See "Update: Hot on "The facility can produce the Trail of Fire Ants," Agricul3,000 to 5,000 flies a day," Vogt tural Research, February 2003, p. says.
"To establish flies in an area, 20.)
Infected colonies die out in 9 ants are collected from the field, to 18 months.
Another biocontrol exposed to the flies in large `attool they're investigating is the fire tack boxes' in the laboratory and ant-decapitating phorid fly, which then released back into their uses the ant's head as a protective source colonies."
home for its developing maggot young.
High-Tech Solutions The Stoneville program is rela- Technician John Davis measures a black imported fire ant The researchers are using a tively new, established in 2000.
mound while entomologist James Vogt records data.
Mound geographic information system to Vogt and his research leader, area affects visibility in aerial images.
track phorid fly establishment Agricultural Research/May 2003 16 SCOTT BAUER (K10391-1) Ants on a lifter cup: When a cup is in the up position, fire ants travel back to the tray surface using plastic strips that hang down.
Every 10 minutes, the cups switch position (moving up or down).
This causes the ants to trail back and forth in seeking shelter and increases their exposure to attacking phorid flies.
Being frequently on the move, the ants are also unable to group together to defend against the flies.
SCOTT BAUER (K10386-1) Phorid fly, Pseudacteon tricuspis, about 1/32-inch long.
Entomologist James Vogt examines a lifter cup in a phorid fly rearing system.
SCOTT BAUER (K10390-1) Agricultural Research/May 2003 17 SCOTT BAUER (K10389-2) with geographically referenced coordinates.
Using the global positioning system to calculate their positions, they can relocate ant mounds where they released flies with an accuracy of less than 1 meter.
Otherwise, it can be difficult to navigate rough terrain and return to an exact point.
They use hand-held personal computers to display coordinates in a map overlay to monitor their spread and measure the progress of their attempts to establish the flies.
Vogt and cooperators developed techniques to secure imagery of fire ant mounds from airplanes and quantify infestations over large areas.
They use passive remote sensing instruments to detect sunlight reflected by mounds and mark areas infested by imported fire ants.
The plane-mounted camera system uses four separate sensors to obtain truecolor and false-color infrared, multispectral images of fire ant mounds.
Vogt says the mounds typically have a ring of thriving vegetation surrounding them at Technician John Davis uses a GPS unit to record the exact position of a fire ant mound.
Mound position data are overlaid onto aerial digital images of the study site to determine mound visibility.
Knowing the exact location of a mound also allows researchers to place parasitized ants back into their original colonies.
SCOTT BAUER (K10388-1) Technician Debbie Smith weighs groups of fire ants for use in the phorid fly rearing system.
certain times of the year.
The digital images display a dark spot where the mound is located, surrounded by a bright red ring, which indicates healthy vegetation in the false-color infrared images.
Also, because mounds heat up in morning hours more quickly than the surrounding soil does, the researchers are using thermal cameras to measure infrared emission (heat) and locate fire ant mounds, which appear as bright spots in images taken from the air.
The Stoneville researchers will use their remote sensing techniques in the spring of 2003 when they partner with Jason Oliver of TSU to help nurseries in Warren County, Tennessee, hold off quarantine status of the ball and burlap tree and plant industry.
Counties to the south of Warren are under partial quarantine to help slow the spread of imported fire ants to other areas of the state.
This means they have to treat their stock and soil with the few, costly insecticide treatments approved by USDA's Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service.
The Stoneville researchers plan on using remote sensing imagery to help the Tennessee Department of Agriculture identify high-priority areas in those quarantined counties as part of an areawide program to manage imported fire ants.--By Jim Core, ARS.
This research is part of Arthropod Pests of Animals and Humans, an ARS National Program (#104) described on the World Wide Web at www.nps.ars. usda.gov.
Douglas A. Streett and James T. Vogt are with the USDA-ARS Biological Control of Pests Research Unit, 141 Experiment Station Road, Stoneville, MS 38776; phone (662) 686-5229 [Street], (662) 686-3065 [Vogt]
Agricultural Research/May 2003 18
