Background Investigations of Foreign Employees General Accounting Office Washington, D.C. 20648 National Security and International AfYairs Division
united states
B-231229 January 6,1989 The Honorable John Conyers Chairman, Committee on Government Operations House of Representatives Dear Mr. Chairman: To reduce the vulnerability of U.S. overseasposts to espionageand terrorist attacks, the State Department uses a variety of physical and procedural measures,including the program to perform background investigations on foreign nationals working at the posts and periodically updating these investigations.
In responseto CongressmanJack Brooks' September 22,1987, request, we reviewed the State Department's procedures for conducting such investigations and reinvestigations.
Res' Its in Brief P
Our review at U.S. diplomatic posts in nine countries showed that State had not routinely investigated or reinvestigated the backgrounds of many foreign nationals with regular accessto US. facilities and officials overseas,as required.
In particular, local guards and foreign nationals working for commercial firms that provide routine services, such as equipment maintenance and janitorial work, had not been adequately investigated at someposts.
These shortcomings represent not only non compliance with State regulations but more importantly, a gap in the U.S. efforts to reduce the risk of espionageand terrorism at overseasposts.
6
Background ,
State and other foreign affairs agencieshire thousands of foreign nationals to serve in a variety of capacities such as clerks, secretaries, maintenance workers, drivers, security guards, accountants, and personnel specialists.
State officials believe that employing foreign nationals serves an important function in that it helps the United States to establish closer relations, openness,and mutual respect with the host country.
Moreover, employing them is considerably less expensive than using US. citizens overseas.However, State recognizesthat employing foreign nationals may pose a security risk.
Page 1
GAO/NSIAD-SD-76
Embassy
Security
E231229
To deal with that risk, State regulations require that each overseaspost conduct background investigations and periodic reinvestigations of foreign national employeesto ensure that they are trustworthy and are not likely candidates to compromise U.S. interests abroad.
Although such investigations and reinvestigations do not guarantee that problem job applicants or employeeswill always be identified, an active program increasesthe likelihood that State will uncover serious problems that compromise US. security interests.
Foreign nationals are generally not allowed accessto national security classified material.
However, they often hold jobs that are considered sensitive or can pose a significant security threat, given the close promixity or accessto American personnel and facilities.
State regulations call for full investigations of foreign nationals in the host country and should parallel the background investigations of U.S. employees.
The investigations are to include interviews with the individuals, police and credit checks, and interviews with neighbors and past employers.
The employment of each foreign national is contingent upon a favorable security determination and certification by the post regional security officer.
State regulations also require that foreign national employeesbe reinvestigated every 6 years.
State also requires that background investigations and reinvestigations be conducted on foreign contractors and contractor employeeswhen they provide servicessimilar to or under the same working conditions as those of foreign national employees.Under State regulations the post regional security officer is to conduct such investigations/reinvestigations or spot-check investigations/reinvestigations performed by the contractor, State regulations also require that each overseaspost maintain information on the security clearancesof each American employee assignedto the post.
To ascertain how well these requirements were being carried out, we reviewed the security investigative practices employed by State officials in Algeria, Argentina, Chile, Egypt, India, Morocco,the Philippines, Thailand, and Uruguay.
Page 2
GAO/NSIAD-99-76
Embassy Security
6231229
par of Foreign Investigative Prz tices Nar 
During our review, we found that when the posts conducted full background investigations and reinvestigations they generally did so in accordancewith State regulations.
In essence, means they generally this covered the required elements, such as checks on education, previous employers, credit history and neighborhood interviews.
However, we found four principal problems in the posts' investigative practices.
In five countries we visited, investigations had not been done on all current employees.In six of the countries we visited, regional security officers did not conduct background investigations for all contract employees, although many had direct accessto U.S. officials, buildings, and facilities.
Also, six of nine posts did not follow established procedures when investigating local guards.
As for reinvestigations of long-term employees,backlogs of varying degreesexisted in six of the countries we visited.1 Our concerns about the manner in which State has carried out its overseasinvestigative responsibilities are illustrated in the following examples: In Egypt, 310 of the 1,117 local employeeswere never investigated, or investigations were not yet completed.
The post had not investigated and could not confirm the identities of most commercial contract employees; 169 direct hire and personal service contract employeeshad not been reinvestigated as required.
In Algeria, 62 of the 229 employeeshave been investigated.
The post work force included 94 security guards who had not been investigated.
The post had not confirmed the number or identities of the employeesof six commercial contract firms that had routinely performed work for the post.
In India, over 400 of its long-term employees had not been reinvestigated.
In Thailand, over 360 employeeshad not been reinvestigated.
Our review indicated that these conditions were principally causedby (1) the inconsistent application of State's regulations by overseasposts, (2) the low priority generally assignedto background investigations relative to other security concerns,(3) the lack of monitoring by State's headquarters to seethat posts perform background investigations or reinvestigations of foreign nationals, and (4) inadequate tracking systems to determine who neededbackground investigations.
`The shortcomings we identified were not limited to six countries; we found some deficiencies in eight of the nine countries visited.
These are detailed in appendix I.
Page 3
GAO/NSIAIMQ-76
Embassy Security
.
..
B-231229
The greatest disparity in post practices was in the way that contractor employees have been investigated.
Although the regulations require full investigations, officials at the posts we visited interpreted the requirement differently.
As a consequence, large numbers of contractor employees were not fully investigated, yet they worked in close proximity to American personnel and had accessto post equipment and facilities.
Someposts had checkedlocal police records, and embassychecks2 were generally being made for contract employees.Yet other elements of a background investigation, such as interviews with neighbors and previous employers and credit checks,were not performed.
We also found that three posts did not confirm the number or identities of all contractor personnel.
In four countries, other U.S. agenciesat posts employed short-term contractors but did not notify the regional security officer so that the required security investigations could be performed.
Someof the posts did not have tracking systems in place to readily identify who should be investigated and when the investigation should be conducted.
State officials told us they did not monitor post performance on conducting investigations of foreign nationals becausethese investigations are considered a decentralized function.
We also noted that the posts we visited did not keep records of the clearancesheld by assignedAmerican personnel, as required by State regulations, I
Se urity Risks A 4sociated With mploying Foreign Ndtionals I I
Although local personnel are regarded by State as playing a critical role in helping to run an overseaspost, employing foreign nationals may entail some security risks.
Over time, State has investigated numerous allegations of espionageby foreign national employees and foreign service officers.
While conducting full background investigations and reinvestigations cannot guarantee the elimination of such security risks, it should increase the likelihood that serious problems that could compromise U.S. security interests will be uncovered.
U.S. officials at the overseasposts we visited expresseddiffering views concerning the nature and extent of the security threat posed by foreign nationals.
SomeU.S. officials were concernedabout possible terrorism and other criminal activities.
Other U.S. officials were primarily concerned with the threat of espionage.
2J3mbassychecks usually entail reviews of files within the post consular affairs section, Drug Enforcement Administration, or other internal units that have knowledge about local nationals.
b
Page 4
GAO/NSIAD89-76
Embassy Security
B42122fi I',: elusionsand mmendations Our review indicated a lack of (1) consistent application of State guidance by the posts as to who should be investigated and reinvestigated, (2) priority assignedto background investigations, (3) routine monitoring of post investigative practices by State's headquarters staff, and (4) a tracking system to identify those foreign nationals that require investigations or reinvestigation at someposts.
As a result, post investigation practices varied, all foreign nationals were not investigated, and somereinvestigation backlogs developed.
To addressthese problems, we recommendthat the Secretary of State ensure that the overseasposts consistently implement the requirements for investigating foreign national employees and foreign contractor personnel, assign a specific headquarters unit or staff within the Bureau of Diplomatic Security the responsibility for monitoring post performance in conducting foreign national investigations, develop a pro forma tracking system that all posts can use for routinely identifying foreign nationals who need to be investigated or reinvestigated and ensure that any reinvestigation backlogs be promptly identified and resolved, and ensure that each post maintain a record of security clearancesfor all assignedU.S. personnel.
Our evaluation of State's embassysecurity practices is discussedin more detail in appendix I. Appendix II discussesthe nature and extent of security threats as posed by foreign national employees along with the views of various post officials.
Appendix III sets forth the objectives, scope,and methodology for our review.
As requested, we did not obtain agency comments on a draft of this report.
Unless you publicly announce its content earlier, we plan no further distribution of this report until 30 days from the date of issuance.At that time we will send copies to the appropriate congressionalcommittees; the Secretary of State; the Director, Office of Management and Budget;
Page 5
GAO/NSIAD89-76
Embassy
Security
`,
B-221229
and other interested parties.
This report was prepared under the direction of Joseph E. Kelley, Senior Associate Director.
Other major contributors are listed in appendix IV.
Sincerely yours,
Frank C. Conahan Assistant Comptroller General
Page 6
GAO/NSIAD49-76
Embassy Sea
A
Page 7
GAO/NSLAJHB-76
Embassy !hcurity
I, ,"
., ,, ,a'
,
,`.
COntents
Letter Appendix I Sec@ity Investigative Przktices Related to Fo4eign Service Nationals I Apbendix II The Security Threat Po$edby the Enjployment of Foteign Nationals Introduction Extent of Post Compliance With Regulations Varied Other Security-Related Problems 10 10 11 16
18
21
Abpendix IV Contributors to
National Security and International Affairs Division European Office Far East Office
22 22 22 22 A
Abbreviations Ds FAM
Bureau of Diplomatic Security Foreign Affairs Manual GAO/NSIAD-S@-76 Embassy Security
Page S
,
Page 9
GAO/NSIAD-99-76
Embassy
Security
Appendix I
.
Security Investigative Practices Related to Foreign Service Nationals Our review of State's overseassecurity investigative practices regarding foreign national employeesshowed that eight of the nine posts we visited had not fully conformed to the security requirements for investigating foreign national and foreign contractor personnel.
In addition, posts did not maintain records of security clearancesof American personnel, and regional security officers were not always informed of individuals who were hired by various U.S. agenciesattached to the posts.
I
Inttoduction
State and other agenciesoperating overseas,such as the U.S. Agency for International Development and the U.S. Information Agency, employ many foreign nationals to help run overseasposts.
State's Bureau of Diplomatic Security (~6) is responsible for protecting US. diplomatic personnel and property and ensuring that no U.S. diplomatic post is vulnerable to terrorist bombs or open to foreign espionage.
To accomplish this, DS employs a variety of physical and procedural security measures,including a program to screenforeign national employees at overseasposts, much the sameas it does for American employees.The investigative program is intended to reduce the likelihood that untrustworthy individuals will have routine accessto US. facilities and personnel.
The regional security officer at each overseaspost is responsible for conducting background investigations of foreign national applicants before they are hired and for reinvestigating them at least once every 6 years.
State regulations (Instructions and ProceduresManual, vol. II) state that these background investigations should be conducted, to the extent possible, in the sameway as background investigations for U.S. employees.
The employment of each foreign national is contingent upon a favorable security determination and certification by the post regional security officer.
State regulations also state that non-US. citizen contractors and their employeeswill be subject to the sameinvestigative and certification procedures as foreign national employeeswhen the services provided are similar or are performed under similar working conditions.
According to the regulations, investigations of contractors are also warranted when the services provided require unsupervised regular and emergency maintenance servicesto office machines or elevators.
At many posts around the world the Department contracts for guard services to enhanceinternal security, control accessinto the compound, GAO/NSIAD-S9-76 Embassy Security
Page 10
Appendix I Security InveeUgatIve Praetiee13 ReInted to Foreign Service Nationals
guard residences,inspect vehicles and packages,and perform other duties.
DS guidelines established in February 1987 (Local Guard Manual) require a background investigation of each candidate for employment as a contract guard to determine his or her suitability, including inquiries of previous employers and neighbors and determinations of police records, financial solvency, and reliability.
The regulation allows the local contractor to perform the background investigations, provided the regional security officer conducts spot checksto determine the veracity of the contractor's investigations.
Our review showed that the posts in nine countries differed in the extent of their compliance with State regulations concerning investigations and reinvestigations of foreign nationals.
Overall, we found shortcomings in eight of the nine countries we visited.
In five countries, background investigations on all current direct hire foreign national employeeshad not been done.
In six countries, the regional security officers had not performed required investigations of all contract employees.Six posts did not follow established procedures when investigating local guards.1Reinvestigation backlogs of varying degreesexisted in six countries.
These shortcomings were due to systemic problems resulting from (1) differing interpretations by post officials as to who should be investigated and reinvestigated, (2) the low priority generally assignedto security investigations, (3) the lack of routine monitoring of post performance of investigations, and (4) the lack of a tracking system at someposts to identify foreign nationals who required reinvestigations.
When the posts conducted investigations and reinvestigations, they generally complied with State criteria.
Our review of 26 or more casesat each post we visited indicated that the required investigative elements were covered and were supported through adequate documentation.
However, the posts were inconsistent in conducting investigations and reinvestigations.
Officials in ~6 advised us that they did not monitor whether post regional security officers were carrying out the required background investigations and reinvestigations of foreign nationals.
They said that `The principal problems were that the posts did not always investigate the guards, or contractors did not document investigations of the guards.
Contractors at two posts were completing investigative report.8 of guard applicants, but the post security personnel were not spot-checking the investigations to ensure the veracity of the investigations.
b
Page 11
GAO/NSIADS9-76
Embassy Secnrity
Security lnveotlgative PractIcea Foreign Servke Nationals
Relat.ed to
they did not have any information on the extent of any backlog of unperformed investigations/reinvestigations of foreign nationals.
According to DSofficials, the investigations/ reinvestigations of foreign nationals were considered a decentralized function, and they do not attempt to overseehow well or whether they were being performed.
A rudimentary step in developing an effective investigative system for foreign nationals is ascertaining who should be investigated and when they should be investigated.
However, at five posts we visited, the regional security officer had no mechanismto routinely identify who neededto be investigated or reinvestigated, and at three of the five posts the regional security officer did not know the identities or the number of contractor employeeswith routine accessto U.S. facilities.
Following are country-by-country summaries of our findings: Of the 229 foreign nationals employed in Algeria, only 62 had been investigated and security certified.
The post also had a local guard force of 94, and none of them had been investigated and certified.
The U.S. mission contracts with three general contractors and three firms that repair and maintain embassyequipment such as typewriters and photocopy machines.
Post officials did not know how many employeesfrom these firms have accessto embassygrounds.
However, according to the regional security officer, the post restricted the number of foreign nationals working in controlled areas such as the offices of the Ambassador, Deputy Chief of Mission, and DefenseAttache.
We also found that two foreign national employeeswere handling "Limited Official Use" documents without the appropriate authorization.
The post's difficulties in completing investigations were due to a variety of factors, including higher priority work.
In Argentina, 7 of the 182 direct-hire foreign national and personal service contract employeeshad not been initially investigated and certified, and there was no backlog of reinvestigations.
The post conducted only a police check on commercial service contractor personnel, who perform such tasks as gardening and janitorial work and are allowed to move throughout most of the compound.
However, the post required police checks, embassyrecord checks, and an interview Page 12 GAO/NSIAD-S9-76 Embassy Security
Secnrlty Inve8tigatlve Praetieea Foreilpl Service Nationals
Related
to
with the security office's local investigator on employeeswho do not work on the embassy grounds--suchas employeesof the Foreign Agricultural Service and the maids at the residenceof the U.S. Marine security guards.
(The regional security officer believed this group needed a more thorough background investigation becauseof its closer, more frequent contact with Americans.)
The post did not spot-checkthe results of investigations that were performed by a contractor on the 71 local guards.
At the U.S. Embassy in Santiago, all direct-hire foreign national and all local contract guards had been investigated and certified.
The post conducts background investigations of all employees,with the exception of short-term and emergency contractor personnel, who receive only a police check and are placed under surveillance when inside the Embassy.
The post did not use long-term commercial service contract personnel.
All certification and recertification investigations were current.
Of the 1,117 direct-hire and personal service contractor foreign nationals employed at diplomatic posts in Egypt, 310 had not been investigated, although somehad worked for the Department for up to 6 years.
There was a backlog of 169 reinvestigation cases.The Embassy in Cairo has not investigated, maintained files on, and doesnot know the number of commercial contract personnel involved in providing maintenance, food, and other services.Contract employeeswere generally required to provide only a police certificate (documentation describing individuals' police records) and an Egyptian identification card to meet the post's security requirements.
The post also employed over 200 local nationals who worked on a day-to-day basis (refered to as "daily hires"), who perform maintenance and guard services similar to the services performed by other foreign national employees.Many of the daily hires have worked for the embassy for many years but have never been investigated.
There were 328 guards and at least 204 were not investigated.
According to the regional security officer, the post began conducting background investigations of the local guards who had not yet been investigated in the spring of 1988.
However, there were no plans to investigate 48 commercial contract guards.
h
Page 19
GAO/NSIADS9-76
Embassy Security
Appendix I SecuriQ InveMgatlve Practice13 ReIated to Foreign Service Nationah
The officer also told us the backlog of investigations was due to several factors, including the increase in new hires, high turnover, and greater priority work.
India
, /
There were 3,468 direct-hire foreign national and contractor personnel working at U.S. facilities in India.
This total included about 1,700 directhire and personal service contractor employees;the remainder were employeesof 20 commercial contractors.
All employeesreceived background investigations and were certified.
We found, however, that there was a backlog of reinvestigations for 431 employees.The security officer and chief foreign national investigator attributed the backlog to a heavy work load in other areas- such as police liaison for visiting dignitaries-and a temporary shortage of investigative staff.
In Morocco, 108 of the 821 foreign nationals had not been investigated.
The regional security officer did not have a tracking system to identify those needing reinvestigation, but he estimated the backlog at about 80.
The post employed few commercial contractors.
Those who entered the embassy compound were under surveillance during the course of their visit.
The regional security officer did not maintain security investigation records on each direct-hire and personal service contract employee as required by State regulations.
For example, background security investigation files were missing for 112 employees,and the regional security officer told us 108 of them were probably never investigated.
In addition, two employeeswere handling "Limited Official Use" documents without the appropriate authorization.
MO
e The Phlllppmes ..---
~~~
~~
Of the 1,384 direct-hire and personal service contractors and contract guards in the Philippines, 127 had not been investigated, but the regional security officer said that the required investigations were in process.There was a backlog of 140 reinvestigations.
About 616 commercial service contract personnel in the Philippines serve as guards, laborers, drivers, maintenance workers, and janitors.
With the exception of contract guards (who are subject to a full background investigation), the post requires only an interview and a police check as a security precaution for these employees.We found that 64 of these limited background checks had not been completed.
However,
Page 14
GAO/NSIAD-lW76
Embassy Security
Appendix I SemrIty Investigative Practices Foreign Service Nationale
Related to
many of these employeesrequire frequent accessto the compound grounds and comein close contact with U.S. personnel.
In addition, the regional security officer had not established a system to readily identify when foreign national employeesneededto be reinvestigated, and as a result the post had not always completed S-year reinvestigations.
Recently, the post investigators went through the files and manually identified 140 employeeswho had not been reinvestigated in over 6 years.
The senior foreign national investigator said that the backlog had resulted becausehe recently had to train two new personnel, which took time away from his investigative duties.
Th
All of the 1,117 direct-hire foreign nationals and contract personnel with accessto chancery facilities had been fully investigated, but we determined there was a backlog of 369 reinvestigations.
The regional security officer had not investigated the 183 local guards, and the guard contractor was permitted to independently determine which guards to investigate.
The regional security officer had not spot-checkedthe results of the contractor's investigations.
The post did not have a system for determining which foreign national employeesof 26 commercial contractors required investigation, and the post had no system to determine which employeesrequired recertification investigations.
The regional security officer told us that he could not readily identify the employees that neededto be reinvestigated at any given time.
According to the regional security officer, the reinvestigation backlog was due to a shortage of investigative staff and a heavy workload.
We were told that contract personnel with accessto the chancery had been certified by the regional security officer and that building and grounds personnel who had not been investigated and certified were allowed escorted accessto the restricted floors of the chancery to perform repair work.
According to the general services officer, however, the escortsdid not necessarily remain with the contract personnel for the entire time the work was being performed.
b
Ur
All of the 121 full-time foreign national employees at the U.S. embassy in Montevideo had been initially investigated.
There was a backlog of 14 reinvestigations.
In addition, about 100 were to be reinvestigated during 1988.
The 84 contract guards and bodyguards-who also served as Uruguayan federal police officers-were not investigated.
We were told that the guards had not been investigated becausethey were police Page 16 GAO/NSIAD-99-76 Embassy Security
bP@muxI SecnrIQ InvesUgative Pm4dcesBeIatedto Foreign Service Nationale
officers and had probably been cleared by the federal police.
Only local police checks were required on somepart-time employees,such as the embassy cashier and customs dispatcher.
The regional security officer had performed background investigations for somepart-time employees, such as the post travel agent, becausethey had greater accessto post information than other part-time employees.The security officer told us that some employees-including janitors, commissary and cafeteria workers, and domestic staff-had not been investigated in the past becausethe post did not have a full-time regional security officer.
These employees are now investigated.
Otljer Security-Related Pr+lems / /
During our in-country reviews of State's investigation practices, two related problems cameto our attention that indicated a breakdown in internal security controls: (1) other agenciesat overseasposts had not always informed State officials that they had hired foreign nationals who had not been investigated, and (2) the overseasposts did not have information on the security clearancesof assignedAmerican personnel as required.
According to State regulations, the regional security officer for each post is responsible for investigating foreign nationals hired by US. agencies in the host country, including the U.S. Information Agency, US.
Agency for International Development, and the PeaceCorps.
Occasionally, the other agencies- with their own programs and separate budgets and facilities frequently located outside the embassycompound-hire foreign nationals for short periods of time without notifying the post personnel officer, who would in turn notify the security officer at post so that a background investigation could be conducted.
However, since these procedures have not always been followed, somebackground investigations have not been conducted.
Failure to inform the post security officer could pose a security risk to US. personnel and facilities.
Regional security officers in Argentina, Chile, Egypt, and Uruguay indicated that in several casesother agencieshad hired contract personnel but had not informed the personnel officer or security officer.
Two examples in Argentina highlight this concern.
In one case,the regional security officer learned inadvertently that the U.S. Information Service had hired seven foreign nationals to work at the embassy and the library and binational center located near the embassy.These centers have been targeted by terrorists worldwide.
In a secondcase,the US.
Page 16 GAO/NSIAD-99-76 Embassy Security
Othbr U.S. Agencies Do Not 1 Always Inform State Offi ials About New Hires I" I
b
se4!nrIty Invesugauve pnctices Relat43dto Foreign Service Nationals
Ambassador used his own funds to employ two foreign nationals-a nanny and a chauffeur-without informing the regional security officer.
When the officer subsequently learned of the nanny's employment, he initiated an investigation and found that the nanny had a police record in both the United States and Argentina.
The uninvestigated chauffeur was subsequently fired when he participated in the theft of the Ambassador's car.
When we discussedthis issue with other agencies'officials overseas,we found that they either did not believe that the personnel neededto be investigated-particularly if they worked outside the embassy compound-or were unaware that the regional security officers required investigations of such employees.
Pos\s Did Required Clepme rican q
Not Have Security Information on Personnel
State regulations (3 FAM 090) provide that each overseaspost is to maintain personnel records for each American employee attached to the U.S. mission, including information on each individual's security clearances.
However, in the countries we visited, none of the posts had employee security clearanceinformation available.
According to a D5official, the Department is concernedthat such information is not available for either State employeesor employeesof attached U.S. agencies.Currently, security clearance information is maintained by the various agenciesat their respective headquarters in Washington.
We were also told that it was particularly important for clearance information to be readily available at the posts becausepersonnel require special accessclearancesto use someof the classified communication and word processingsystems that are being installed at overseasposts.
Page 17
GAO/NSIAD99-76
Embassy Security
App
*'
The Secmity Threat Posedby the Employment of Foreign Nationals According to State, local personnel play critical and unique roles in providing facilitative services, and certain functions are most efficiently performed by personnel who are thoroughly familiar with the local environment.
Although American employeeswith the requisite language skills could perform many of these functions, becauseof the frequent turnover that is common to almost all American positions overseas, State favors the retention of permanent local employeesto maintain efficiency and continuity.
In addition, replacing foreign nationals with American employeeswould substantially increasethe cost of operating diplomatic posts overseas.'The State Department indicated that the benefits outweigh the risks in employing foreign nationals except for those employeesfrom certain Eastern bloc countries.
Nevertheless, disclosures in recent months about the involvement of foreign national employeesin espionageat the U.S. embassyin Moscow and other posts have heightened security concerns.State has reported that its personnel and facilities are being aggressively targeted by hostile intelligence services worldwide.
Foreign nationals with accessto U.S. facilities, processesand procedures, information, and U.S. employees could be very useful to intelligence servicesdedicated to countering U.S. foreign policy objectives or intercepting vital data.
An active program of conducting investigations and reinvestigations of foreign nationals reducesthe potential for security risks becauseserious problems that could compromise U.S. security interests are more likely to be uncovered.
State's counterintelligence staff told us they had investigated numerous allegations of foreign service officers' and foreign employees' involvement in espionage.However, the threat to national security is not limited to espionage.U.S. officials also expressedsomeconcernsthat knowledge gained by foreign nationals at U.S. facilities could also be valuable in planning terrorist acts.
Such acts could include bombings, kidnappings, or other violence.
The Department considersthe principal security threat at overseas posts to be the disclosure of national security information.
Foreign national employeeshave the opportunity to observethe American staff on a daily basis and can develop close personal relationships.
As a result, foreign nationals can develop information on personal habits and %%ate'sfiscal year 1989 budget request included $7.7 million to replace foreign national employees in sensitive positions with cleared Americans at certain Eastern European posts and to provide separate facilities for certain operations to which foreign nationals would not be allowed access.
Page 18
GAO/NSJAD-99-76
Embassy Secdty
me, Security Employment
Threat Posed by the of Pore
interests, work habits, and job assignments.Host governments can pressure foreign national employeesto provide information about U.S. embassy activities in ways that American personnel cannot be pressured.
For example, foreign governments can withhold work permits, pressure foreign national employees' families, or place employeesunder arrest.
Department officials also raised the issue of where foreign nationals' loyalty lies.
Although the United States pays their salaries, most foreign employees are loyal to their own country and not to the United States.
Therefore, foreign intelligence services could persuade foreign nationals to provide information on U.S. embassy staff or describe the details of physical or technical security countermeasuresbeing taken by the embassy.
In four of the nine countries we visited, US. officials indicated that the host government has routinely interviewed local employeesconcerning their duties and responsibilities at U.S. facilities to obtain information on embassy activities, In Argentina and Uruguay, the regional security officers told us that the Soviet bloc was very active and that foreign intelligence services had probably attempted to obtain sensitive or classified information from foreign national employees.
In each country we visited, the posts restricted foreign national employees' accessto classified information.
However, some local employees were authorized accessto "Limited Official Use" information.
To obtain authorization for such access,the American supervisor submits a written request to the regional security officer explaining why the local national needs access.The regional security officer reviews the employee's security file and makes a recommendation either to grant or deny the clearance.
The Ambassador makes the final determination.
Employees are required to have "Limited Official Use" clearancesto carry out duties such as typing sensitive correspondence,maintaining personnel files, making travel arrangements for U.S. officials, screening visa applicants, or translating official documents.
In Algeria and Morocco, two employeesin each country were given accessto "Limited Official Use" documents without the proper authorization, In several countries we visited, US. officials considered terrorism the principal security threat and expressedconcern that foreign national employees may facilitate acts of violence.
In three countries, for example, the regional security officers emphasized that certain foreign national positions-particularly bodyguards, chauffeurs, and other Page 19 GAO/NSIAD-99-76 Embassy Security
b
Appendix If The Security Threat Posed by the Employment of Foredgn Nationals
positions that involve regular contact with the ambassadorand other post officials-are sensitive from a physical security standpoint.
These employees are familiar with the itineraries and daily activities of US. personnel.
In several countries there was concern that foreign employeescould be involved in criminal activity.
For example, in one country U.S. officials noted that visa clerks and procurement officer positions were sensitive becausethey were susceptible to bribery; cashiers were in sensitive positions becauseof the large amount of cash they handled.
In the Philippines, where the post issuesabout 16 percent of all immigration visas issued worldwide each year, post officials were concerned about visa fraud.
Two major caseswere recently uncovered involving foreign national employees.
Page 20
GAO/NSIAD-S9-76
Embassy Security
7
ppendix III
' "objectives, Scope,and Methodology
Our objectives were to (1) review State Department procedures for investigating foreign national employees at overseasfacilities, (2) determine whether overseasdiplomatic posts were complying with State's requirements concerning security investigations, and (3) ascertain the views and perspectives of U.S. officials overseasconcerning the potential security risks posed by foreign nationals at the overseasposts.
We conducted our review in Washington, DC., at the $tate Department's Bureau of Diplomatic Security and at nine overseasembassies:Algiers, Algeria; Bangkok, Thailand; BuenosAires, Argentina; Cairo, Egypt; Manila, The Philippines; Montevideo, Uruguay; New Delhi, India; Rabat, Morocco; and Santiago, Chile.
We selectedposts from differing geographic locations and with differing numbers of foreign national employees,where host governments were generally cooperative in allowing background investigations of foreign national employees.
We did not select posts in countries where the host government was not cooperative or where State officials assumedall foreign national employees were reporting to foreign intelligence services (i.e., Soviet bloc countries).
In such countries, background investigations cannot be performed in accordancewith Department guidelines.
Our review was conducted between October 1987 and August 1988 in accordancewith generally acceptedgovernment auditing standards.
As requested, we did not obtain agency comments on this report, but during the course of our work we discussedthe facts with the appropriate agency officials and considered their comments in preparing the report.
Page 21
GAO/NSlADBB-76
Embassy Security
Ppeh
k
Chtributors to This Report
National uLLuA and Q-A+ 
Joseph E. Kelley, Senior Associate Director, (202) 276-4128 Joseph F. Murray, Assistant Director James Martino, Evaluator-in-Charge David G. Jones, Evaluator Calvin Chin, Evaluator Sharon L. Pickup, Evaluator
Robert D. Wurster, Evaluator
(razaei)
Page 22
GAO/NSIAIMB-76
Embassy Security
L: " =:
1.-w ma" ..= =.r --
2 .
Illll-"ll-ll.-.---
-"_._l---.--"--_---
Firsl,-( :la.ss Mail Post,2ilgt~Et.
Ftws I%,iti (iA0 I't~rrrli(, No. (; 100 i.
