NCPC file No. 5923 WASHINGTON DULLES INTERNATIONAL AIRPORT NORTH FLANK PARKING GARAGE Loudoun County, Virginia Report to the Metropolitan Washington Airports Authority March 4, 1999 Abstract The Metropolitan Washington Airports Authority has submitted plans to construct a fivelevel parking garage at Washington Dulles International Airport.
The garage would be located parallel to the Main Terminal, adjacent to the existing parking bowl.
The proposed parking garage and associated landscaping will not obstruct any existing views of the Main Terminal from the Dulles Access Highway.
Authority Memorandum of Understanding (MOU) by and between the Metropolitan Washington Airports Authority and NCPC dated November 2, 1988.
Commission Action The Commission approves the preliminary and final site and building plans for the proposed north flank parking garage at Washington Dulles International Airport (Dulles) as shown on NCPC Map File No. 2301.00(38.00)-40611.
*
*
*
NCPC File No. 5923 Page 2 BACKGROUND AND STAFF EVALUATION DESCRIPTION OF THE PROPOSAL The Metropolitan Washington Airports Authority (MWAA) has submitted preliminary and final site and building plans for the north flank parking garage at Washington Dulles International Airport in Loudoun County, Virginia.
The MOU between MWAA and NCPC requires MWAA to submit for NCPC review all new construction projects at Dulles which would significantly alter views of the Main Terminal.
The Site The new parking garage will be located adjacent to the north side of the parking area in front of the Main Terminal, between the parking bowl and the existing office buildings.
Building Program · · The garage will provide 4,700 parking spaces on five levels.
Long-term future expansion to the north could add 4,000 additional spaces, however this will require demolition of the existing office buildings.
Building Design · · · The appearance of the parking garage is intentionally uncomplicated to remain subordinate to the Main Terminal.
The building height is approximately 45 feet.
The structure is cast-in-place post-tensioned concrete with precast concrete spandrel panels.
The finish of the panels is similar to the color and texture of the concrete of the Main Terminal.
Access · · Vehicular access to the parking garage will be from the Dulles Airport Access Highway.
Passenger access to the Main Terminal will be provided through an underground pedestrian connector, which is shown on the plans but will be constructed as a separate project.
Access to the underground connector will be provided at the parking garage, and at two points within the parking bowl through tunnel egress nodes.
NCPC File No. 5923 Page 3 ·
Shuttle busses will pass directly in front of the garage to provide an alternative to using the pedestrian connector.
Tunnel Access Nodes · · The tunnel access nodes, like the airport's original service structures, are simple rectangular structures clad in Dulles Grey metal panels.
They have flat roofs with raised parapet screening walls to shield the rooftop ventilation equipment.
Landscaping · · · Landscaping will be provided to reinforce the original Saarinen landscape plan.
Evergreens (Eastern Red Cedars) will be planted in a grid pattern along the east side of the parking garage to re-establish and extend the original grid.
Existing oak trees along the parking bowl roadway will be replaced with a double row of evergreens to provide year-round visual screening of the parking garage from the Main Terminal.
The plans originally called for Southern Magnolias, but after consultation with NCPC staff, MWAA representatives agreed to substitute a type of evergreen more tolerant of the clay soils and windswept condition of the airport.
EVALUATION Staff recommends approval of the plans.
The proposed parking garage and associated landscaping will not obstruct any existing views to the Main Terminal from the Dulles Access Highway.
The dense evergreen grid will significantly screen views of the parking garage from the access highway, while reinforcing the approach sequence in which the Main Terminal is visible from a distance, then hidden, then revealed again in full splendor.
CONFORMANCE Comprehensive Plan The proposed parking facility is not inconsistent with the Comprehensive Plan for the National Capital.
With the Passage of P.L. 99-951, Washington Dulles International Airport is no longer operated as a Federal facility.
NCPC File No. 5923 Page 4
Master Plan The proposal is consistent with the Master Plan for the Washington Dulles International Airport, approved by the Commission on July 31, 1986, as shown on NCPC Map File No. 2301.00(05.12)-29777.
National Historic Preservation Act MWAA has determined that the proposed project would create an adverse effect on cultural resources.
Dulles International Airport was listed in the National Register of Historic Places within twenty years of its completion under the provision allowing listing under exceptional significance.
Dulles is a nationally significant structure.
MWAA has worked with the Virginia State Historic Preservation Officer and the Advisory Council on Historic Preservation to address or mitigate these adverse effects.
A Memorandum of Agreement has been drafted.
National Environmental Policy Act The Federal Aviation Administration (FAA) has determined that the project qualifies as a categorical exclusion under its National Environmental Policy Act (NEPA) compliance procedures.
NCPC File No. 5923 Page 5
NCPC File No. 5923 Page 6
NCPC File No. 5923 Page 7
