Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.
Communication Arts Grades 2-3 Performance Task by Judy Taylor MAP Senior Leader Stewartsville C-II School District Northwest Regional MAP Center
Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr
.
Purpose: This performance task requires that students summarize a piece of non-fiction (biography) that describes the life of Dr. Martin Luther King Jr.
They will construct a graphic organizer (story map) to summarize the events from Dr. King's life.
Then, they will write a short paragraph telling what Dr. King's dream was and whether or not they feel it has come true and why.
Correct capitalization and punctuation need to be used.
Show Me Standards Addressed: Knowledge: CA3, CA4 Performance: 1.8, 4.1 Grade Level Range: 2-3 Subject Area: Communication Arts Materials Needed: pencil, crayons, Performance Task Packet (which includes the Student Prompt, the Response Sheets, and the Scoring Guide).
Time Needed for Task: two to three 30 minute class periods Instructions for Administration: Present students with the Performance Task Packet and make sure they understand what they are to do.
Go over the scoring guide so they know how the written product will be assessed.
Pre-Assessment: Students will have selected and read a biography about the life of Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.
Discuss what a graphic organizer looks like and show several examples.
Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr
.
Student Prompt A new elementary school is being built in the school district.
It will be named Martin Luther King, Jr.
Elementary School.
In the main hall, there will be a large mural showing events from Dr. King's life.
The superintendent of schools has asked the elementary students to submit a plan that might be used as a basis for the mural.
Use Student Response Sheet #1 to create a story map of what you feel the mural should include.
Be sure it includes important events from Dr. King's life, is neat, colored, and labeled.
Also, with the mural will be a short written summary of what you feel Dr. King's dream was, whether or not you feel his dream has come true and your reasons.
Write your paragraph on student Response Sheet #2.
Your work will need to use proper grammar and correct punctuation.
Student Response Sheet #1 Use Student Response Sheet #1 to create a story map of what you feel the mural should include.
Be sure it includes important events from Dr. King's life, is neat, colored, and labeled.
Student Response Sheet #2 Write a short summary of what you feel Dr. King's dream was, whether or not you feel his dream has come true, and include reasons.
Your work will need to use proper grammar and correct punctuation.
Dr. Martin Luther King, Jr.
Scoring Guide My story map shows the important events in Dr. King's life.
My story map is neat, colored, and labeled.
My paragraph tells what I feel Dr. King's dream was and explains why or why not I feel his dream has come true.
My paragraph uses proper grammar and correct punctuation.
