Attachment B TECHNOLOGY ACCESSIBILITY ALTERNATIVES FOR AGENCY USE The following covers the major areas that should be considered when planning and acquiring electronic equipment.
These alternatives have been excerpted in part and adapted from Federal Information Resources Management Regulation (FIRMR) Bulletin C-8 and Managing Information Resources for Accessibility and guidelines issued by the Adaptive Computing Technology Center, the Trace Institute of the University of Wisconsin and the General Services Administration.
Input Alternatives.
The problems associated with inputting information into a computer for a person with disabilities depends on the nature and severity of the disability.
Some users with disabilities are capable of using a standard keyboard if it is modified slightly.
Others require an alternative strategy.
The following is an overview of common input alternatives and other input functional requirements that should be considered: * Multiple simultaneous operation.
Computers requiring simultaneous striking of multiple keys or buttons can be a problem for persons with a mobility or cognitive disability.
Sequential activation control is an alternative method of operation, enabling the user to depress keys or buttons one at a time to execute the same functions.
Sequential keystroke input software programs can be loaded to allow the user to enter keystrokes sequentially that others enter simultaneously and still achieve the same effect.
For example, CTRL, ALT, DEL keys are all held down together to perform a soft reboot on a PC.
When sequential keystroke input software programs are used, CTRL is pressed, then ALT, then DEL to achieve the soft reboot.
Also, "Keyboard Repeat Rate Control Programs" exist that allow the PC user to adjust the sensitivity level of the keyboard or completely turn off the keystroke repeat function.
In addition, "Keyboard Macros Software" and hardware solutions allow a few keystrokes to be automatically translated into multiple keystrokes.
Macros reduce the number of keystrokes needed to generate a word, phrase, or paragraph.
For example, an individual's initials can be used to generate the entire signature block on the screen.
* Alternative input devices.
Some programs require a "mouse" or other fine motor control device for input.
Since some users with motor disabilities cannot operate these devices, an input redundancy feature permits the functions of these devices to be performed through the keyboard or another suitable alternative such as voice input.
For users unable to use a modified standard keyboard or mouse, an alternative input device consists of a port (serial, parallel, etc.) or connection capability, that fits to an accommodation aid which augments or replaces the keyboard.
For example, an alternative input device, such as switch, eye scan, or head tracking system, may be customized to allow the user to input information while supporting transparent hardware emulation for the more standard input devices such as the keyboard and the mouse.
t Alternative keyboards.
Several alternative keyboards exist to ease use by individuals whose mobility may be impaired.
There are small versions of keyboards and large, expanded keyboards.
There are also keyboards that are not physically connected to the PCs but rely on inflated transmission to a receiver attached to the PC.
The standard keyboard can also be re-mapped to be used as a right-handed or left-handed "Dvorak" keyboard (i.e., for persons who type with a single-hand).
t Non keyboard dependent input devices.
There are a variety of alternative devices that allow keystrokes to be generated by various mechanisms and then transmitted as if they were generated by the keyboard.
Examples are sip and puff systems, touch screens, muscle switches, optical pointer devices, Morse code input systems, and eye scanning systems.
t Word prediction packages.
Word prediction packages may be used in conjunction with many PC application packages, keyboard enhancement products, and alternative input mechanisms.
Word prediction packages try to anticipate the next word the user will type and display a list of choices for the user.
If the word desired is not on the list, the user types in the first character of the word he/she is seeking and the selection list changes.
Word prediction can significantly reduce the number of keystrokes the user must enter.
t Braille input devices.
This includes portable note taking systems that can generate a file to be transferred to a PC, as well as other devices, that can be connected to the PC in place of the standard keyboard to provide for braille input mechanism.
There are also software packages available that will configure a standard keyboard so it can be used for braille input.
t Optical character recognition (OCR).
OCR is a scanning device that recognizes characters (letters, numbers, punctuation) from most types of printed text.
Once the text is in computerized form, it can be loaded from the scanner into a computer system where it can be manipulated by a word processor or displayed through a special device such as synthesized voice, refreshable braille, or braille printer.
Depending on the scanning device used, most type styles including Italics, underscoring and boldface can be recognized.
t Speech recognition.
Some computer users who are blind use speech input systems to give voice commands and/or mouse movements instead of using the keystroke equivalent.
This strategy is becoming increasingly useful with new applications that employ pull-down menus which may be more difficult to gain access to when speech output and keyboard commands alone are used.
* Key Repeat.
A typical personal computer repeats a character when the key for that character remains depressed.
Since this is a problem for users without sufficient motor control, a key repeat feature can be used allowing the timing parameters to be extended or the repeat function to be turned off.
* Toggle key status control.
Personal computer toggle keys usually provide a visual indicator of whether they are on or off.
A toggle key status feature provides an alternative, non-visual means of showing the "on" or "off" status of a toggle key.
* Keyboard orientation aids.
To orient a user with a visual impairment to a particular keyboard, a set of tactile overlays should be available to identify the most important keys.
The tactile overlays can be in the form of keycap replacements or transparent sticky tape with unique symbols to identify the various keys.
t Tactile orientation aids.
A raised dot or bleb can be added to certain keys, such as the home row keys or the number five on the numeric keypad, to give a tactile orientation to the keyboard for users who are visually impaired.
t Other keyboard aids.
Adhesive backed keycap labels can be purchased and applied to the standard keyboard that have very large, bold letters.
These labels can be purchased in either white-on-black background or black-on-white background.
* Keyguards.
To assist a worker with impaired motor control, a keyguard should be available to stabilize movements and help ensure that the correct keys are depressed.
A keyguard is a keyboard template which fits directly over the keyboard surface with holes corresponding to the location of the keys.
Output Alternatives.
Some users with disabilities need an alternative output device to permit them to fully use technology resources.
The following is an overview of common output alternatives and other output functional requirements that should be considered: * Auditory output.
Some users with disabilities may require synthesized speech capability.
Computers can be upgraded with the addition of a sound card and appropriate software.
A user-adjustable volume control and headset jack should also be provided.
* Information redundancy.
When computer programs use sound to present information, an information redundancy feature can be used to present a visual equivalent of the auditory information for users with hearing impairments.
* Monitor display.
To enhance text size, reproduce text orally or in braille, or modify display characteristics, the following capabilities are required:
t Large print display and production.
To enlarge a portion of the screen for a low-vision user, this process uses a window or similar mechanism to enable magnification controlled by a user.
A user can invoke the large-print display capability from the keyboard or control pad for use in conjunction with any work-related applications software.
If applications software includes graphics, enlargement of graphic displays can also be available.
Tools include:
n Glare protection screen which minimizes visual fatigue associated with glare on the monitor.
n Large monitor with high resolution (19" 25") to increase character size in proportion to monitor dimensions and provides a crisp, sharp image.
n Magnified display of computer screen uses a software or hardware solution to present the images on the computer in a larger format.
Character size can be increased approximately 216 times.
n Magnified display of hard copy material uses a closed circuit television (CCTV) to magnify any item placed under a special camera.
Documents, drawings, phone messages, etc., can be seen enlarged on a special monitor.
n Large print production software packages print large, bold type on either a dot matrix or a laser printer.
t Access to visually displayed information.
The ability to access the screen is necessary to support the speech or braille output requirement of many users who are blind.
Blind users are currently able to select and review the spoken or braille equivalent of text from any portion of the screen while using standard applications software.
Users with access to the screen contents can translate and direct the content to any internal speech chip, a speech synthesizer on a serial or parallel port, or a braille display device.
Information presented pictorially also needs to be available such that as software sophistication improves, it may eventually be translated using alternative display systems.
Available tools include:
n Visual redundancy on computers ensure that important information conveyed by beeps or speech during computer-related tasks is also displayed visually for the user with a hearing impairment.
n Speech synthesizer is a hardware device used in conjunction with a screen reader that converts screen contents into spoken words by using synthetic speech.
Depending on the system, reading speed, pitch, and volume can be adjusted.
n Screen reader software packages direct screen contents to a speech synthesizer.
The individual can choose to listen to the information appearing on the screen by the letter, word, line, entire screen, etc.
n Tactile output non-braille devices produce raised line drawings which may be useful for individuals who are blind.
Several braille printers and wax jet printers have the capability of producing raised line drawings.
There are also hand held devices that use an array of vibrating pins to present a tactile outline of the characters or text under the viewing window of the device.
n Refreshable braille devices have a row of braille cells that change to reflect what is being presented on the computer screen.
This dynamically changing braille display requires special hardware and software to operate.
n Braille printer/embosser provides hard copy braille documents directly from properly formatted diskettes storing the text.
n Braille translation software and firmware converts a standard word processing document to a format that can be printed on a braille printer.
t Color presentation.
When colors must be distinguished in order to understand information on the display, color-blind end users should be provided with a means of selecting the colors to be displayed.
Tools include:
n Color and contrast selection are systems or applications which allow the individual user to choose the color combination and level of screen brightness to be displayed.
Telephone Access.
When an agency relies on the transmission of voice information to conduct its business-which most do in some form-it must determine how the needs of persons will be accommodated who are unable to use the telephone (e.g., persons who are deaf, hard of hearing, or who may have a speech impairment).
The following is an overview of products and services available that facilitate telephone accessibility: * TTY.
For an employee who cannot use an amplified telephone, a telecommunications device for the deaf (TTY) or TTY-compatible device is necessary to support work-related needs.
A TTY permits a person who is deaf, hard of hearing, or who has a speech impairment, to communicate over a standard telephone line with another TTY user or through a relay operator to reach a non-TTY user.
Using a TTY, the sender can type a message that is displayed as text on a screen.
The receiver can receive an auditory message or a paper tape.
A personal computer can also be configured to function as a TTY by adding a special modem (the modem must support both the PC code/ASCII and the code used by most older TTYs/Baudot).
The PC-based solution should reflect the special needs of the user and allow call announcement and pickup without exiting other PC programs.
* Automated attendant systems.
The New York State Relay service provides a link between persons using a TTY, a telecommunications device for persons who are deaf, hard of hearing, or who may have a speech impairment, and voice callers.
However, agencies need to assess whether their automated telephone services are sufficient to enable relay operators to translate the information within the time allotted.
Services and hardware are available that allow callers to have direct and equal access to fully automated telephone services.
These services take the same information that support access by TTY users and translate it into a text messaging mode.
Either a single line designed to handle both hearing callers and TTY callers, or two separate phone lines can be used.
In either case, whenever the telephone number is listed, it should be distinctly identified as being TTY accessible.
* TTY with refreshable braille display.
Individuals who are deaf and blind may need a TTY that also has a refreshable braille display unit attached.
Using this device, an individual who is deaf/blind and a sighted person can communicate in a face-to-face situation whereby both people type their messages using the TTY keypad.
The typed message keypad then displayed on the TTY readout and on the refreshable braille display unit.
This device also enables an individual who is deaf/blind to access the telephone system in the same way a standard TTY user would.
Instead of reading the text displayed visually, the individual, who is deaf/blind reads the refreshable braille display.
* Pay phone TTY.
A pay phone TTY can be purchased or leased and placed next to other pay phones in building for visitors who use TTYs.
The TTY is in a closed case to protect it from vandalism.
The case opens when a TTY is detected at the number that has been dialed.
If the number being dialed is a voice and TTY number, a spoken message can be generated that informs the person answering the call that a TTY needs to be connected to respond to the caller.
* Signaling system.
For a person who is hard of hearing or deaf, the normal sounds and tones that alert one to take action, such as a phone ringing, may not be heard.
A transmitter can be attached to a phone that will cause a light to flash or a personal alerting device to vibrate when the phone rings.
Additionally, transmitters can be used to activate a visual signaling system for fire alarms and door buzzers.
For some individuals, tone ringer devices can be used to convert the ring of telephones into a frequency range more easily heard.
* Hearing aid compatible phones.
When a person wearing a hearing aid uses a telephone that is not hearing aid compatible, they often hear a very loud, high-pitched squeal which often precludes using the telephone to carry on a conversation.
Hearing aid compatible phones eliminate this problem.
* Speech amplification telephone.
For individuals who are hard of hearing, there are several methods of amplifying the speech being heard over a telephone designed both for people who use a hearing aid and for those who do not.
Battery powered, portable handset amplifiers are available for calls made on other phones while traveling.
* Telephone light pen.
Individuals who are blind and use a multi-button phone set may have difficulty identifying which line is ringing, on hold, or not in use.
A light pen gives an auditory signal when it is held near to the phone set button that is lit or blinking.
Web Sites.
The design of agency home pages and Internet applications should enable access by the maximum number of potential users.
Some home page features, such as slow modems, text-based browsers, or lack of sound cards or helper applications, may limit access by individuals with disabilities.
The following are some general guidelines when developing home pages: * The site should be registered with the major search engine providers to maximize accessibility.
* Since each search engine provider has different protocols for indexing and summarizing Web pages, the protocols should be reviewed to insure the design facilitates easy identification of keywords and phrases.
For example, the difference between being in the 5th position of a search versus 35th can often determine whether a user accesses the site.
Minimally, the opening paragraph should contain the appropriate key words and phrases to identify the information included at the site.
Meta tags should also be used to identify keywords.
* A standard page layout should be maintained throughout the site.
Once an effective page has been designed, it should serve as a template for all other pages.
Knowing where important information is located and where to find buttons will make it easier to navigate through the site.
* Web pages should be tested on a variety of browsers to ensure consistency.
* Web pages should be reviewed with the image loading option turned off.
This will simulate how pages will be displayed using text-based browsers.
* The design of the page should ensure background patterns contrast well with the lettering for readability (background refers to both backgrounds of pages and background of images).
* Blinking tags should not be used because some screen readers lock-up when they encounter blinking test.
* All sentences, headers, and list items should end with a period or suitable punctuation.
Screen readers interpret punctuation for the listener.
Lists, headings or titles without punctuation marks may be run together by the screen reader making it difficult for the listener to understand.
* A graphical button-bar should be included as a navigational aid.
Graphical aids are useful to some individuals with learning disabilities.
* When using graphical button bars, text anchors should also be included to make the selection.
If the viewer is using a text-based browser or a computer not capable of viewing graphics, absent an anchor, there is no way of making a selection.
* When image maps are used for selecting options, there should be an alternate method of making the selection such as a listing of regions in the state.
* Text transcriptions or descriptions of all audio clips should be provided in an accessible format by persons who are deaf or have a hearing impairment.
* Links that occur consecutively should be avoided, if possible.
If consecutive links are necessary, vertical bars are often used to prevent a list of links from being read as a single link by a screen reader.
* Image files at different resolutions and color depths should be tested especially on 256 color (Super VGA) and 16 color (VGA) adapters.
* Date formats need to be clear.
The preference is to use the full text when referencing dates to avoid confusion as to the order of the month, day and year.
* Tables can cause problems for screen readers since they tend to read across the page in a way that runs all of the text in a line together.
Although, some newer screen readers are now able to read columns, you should avoid using columns if possible or present the data on an alternate text page without tables.
Kiosks.
The current design of most kiosks provides only limited access to individuals with disabilities.
This is an area where new solutions are needed.
Recognizing this, kiosks should provide information on alternative ways for individuals who are limited in the ability to use a kiosk to obtain access kiosk information.
The following are some guidelines for the development of kiosk applications: * The kiosk should be wheelchair accessible.
* There should be a place to rest a cane or walking stick near the kiosk.
* There should be physical supports for stability such as an armrest, footrest and a shelf for the user to place packages, etc.
* Outputs should be easily reachable and graspable.
* The screen should be shielded to avoid glare.
* The kiosks with audio should include a vandal proof headset or telephone handset with volume controls.
Related Information.
In addition to the tools listed above, the following may also prove helpful: * Assistive Listening Devices.
Speech amplification devices can be easily set up as a permanent or portable fixture for use in public hearings, group meetings, training courses, or lectures for persons who are hard of hearing.
* Captioning.
Captioned videos provide the text equivalent of sounds and speech as they occur on the video.
Any video-based media produced for instructional, training, or informational purposes should be captioned so the information presented is accessible to viewers who are deaf, hard of hearing, or who have a learning disability.
When purchasing training tapes, permission should be obtained from the copyright holder to caption them if they are not already captioned.
* Electronic mail.
Electronic mail presents few barriers to communication because it is essentially a text-based process.
Systems that provide for an interactive "chat" mode in addition to the non-interactive mail mode can greatly expand the communication possibilities for individuals who are deaf, hard of hearing or who have a visual disability.
The chat mode may be a very viable alternative for many internal communications needs.
The electronic mail system should include a feature that provides a visual indicator of message status.
* Bulletin Board Systems (BBS).
Access to bulletin board systems may be useful in addition to or to supplement access to information.
* Fax.
Sending computer-generated information, hard copy documents or handwritten notes through a facsimile machine may provide a valuable alternative to telephone messaging in some situations.
However, the non-interactive nature of fax communications makes it unsuitable as a substitute for TTY communication capabilities.
Faxing can serve as a technology supplement to a TTY or TTY-compatible device.
The fax system used should provide all necessary status information and messages needed for completing the fax transmission in a visual manner.
Fax machines that rely on the sender responding to tone or beep indicators are not acceptable for use by individuals who are deaf or severely hard of hearing.
A PC fax card may be an alternative to a standalone fax machine for individuals who frequently transmit data that has been generated on a PC.
A combination fax machine/telephone may also be an alternative to a standalone fax machine.
* Copy machine with enlarging and reducing capability.
This provides enlarged print copies for persons with impaired vision and small print copies for persons with visual impairments such as tunnel vision, which narrowly restricts the field of view.
* Video conferencing.
As video conferencing becomes more widely used, the communication needs of individuals who are deaf should be taken into consideration.
At the higher transmission rates used for video conferencing, a sign language interpreter can still be visible and understood on the receiving end.
At lower speeds, movements blur and signs cannot be understood by the receiving individual.
* Computer Aided Real Time Captioning (CART).
CART is another service that enables persons who are deaf, hard of hearing or who have a cognitive disability, the opportunity to access information in conference settings.
A CART provider uses either a laptop computer or court reporter machine to input meeting discussion or presentations for direct and immediate captioning.
The captioned information can either be viewed through the laptop screen or be projected to a large screen in the meeting room.
* Braille note taker.
This small, portable device allows braille code entry for note taking, editing and storage of information.
Additional Resources/Support.
The following Internet sites offer additional information, support and advice on accessibility: * Code of Federal Regulations on Reasonable Accommodations www.itpolicy.gsa.gov/cita/reas_acc.htm * Federal Guidelines Developed by the General Services Administration www.gsa.gov/coca * Trace R
Summary: The information provided in the guidelines is by no means comprehensive as to the technologies available to improve accessibility.
Agencies should avail themselves of the resources that have been listed to obtain updated information and a full array of services and technologies available in this area.
To Next Section To Table of Contents
