Skip Navigation National Institute of Environmental Health Sciences NIEHS Computing Guide Announcements ________________ Search Contact Home 
These irritating intrusions into our in-boxes are increasing.
NIEHS employs several anti-Spam techniques to help protect our user community.
However, unwanted e-mail can still make it through our defenses because we do not censor e-mail content.
If you have any additional questions, please contact the NIEHS Information Systems Security Officer (ISSO) at isso@niehs.nih.gov.
Q.
What is Spam? A. Unsolicited and unwanted e-mail messages are called "Spam".
Unwanted e-mail is a message you receive that you do not wish to receive, generally a solicitation of some kind.
One form of Spam called "chain letter e-mail" directs recipients to forward multiple copies, thus leading to a geometrically increasing circulation of the message.
Spam e-mail generally lacks the correct name and contact information of the original sender rendering it difficult, if not impossible, to verify authenticity.
Hoax mail and mail that markets pornography are Spam.
[ Back to Page Index ]
Q.
What is the NIEHS policy on Spam? A. NIEHS follows the NIH Guidance on Unwanted E-mail, Spam, and Chain Letters.
When attempting to block Spam, legitimate e-mail may be incorrectly identified and lost.
Therefore, centralized blocking of e-mail by content filters is not approved at NIH.
However, NIEHS takes steps to alleviate the amount of Spam the user receives.
NIEHS filters e-mail from known Spammers as identified in various Internet based reporting tools.
NIEHS does not filter based on e-mail content.
Q.
What are the different types of Spam? A. By most accepted definitions, there are no official different forms of Spam.
It is all one category of unwanted e-mail.
However, Spam that is illegal or offensive may require action on the part of the recipient.
[ Back to Page Index ]
Q.
What should I do if I receive Spam? * DELETE the message.
* Do NOT reply to the e-mail, especially to hoax or chain mail, is unwise as this action lends your name and the NIH reputation to the message making it appear authentic.
NIH does not recommend sending a "remove my name from your mailing list" message.
This action informs the Spammer that your e-mail address is valid and that you read your e-mail-thus you become the perfect target for more Spam.
Users can reduce the likelihood of being Spammed by not posting their e-mail address on a website or to forums, chat rooms, mailing lists or newsgroups.
* Set up rules to automatically move Spam to a custom folder.
NIH recommends using the filtering capabilities inherent in your own e-mail software.
Your CSP can help you configure this software for any options it may possess.
This allows you to handle your filter rules and Spam disposition any way you choose.
* Report illegal or offensive Spam.
NIH and ISSO procedures ask that all illegal Spam be sent to the ISSO.
The ISSO will report the incident to the Incident Response Team at NIH for additional action as required based on the e-mail content.
Some Spam is offensive, but not illegal.
Examples of illegal Spam are: + Attempts to ask for money or to commit fraud (see below); + Hate mail that is directed at an individual from an identifiable source; + E-mail that is personally threatening; + E-mail containing child pornography; How to report Spam to ISSO: + If Spam is deemed Illegal, send or drop the message into the Exchange public folder: "All Public Folders/NIEHS/.NIEHS/SPAM to Report".
The message will not be able to be read by you once you deposit it in this folder, however the ISSO does receive it.
If illegal, it's important to report the Spam to the ISSO with full Internet header information.
You can do so by: o Open the message (Double-click on it) o Click on "View", then "Options" o Near the bottom of the new window that pops up, you'll see a section called "Internet Headers".
Highlight the *entire* section with your mouse.
On a pc, you can "copy" the highlighted section by pressing "Ctrl-c".
Then "paste" the headers into the forwarded Spam email by pressing "Ctrl-v".
A recipient of offensive Spam may want to report it to someone so that may be stopped or sent to other appropriate authorities.
In the case of pornographic messages or excessive amounts of repeated e-mail from one identifiable source, NIEHS users should utilize http://Spamcop.net.
Please read through the 'SpamCop' web site and consider this valuable self-reporting option for offensive Spam.
If in addition to reporting illegal Spam to the ISSO, you wish to pursue more direct reporting through other federal organizations that allow self-reporting of Spam, please refer to the following: + General Self Reporting: In the case of pornographic messages or excessive amounts of repeated e-mail from one identifiable source, NIEHS users should utilize http://spamcop.net.
Please read through the SpamCop web site and consider this valuable self-reporting option for offensive Spam.
+ Unsolicited Consumer E-mail: If you have a specific complaint about unsolicited commercial e-mail, you can forward Spam directly to the Commission at UCE@FTC.GOV without using their complaint form.
To submit a complaint form to the Federal Trade Commission (FTC): The FTC Bureau of Consumer Protection does not resolve individual consumer problems, however, your complaint helps them investigate fraud, and can lead to law enforcement action.
The FTC enters Internet, telemarketing, identity theft and other fraud-related complaints into Consumer Sentinel, a secure, online database available to hundreds of civil and criminal law enforcement agencies worldwide.
You can submit the form to the FTC.
+ Popular fraud scheme: We are getting increasing amounts of e-mail that involve a fraudulent scheme.
It is recently titled, "Strictly Confidential And Urgent", although it has many forms.
You should simply delete the message.
If you choose, you may report it to the Secret Service.
For more information, this PDF document explains the scam.
+ Child pornography: If the message deals with child pornography or other illegal activities, forward the message to your ISSO.
No other reporting is necessary as these cases are submitted to NIH for action.
+ Identity theft: Sometimes Spam can involve identity theft.
If you would like to submit a report about identity theft, please use the FTC Identity Theft Complaint Form.
+ General Internet fraud: The Internet Fraud Complaint Center (IFCC) is a partnership between the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) and the National White Collar Crime Center (NW3C).
IFCC will provide you additional information and serve as a reporting point if you are a victim of fraud through an e-mail scam.
The IFCC offers a central repository for complaints related to Internet fraud, works to quantify fraud patterns, and provides timely statistical data of current fraud trends.
* The most popular e-mail fraud scheme We are getting increasing amounts of e-mail that involve a fraudulent scheme.
It is recently titled, "Strictly Confidential And Urgent", although it has many forms.
You should simply delete the message.
If you choose, you may report it to the Secret Service by following these instructions.
For more information, the State Department has a large document (PDF) explaining the scam.
* Do NOT open attachments, unless you know what the attachment is and that you requested it.
Attachments may contain malicious programming.
* Spoofed or falsified email addresses: It's possible that you might receive a notice that says you sent an e-mail that you did not send.
False identification in message headers is common on the Internet.
E-mail message headers are easily forged as they are simply text fields.
There is little we can do about this problem on the Internet today.
And, since worms send e-mail that the senders are not even aware of originating, even the real sender of the information can do little to help with this problem.
There is one topic where the ISSO would need to report the e-mail to NIH: content with child pornography.
You also cannot assume that every e-mail includes accurate information.
Almost all of the information in the e-mail headers can be altered by a virus, a worm or directly by the sender.
Spoofed header information is common and very confusing for all recipients.
Spammer sometimes find open servers that allow mail relay so the actual sender's address is protected behind misinformation.
Over 98% of the e-mail you receive is most likely correct and not forged.
The vast majority of Spam includes spoofed address header information.
Please do not overreact to strange address header information
[ Back to Page Index ]
Q.
What happens to email sent to the "NIEHS Spam-to-Report" Public Folder? A.
The 'NIEHS Spam-to-Report' Public folder allows NIEHS users to easily submit spam for review by the ISSO.
The ISSO only takes action on spam if it is illegal according to various federal guidelines on spam.
When spam is reported to the NIH ISSO and Inspector General as illegal, we still cannot prevent it.
There are simply too many tricks available for Spammers.
NIEHS tested spam-blocking software in August 2002 with inconsistent results.
Administrators are not happy about the 'good' mail getting blocked or marked.
They simply could not come up with rules that blocked spam mail without blocking intentional mail because so many people subscribe to such diverse services.
We cannot censor mail or prevent mail good mail reaching its recipient - imagine how upset you would be if we blocked you from even one piece of mail you wanted.
Improved spam blocking remains on the IT agenda as an area to improve.
The best user option remains local filters.
Example of a filter rule: Move all incoming mail with text in the body including 'promotions valid' and 'to remove yourself from this list' and 'offers expire' to a folder called spam-basket (that the user creates).
[ Back to Page Index ]
Q.
What problems are caused by Spam? A. Aside from the personal annoyance of receiving "junk mail," Spam can cause network congestion and impede the routing of legitimate e-mail messages.
While most forms of unsolicited e-mail are not illegal, chain letters are illegal if they ask for money or anything of value.
E-mail containing child pornography is also illegal and must be reported to the ISSO.
One of the more frustrating problems for recipients is the sender's name is usually forged in the header information.
Any Spam e-mail you receive can include false header information ("from" and "to" addresses) because the header information is simply text that can be replaced by the real sender.
Occasionally, users are upset because someone notifies them that they sent something that they did not send.
Many people get really upset when they receive Spam, especially when it is pornographic.
The cost and risk associated with hoaxes may not seem to be that high for one computer.
However, if you consider everyone that receives a hoax, that small cost gets multiplied into significant costs because they multiply.
For example, if everyone on the Internet were to receive one hoax message and spend one minute reading and discarding it, the cost would be something like: 50,000,000 people * 1/60 hour * $50/hour = $41.7 million.
[ Back to Page Index ]
Q.
What is NIEHS currently doing about Spam? A.
All e-mail coming into, or leaving from, the NIEHS travels through our "mail gateway", commonly referred to as Cliff, appropriately named after the mailman on "Cheers".
The number of Spam messages that we receive daily is increasing rapidly.
Spammers are becoming increasingly sophisticated at circumventing the reasonable defensive strategies.
Because we cannot filter on content, we will never be able to effectively filter all Spam.
However, NIEHS does implement the following effective anti-Spam actions centrally.
* Filtering messages based on externally maintained databases of addresses of known Spammers (http://mail-abuse.org/rbl/ and http://bl.spamcop.net/).
* Filtering messages based on a test for a poorly configured source of mail forwarding known as open mail relays (http://www.ordb.org/).
* Blocking messages based on domain name.
NIEHS does not allow e-mail to enter the NIEHS unless the domain name can be identified.
[ Back to Page Index ]
Q.
How much Spam does NIEHS block? A. Our current blocking methods detect and block hundreds of e-mails per day because the sender is a known sender of Spam.
Since it is not within NIH policy to filter e-mail based on the content of a message, NIEHS only blocks e-mail produced by well-documented anti-Spam mechanisms that involve mail and sender characteristics.
Our spam blocking statistics and methods of blocking.
Q.
What we are researching for the future to help fight Spam? A.
We have several initiatives planned or underway to help reduce Spam in the future.
To better inform our end-users, we are keeping statistics of the Spam mail we block though our mail gateway.
NIEHS is planning a Spam information web page that will provide specific numbers to the NIEHS user community (scheduled for December 2002).
We are planning to deploy new anti-Spam software called 'SpamAssassin' (http://spamassassin.org/) (due October 2002).
The 'SpamAssassin' software will mark probable Spam with additional text in the subject line to assist users with local filtering options.
We hope that the 'SpamAssassin' marking significantly outperforms the Outlook mail client's "Junk E-mail" option available today.
Q.
Where can I get more information regarding Spam? A.
If you do have problems, concerns, or require additional information about Spam, you may contact the NIEHS Information Systems Security Officer (ISSO) or your Computer Support Person (CSP).
The following reference may be helpful of you wish to read further.
* Federal Trade Commission - Spam Mail * US Secret Service Public Awareness Advisory regarding "4-1-9" or "Advance Fee Fraud" Schemes * Internet Mail Consortium: Limiting Unsolicited Bulk Email * HOAXBUSTERS * The Coalition Against Unsolicited Commercial Email
[ Back to Page Index ]
Additional Information:
* NIH Guidance on Unwanted E-mail, Spam, and Chain Letters * NIH's Procedure for Handling Unwanted E-mail (Word Doc) * Computer Viruses * How Computer Viruses Are Handled At NIEHS
The Junction | People Locator | NIEHS Home | NIH Home
