[daiywash.gif] *EPF102 03/08/99 TRANSCRIPT: SPOKESMAN RUBIN PRESS BRIEFING IN LONDON MARCH 6 (Discusses Kosovo, bananas dispute, arrest of Ta Mok) (1930) London -- State Department Spokesman James Rubin briefed the press March 6 following Secretary of State Madeleine Albright's meetings here with former Senator Robert Dole and U.S. Special Envoy for Kosovo Christopher Hill on their efforts to convince the Kosovar Albanians' to agree to the interim settlement offered at the recent Kosovo peace talks in Rambouillet, France.
"Secretary Albright was encouraged that things continue to move in the right direction," Rubin said.
The Kosovars are expected to give their final answer "in a short number of days."
"We're waiting with hope and expectation that the Kosovar Albanians will follow through on their stated commitment at the Rambouillet talks to take two weeks to consider the agreement and then agree to it," he added.
The peace talks are scheduled to start again March 15.
If the Kosovars sign on to the Rambouillet Accords, "we do believe the pressure will build and continue to build on the Serb side" to agree, Rubin said.
Asked about March 3 announcement of a U.S. Customs action against selected European Union products in response to the EU's failure to implement a World Trade Organization (WTO)-consistent banana regime, Rubin said, "We did not retaliate yet.
What we did was protect our rights to receive the compensation" the United States says it is entitled to because of the EU's non-compliance with the WTO's dispute settlement panel ruling.
The United States will suspend tariff concessions on the EU products "only when the WTO makes the decision" on the extent of compensation, Rubin said, "and we will comply with that decision."
On March 2 the WTO arbitrators announced that they needed more information from the parties before making a decision.
If permitted, the compensation would be in the form of U.S. tariffs (that is, the suspension of tariff concessions) on certain EU products.
Rubin added, "What we want to do is work with our allies and friends in Europe and come up with a [banana import] scheme, a plan that is not discriminatory, that does not discriminate against Latin American and American products, so that this kind of dispute can be put behind us.
But right now there is no question but that unfair trading was going on; the question is how large the compensation would be."
Rubin also said the United States welcomes the arrest of Ta Mok, a senior Khmer Rouge figure who was the right-hand man of Pol Pot and was alleged to be responsible for the deaths of some 1.7 million Cambodians.
"We now have a real chance to bring to justice one the most notorious war criminals in recent history," he said.
Following is a transcript of the press briefing: (Begin transcript) U.S. DEPARTMENT OF STATE Office of the Spokesman (London, England) March 6, 1999 PRESS AVAILABILITY BY SPOKESMAN JAMES P. RUBIN (Churchill Hotel) MR. RUBIN: Secretary Albright just had a set of meetings, first with Senator Dole and Ambassador Hill.
They were then joined by several other officials including General Wesley Clark of NATO, Secretary Albright's military advisor, General Doc Foglesong, as well as Walt Slocombe, the Under Secretary of Defense.
They discussed the subject of Kosovo.
Senator Dole reported to the Secretary on his recent efforts in the region to try to obtain the agreement of the Kosovar Albanians to the package the international community has put forward.
Based on his report and further discussions from Ambassador Hill, Secretary Albright was encouraged that things continue to move in the right direction.
The Kosovars have promised to accelerate their timetable to be able to give the answer -- the final answer -- in a short number of days.
On that basis she has asked Ambassador Hill to go back to the field and to meet primarily with KLA [Kosovo Liberation Army] commanders, who are the critical deciding votes in this final decision-making time.
Again, we believe it's extremely important to try to stop the conflict in Kosovo before it gets far, far worse.
In order to do that, we have been expending considerable diplomatic energies to that end.
That process is clearly not over.
But at this stage, we're waiting with hope and expectation that the Kosovar Albanians will follow through on their stated commitment at the Rambouillet talks to take two weeks to consider the agreement and then agree to it.
That's where we are.
In the meantime, we think it's very important that [Federal Republic of Yugoslavia] President Milosevic understand that it is he who will be held responsible if the movements of troops and forces in the region yield a crackdown or an offensive.
NATO has spoken to that, other members of the administration have spoken to that.
Q: (inaudible) any signs that the Serbs will sign on to this? MR. RUBIN: Well, there are no signs that since the talks ended that they have moved forward.
At the talks, I think there was a general agreement that they had agreed to many parts of the political package, but remain steadfastly refusing to engage seriously on the question of a NATO-led implementation force.
And so, the work that has been done because of the lack of willingness on the part of the Serbs to engage on that, has tended to focus on the Kosovar Albanians.
And if and when they do agree, we do believe the pressure will build and continue to build on the Serb side.
Q: Can I just ask, with these reports today that an American soldier had shot a Bosnian Serb in Tuzla, are you worried that the Americans as a whole -- their efforts to try to win peace in the Balkans will be tarnished by that? And second, could I also ask whether you think peace in Kosovo or peace in the economic trade world will come first? MR. RUBIN: Well, on the first question, I don't have the latest information from the field and I would want to check that information you've provided before making any comment.
With respect to the second question, let's bear in mind there's a big difference between two great friends and allies who are having a trade dispute on the one hand and two factions who've been fighting to the death in Kosovo, so I wouldn't even consider them in the same sentence.
Q: What's the thinking about sending an envoy to Belgrade? MR. RUBIN: Well, there has been some thought about that; there has been no final decision made on that.
I think people are focused again right now on the work that Ambassador Hill will be doing tomorrow in the field to try to bring the Kosovar Albanians over the finish line.
But I wouldn't rule it out.
Q: (Inaudible) Is it possible that they will cross the finish line tomorrow? MR. RUBIN: I'm not going to get into a situation of predicting when they will make this decision; their decision-making is their own.
This is the first time they've ever played in the big leagues.
They're trying to be democratic about it.
It's not as simple as just getting a thumbs up, thumbs down from a dictator.
They're actually going through discussions and those discussions have continued.
But all of them -- and Senator Dole met with a wide group both by telephone and in person -- indicated that it is their intention to complete their consultations in the next day or so.
Q: Jamie, there was some expectation or at least some hope in the administration that [Dole] would actually get a signature -- is this a setback? MR. RUBIN: We don't see this as a setback.
On the contrary, we don't regard things as setbacks, failures, successes.
This is a peace process, and in pursuit of a peace process you take it one step at a time; you try to advance the process.
We believe that Senator Dole's role was extremely helpful in convincing the Kosovar Albanians of the wisdom of this agreement, in explaining to them that Congressional support for American participation will not be forthcoming if the Kosovar Albanians are the ones that are the recalcitrant party; that they have a lot of friends in Congress; that they have a good friend in the United States as evidenced by the efforts that Secretary Albright has made; that they shouldn't lose the opportunity that comes with that friendship; and that they should move forward and say yes.
Q: On the bananas issue, is the Secretary willing or able to try to narrow the difference on this, is this part of the plan...? MR. RUBIN: This has been primarily negotiated through trade negotiators and it is our view that this issue is an issue that at its core is about the dispute settlement mechanisms of the World Trade Organization.
We did not retaliate yet.
What we did was protect our rights to receive the compensation that the WTO said it would provide by March 3rd, a decision that now looks like it will take a few more weeks.
We will impose these restrictions only when the WTO makes the decision, and we will comply with that decision.
It was supposed to have been reached by March 3rd, and all we've done is serve notice and protect ourselves in the event that decision is made.
I think everyone recognizes there was a problem here.
The question is how much compensation will be available.
What we want to do is work with our allies and friends in Europe and come up with a scheme, a plan that is not discriminatory, that does not discriminate against Latin American and American products, so that this kind of dispute can be put behind us.
But right now there is no question but that unfair trading was going on; the question is how large the compensation would be.
And we're protecting ourselves based on an expected compensation to be decided on the 3rd that now looks like it will be delayed for a few weeks.
Q: Jamie, do have you any reaction to reports of the arrest of Ta Mok? MR. RUBIN: Yes, I do.
There has been a report, the Cambodian government has informed us that Ta Mok, who is known as "The Butcher," who was the right-hand man of Pol Pot and who was alleged to be responsible for upwards of 1.7 million dead Cambodians.
This senior Khmer Rouge figure has been wanted for some time
.
We are encouraged that we now have the opportunity to bring one of the most notorious war criminals in the recent past to justice and we will now be focusing our efforts on working with the Cambodian Government to that end.
Q: So has he been arrested or what? MR. RUBIN: Apparently he has been arrested in Cambodia.
Q: So you welcome the arrest? MR. RUBIN: I am encouraged; we welcome this arrest.
We now have a real chance to bring to justice one the most notorious war criminals in recent history.
Q: Can you tell us on the banana question again, why did America announce, serve notice if you like, on these possible sanctions rather than wait for the decision from the WTO? MR. RUBIN: Well, we've been waiting a long time.
Nobody doubts that there's discrimination in these practices.
There was an expectation that on March 3rd this would happen.
It didn't happen.
All we've done is protect ourselves until the decision comes down in the next few weeks.
Thank you.
(End transcript) NNNN _________________________________________________________________
Return to Washington File Main Page Return to the Washington File Log
