Feedback | We Home | DHS Home Perspective [shim.gif] [shim.gif]
I want to let you know that recently I received the results of two surveys of our agency -- a statewide client satisfaction survey and a mystery shopper survey.
In response to Senate Bill 1563 (76th Legislative Session), the agency contracted with the Survey Research Center at the University of North Texas to find out what our Texas Works and Long-term Care clients think about us.
I am very proud of what we found.
A statistically valid sample of 3,500 long-term care and 3,600 Texas Works clients were surveyed by mail between September and November 2000.
Overall, 87.9 percent of respondents were satisfied with the treatment they received from DHS employees.
Specific results indicate that: * 95.5 percent are satisfied with office hours.
* 92.7 percent are satisfied with office location.
* 92.5 percent think that DHS offices are clean.
* 91.2 percent said they are treated with respect.
* 90.6 percent indicated they receive DHS services when needed.
* 89.3 percent said that written materials are easy to understand.
* 89.1 percent indicated they got the help needed to complete paperwork.
* 87.6 percent said they receive clear answers to their questions.
* 70.3 percent are satisfied with the amount of time it takes to answer the phone.
The Mystery Shopper survey was conducted over the phone and in person by Austin-based Business Resources.
It was conducted in every region and included 100 office visits and more than 200 phone calls.
In addition to our ratings, Business Resources compared the agency's survey results to other business and government agency ratings contained in its database.
DHS scored above average for government agencies and above or similar to banks and insurance companies in all areas.
The results were: * Automated answering service -- The agency scored 98.3 percent for friendliness, 95.06 percent for clear instructions, and 88.3 percent for clearly explained options.
* Customer service over the phone -- DHS scored an 87.83 percent rating for courtesy and friendliness, 89.26 percent for the ability to answer questions, and 86.87 percent for speed of service.
* In-person customer service -- 96.8 percent of the mystery shoppers reported being treated with dignity and respect, 95.1 percent reported being helped in an efficient and orderly way, and 91.7 percent reported being greeted by the front desk worker in a friendly and prompt manner.
As an agency, were doing well on most areas surveyed, but we still have some work to do.
Think of it this way: If we can do the right thing by showing respect to clients 91.2 percent of the time or by helping them complete their paperwork 89.1 percent of the time, we can do it 100 percent of the time.
All it takes is a little more effort on all of our parts, and it can make a big difference in the lives of those we help.
Thank you for all you've done to earn this level of feedback from our customers.
I look forward to seeing even better results next year.
Perspective
Short Takes
Eye on DHS
Kudos
Outstanding Employees
Retirements
Deaths
Feedback
