Home | Search | The Artists | Teaching | Hiring | About This Site | Contact Us Artist's Main Page Heather Highland Dancers Main Page Artist's Art Form Heather Highland Dancers Art Form Traditions in Artist's Work Traditions In Their Art Resources Heather Highland Dancers Scottish Highland Dance Madison, WI [On this page:.........]
Vocabulary
Act of Proscription: A law in the 1700s that said Scots could not wear any part of the traditional Highland clothing, including the kilt and tartan.
Bonnet: A hat without a visor that is made of cloth or wool.
It has a tight headband and a soft full top.
Brooch: (sounds like, BROCH) A decorative pin.
Caber Toss: A contest of strength, balance and accuracy.
The tosser throws a 20-foot pole end over end in as straight a line as possible.
Celtic: (sounds like, KEL-tik) Related to people who speak Celtic languages.
Characteristic: A quality thats typical for a certain person or thing.
A quality that makes someone or something distinct.
Flashes: Small flag-like pieces of fabric worn around the top of tartan hose.
They face to the outside and are decorative.
Folk belief: A traditional belief passed from person to person by word of mouth, imitation, and observation.
Folklife: A groups traditions, passed on in informal ways.
Another word for folklore.
Gaelic: The Celtic language spoken in Scotland, Ireland, and the Isle of Man.
Haggis: A sheeps stomach stuffed with meats and oats and then boiled for a long time.
Highlands: The mountainous region of northern Scotland.
Hose: Socks, stockings.
Intergenerational: From more than one generation.
Kilt: A wrap-around garment made from heavy wool with pleats in the back.
Petticoat: A womans skirted undergarment, a slip.
Pipe: A nickname for bagpipe.
Scottish Country Dance: Another type of Scottish dance, danced in patterns with partners.
Scottish Highland Dance: Traditional dances from the Highlands of Scotland, usually danced solo.
Solo: Single, alone.
Sporran: A pouch, usually made from animal skin with the hair or fur on, that a man wears on the center front of his kilt.
He uses it to hold knives and money.
Sword dance: A Highland Dance performed between two crossed swords.
Tartan: A woven pattern with stripes of different sizes and colors that cross in straight lines.
Different patterns represent different Scottish clans.
Vigorous: Showing a lot of energy and strength.
back to top
Journal Questions
Question Do you know what type of dance is part of your regions folklife? Do you know any traditional dances from your ancestors regions?
Question Is there a special activity that you do with one or both of your parents? Is it something that they did with their parents?
Question In the photos on the Heather Highland Dancers Traditions page, both dancers are wearing kilts.
What is different about the rest of their outfits? What is the same?
back to top
Resources For Teachers
Web Resource Robert Burns is Scotlands national poet.
The The Official Robert Burns Site offers his complete works on line, including a glossary for English/Gaelic translations.
Web Resource Along with Highland Dance, there are several strong Scottish Country dance groups in Wisconsin: Madison Wisconsin Scottish Country Dancers, Milwaukee Scottish Country Dancers, Racine Scottish Country Dancers.
Web Resource Pipers often accompany Highland dancers.
Here are two Wisconsin pipe bands that may be in your part of the state: Madison Pipes and Drums and Milwaukee Scottish Pipe Band.
back to top
Resources For Students
Web Resource Visit the Heather Highland Dancers website.
You can see lots of photos showing the dancers in action, and learn about other dances they perform.
Web Resource Have you ever sung Auld Lang Syne on New Years Eve? Then you have sung a Robert Burns song, with Gaelic words! Read the original lyrics and their English translation on this page from The World Burns Club, Robert Burns Federation.
Web Resource Want to hear three poems of Robert Burns read in Gaelic? Go to The Poetry of Robert Burns.
You can hear To a Mouse, Willie Wastle, and A Mans a Man for A That.
Web Resource Have you ever eaten haggis? Want to see what it looks like? Go to Address to a Haggis.
Scroll down the page to find a photo.
Scroll further and youll find the Burns poem, Address to a Haggis that is read at each Burns Dinner.
This version has a translation too.
Try to find a St. Andrews Society or Robert Burns Club in your community.
If they have a Burns Dinner in January, go and taste haggis!
Web Resource There are thousands of different patterns for tartans! View just a few of them at Am Breachdan, the Tartan.
Web Resource Want to do some historical research on Scottish Wisconsinites with primary documents? Visit the University of Wisconsin-Milwaukee Library archives.
Use the materials in the Catherine Campbell Papers.
Catherine was an active member of Milwaukees St. Andrews Society and participated in Highland Games as a dancer during the first half of the 20th century.
back to top
Credits
Text written by Jamie Yuenger and Anne Pryor.
Sources consulted include fieldwork with the Heather Highland Dancer by Jamie Yuenger (11/19/02) and by Anne Pryor (9/16/96); phone interviews with Carrie Marlette by Jamie Yuenger (7/3/02) and with Susan Jeffrey by Anne Pryor (2/8/03); the Scottish Official Board of Highland Dance pamphlet, What it is and What it does; and the website Minnesota Scottish Celtic Dance Association.
Divider
Wisconsin Folks
For Educators:
To Hire Heather Highland Dancers
Curriculum Standards
Resources/ Credits [dotclear.gif] [dotclear.gif]
Home | Search | The Artists | Teaching | Hiring | About This Site | Contact Us
