[USEMAP:title_grants.gif] [mac_purplelogo.gif]
Leland Blues Project
This organization works out to draw attention to and honor the blues musicians who have come from the mid- Mississippi Delta, specifically those from Washington County.
The Project sponsors the annual Highway 61 Blues Festival in Leland, has organized the creation of a series of murals in Leland that feature local blues legends, and operates the Highway 61 Blues Museum in the city.
[dottedrule.gif]
[kuchipudi.jpg]
Dancer Sasikala Penumarthi of Atlanta (photo courtesy of the Academy of Kuchipudi Dance, Inc.
Atlanta)
India Association of Mississippi - statewide
The Association is using their grant funds to sponsor an Indian classical dance performance at Thalia Mara Hall in Jackon in August 2003.
The program will feature Sasikala Penumarthi, a dancer based in Atlanta who is an acclaimed performer in the Kuchipudi dance tradition.
The Association sponsors a number of public programs throughout the year that celebrate Indian arts and culture.
[dottedrule.gif]
[tworivers.jpg]
Jam session tent at 1999 Two Rivers Bluegrass Festival
Two Rivers Bluegrass Festival Leakesville
This festival features local and nationally known bluegrass performers.
Also included are crafts demonstrations, a forestry field day (educates local students about the occupational culture of the local timber industry), and amateur jam sessions.
[dottedrule.gif]
[eagleacad1.jpg]
click here for a video of the drum program (QuikTime required)
Eagle Music 
Eagle Academy is a youth arts program of Walk of Faith Ministry in Mound Bayou.
The program offers instruction in African drumming and sound reinforcement for school age children in the town.
The program plans on bringing in a number of guest musicians for workshops with the students, including musicians that performed on recordings made by the Stax and Hi Records labels in Memphis.
[dottedrule.gif]
Mississippi Delta Tennessee Williams Festival Clarksdale
This event celebrates the life and work of Williams in the town where he spent his early childhood.
It features lectures, panel discussions, performances, walking tours, and an acting competition for local high school students.
[dottedrule.gif]
[moseley.jpg]
Artist Alice Moseley of Bay St. Louis (photo courtesy of Destination 
Alice Moseley Documentary Video Project Bay St. Louis
Destination 
Copies of the video will be distributed to schools and colleges throughout the state.
[dottedrule.gif]
[irishdancers.jpg]
The McTeggert Irish Dancers performing at the 2002 Celtic Fest (photo courtesy of the Celtic Heritage Society).
Celtic Fest - Jackson
This festival is a three day event staged at the Mississippi Agriculture and Forestry Museum in Jackson.
The event is sponsored by the Celtic Heritage Society and highlights the artistic and cultural traditions of the Celtic lands.
Celtic Fest features several different music and dance groups, as well as a series of cultural arts workshops.
[dottedrule.gif]
[Pureblues.jpg]
Pure Blues Express performing at the 2001 festival.
Sunflower River Blues and Gospel Festival - Clarksdale
Now in its 16^th year, this festival features both local blues performers and nationally known artists.
The Sunflower River Blues Association, the festival's sponsoring organization, places a special emphasis on featuring performers that are Mississippi natives or have ties to the state.
The event also includes a stage dedicated to performances by acoustic musicians.
[dottedrule.gif]
[bryant
Georgia blues guitarist Precious Bryant performing with Mississippi's Jessie Mae Hemphill on Thacker Mountain.
(photo courtesy Thacker Mountain Radio).
Thacker Mountain Radio Show Oxford
A partnership between the Center for Study of Southern Culture at the University of Mississippi and Square Books in Oxford, Thacker Mountain is a live weekly radio show presented in downtown Oxford.
The show features readings by nationally prominent authors and performances by regional and nationally touring musicians.
It is rebroadcast statewide on Public Radio in Mississippi on Sunday evenings.
[dottedrule.gif]
[oldhat.jpg]
Alvin Hudson of the Old Hat String Band performing at the 2003 Port Gibson Heritage Festival
Port Gibson Heritage Festival Port Gibson
A community festival that has expanded its mission to feature traditional musicians and craftspeople.
The 2003 Festival featured a number of the states premiere blues artists, including James Super Chikan Johnson, Robert Cage, and Willie Clayton.
[dottedrule.gif]
[pulpwood-small.jpg]
Cindy Bryan of Newhebron demonstrates how to cane chairs at 2002 Pulpwood Festival (photo courtesy of Newhebron Activity Club).
Pulpwood Festival - Newhebron
Newhebron is a small (population: 448) town in Lawrence County that each year stages this festival, which includes an arts and crafts fair and an evening concert that features a wide range of musical groups, including a nationally known performer as headliner.
[dottedrule.gif]
Jazz and Blues at the Alamo - Jackson
A monthly concert series produced at the Alamo Theatre, a historic theater on Farish Street, the historic black business district in Jackson.
The series is sponsored by the Mississippi Association for the Preservation of Smith Robertson School and the Alamo Theater.
The concerts feature the Metropolitan Instrumental Ensemble, a group made up of local professional musicians.
Joining the group on each show are special guest vocalists and musicians.
[dottedrule.gif]
[rootsreunion.jpg]
Members of the bluegrass group Foxfire perform at the March 2003 Roots Reunion.
Roots Reunion Hattiesburg
A live radio show produced at the historic Walthall School in Hattiesburg.
The show is produced by the Pine Hills Culture Program at the University of Southern Mississippi and features a wide range of traditional music groups from the Piney Woods region of the state.
The show is broadcast on WUSM, the university's radio station.
Past featured performers include blues guitarist Vasti Jackson, bluegrass group Fair River Station, country comedienne "Miss Joyce" Shearer and the Pearl River South Singing Convention.
[dottedrule.gif]
Farish Street Heritage Festival Jackson
A community festival held on Farish Street in Jackson, the historic black business district of the city.
The festival features a wide range of blues and gospel performers, along with craft vendors and other artists.
[dottedrule.gif]
[rebstock.jpg]
Danny 
RebStock - Vicksburg
This festival, sponsored by the Vicksburg 
The event features informal picking sessions by old-time musicians during the afternoon and an evening concert featuring a nationally known group who specialize in Civil War era music.
[dottedrule.gif]
[trustys-small.jpg]
The Trustys of Davo Crossing (Danny and Linda Trusty) receive a proclamation from State Representative Zachary Rushing (center) at the 2003 Bluegrass on the Creek Festival (photo courtesy Danny Trusty).
Bluegrass on the Creek Tylertown
A festival that features local and national bluegrass performers.
The 2004 version of the festival will feature Bill Grant and Delia Bell from Oklahoma, The Southern Strangers from Alabama, and Shallow Creek from Mississippi.
[dottedrule.gif]
[top_arrow.gif]
[bottom_banner.gif]
