Secretary Tippett's Remarks for N.C. 94 Fairfield Bridge Ribbon Cutting Ceremony Wed., Aug. 22, 2001 11 a.m.
Good morning and thank you Paul for that introduction.
Paul continues to do an outstanding job on the Board--and I want to thank him for all of his efforts on behalf of the citizens of this state.
It's good to see all of you here today.
We have many people here whose hard work helped projects such as the N.C. 94 Fairfield Bridge become a reality.
I know you're familiar with the Southern Albermarle Association--and we've heard from Carlisle Harrell and Janet Russ.
But I'd be remiss if I didn't take a moment to brag on them a little.
The Southern Albermarle Association has had a long-standing commitment to transportation issues in this region for more than 65 years.
This group of citizens saw the need for paved roads to connect county seats and bridge the waters that connected surrounding counties to the outside world.
They organized their member counties--Beaufort, Dare, Hyde, Tyrrell, Martin and Washington--into an association to encourage the prosperity and growth of this region.
This organization has emerged as a unified voice for transportation in the area.
Their motto--"One For All and All For One"--says it all.
They realized early that their goals of bridging the Pamlico and four-laning U.S. 64 from the Capitol to the coast would only be achieved by working together.
They've worked with DOT on priorities for this region--such as U.S. 64 and U.S. 17.
And their 10-year plan for highways and bridges focuses on projects that will bring growth and prosperity to this area.
I thank the leadership of the Southern Albermarle Association for their vision when it comes to transportation in this part of the state.
Working together has paid off for this region--and I'm proud of the strides we've made.
It's easy to see why this group is so proud of Hyde County--your community's roots run deep through the heart of the Pamlico.
As one of the oldest counties in North Carolina, Hyde County has played an important role in our state's transportation history.
Today, another chapter of this rich history will be written as we officially open and dedicate the Fairfield Bridge on N.C. 94.
This 3,900-foot bridge is one of several bridges to span the Intracoastal Waterway through North Carolina.
The Intracoastal Waterway is a 3,000-mile sheltered passage that runs from Boston, Massachusetts to Key West, Florida --and along the Gulf of Mexico coast from the Apalachee Bay in Florida to Brownsville, Texas on the Rio Grande.
The Waterway, conceived and built back in the 1920's by the Army Corps of Engineers, was designed to stimulate economic growth--and to provide another means of transportation for the region other than horses and mules.
The Intracoastal Waterway is a busy commercial hub that includes barges which haul petroleum, food, building materials and manufactured goods.
Locally, it bisects Hyde County--and connects the Alligator River and the Pungo River to the Pamlico Sound.
With the Intracoastal Waterway, Alligator and Pungo Rivers and the Pamlico Sound, it is easy to see what makes Hyde County the "land of many waters."
Today, the "land of many waters" has one more bridge.
The N.C. 94 Fairfield Bridge will mean great things for this area's transportation network.
It is the last of a series of bridges over the Atlantic Intracoastal Waterway replaced by the federal government.
Most of the original bridges dated back to the 1930's--and were in desperate need of replacement due to their outdated swing span design.
These narrow, two-lane swing span bridges had to be staffed 24 hours a day, seven days a week, so that the bridge could open for passing boats at any time.
Opening the bridges, however, caused traffic delays, and required extensive and often expensive maintenance.
In 1970, the federal government adopted the River and Harbor Act, which called for the replacement of these antiquated bridges.
The new, modernized bridges were built wider and also high enough for boats passing underneath.
The N.C. 94 Fairfield Bridge is the last in a series of projects to improve and modernize the Atlantic Intracoastal Waterway.
The bridge will help speed passage for farmers transporting their grain and soy to the north.
Before, they had to use a narrow bridge--with a traffic signal--which had to be raised to make way for passing boats.
Now they can quickly cross the bridge without any waiting or delays.
The new bridge will also help motorists get closer to some of Hyde County's most valuable natural resources--four national wildlife refuges including the Mattamuskeet National Refuge--made up of 50,000 acres of water, marsh, timber and croplands.
This natural treasure is home to geese, swans, ducks and the endangered bald eagle.
The wildlife--as well as the beautiful flora and fauna--makes it a great refuge for hunters, photographers and nature lovers alike.
Protecting our state's wildlife and other natural resources is a duty the Department of Transportation takes seriously.
Another organization that is serious about protecting the environment is the Army Corps of Engineers--the agency that designed and built the Fairfield Bridge.
The Corps and DOT have a long history of working together on environmental and regulatory issues--and have worked closely to design and build highways and bridges that protect wetlands and waterways.
The Corps' commitment and hard work to protect our environment will ensure a bright future for our state.
The N.C. 94 Fairfield Bridge is a shining example of what can happen when federal and state agencies--as well as local transportation planning groups--work together.
This bridge will certainly benefit this area--and contribute to the economic development of the coast.
It will provide a quick route for farmers and business owners to transport their goods safely and conveniently.
Helping rural areas improve their infrastructure and enhance their economic development potential is one of my top priorities.
I have implemented an aggressive agenda that targets our rural areas with much needed assistance for highway maintenance, better roads and bridges and smarter transportation planning.
We understand that our rural communities hold the key to the future of our state.
Focusing on areas like Hyde County will help bring the kind of success and progress the people of North Carolina deserve.
The N.C. 94 Fairfield Bridge is a step in the right direction.
Thank you.
Back to Index
