2001 Jean Laney Harris Folk Heritage Awards A ceremony honoring this years recipients of the Jean Laney Harris Folk Heritage Award will be held at the State House at noon on Thursday, April 26.
A reception will follow at the University of South Carolinas McKissick Museum.
The award, established by the legislature in 1987, recognizes outstanding practitioners of traditional arts that have been passed down through generations of South Carolinians.
McKissick Museum and the SC Arts Commission administer the awards process; an advisory panel appointed by the Lieutenant Governor and the Speaker of the House selects the winners.
The recipients of the 2001 Jean Laney Harris Folk Heritage Award:
Willie Lee Williams, Master Hash-maker, Varnville Sonoco Mens Club, Gospel/Traditional Music, Hartsville Alvin J. Wall, Bluegrass, Charleston Bill Pinkney, Gospel/Beach Music, Sumter Marquetta L. Goodwine, Advocate for Gullah/Geechee culture, St. Helena Island
[rule.gif]
The late Jean Laney Harris, a member of the House of Representatives, chaired the Joint Legislative Committee on Cultural Affairs.
She was a long-time supporter of the preservation of South Carolinas cultural heritage.
For additional information, contact Saddler Taylor at 803-777-7251 or taylors7@gwm.sc.edu.
[rule.gif]
About the Award Presentation Ceremony Nomination Instructions Award Recipients 2001 Awards Recipients 2000 Awards Recipients 1999 Awards legislation (pdf)
Willie Lee Williams learned to cook Low Country hash in the early 1950s under the supervision of one of the regions best barbecue chefs, Hickam Davis.
A family affair, Williams is assisted by his brother, John Perry and his son Darin during the long cooking process.
The Williams family has been making hash for years, and it is known in the community for supplying hash to churches and other organizations to raise money for charitable causes.
Williams and his sons cook for a variety of occasions, but take particular pleasure in cooking for the annual reunion of their own family.
While there are only a few master hash-makers practicing today, Williams intends to keep the hash-making tradition alive by passing down his recipe and techniques to his son Darin.
The Sonoco Mens Club is a group of men who have dedicated a great part of their lives to singing gospel and traditional music.
Organized in 1960, the Sonoco Mens Club is comprised mostly of retired employees of Sonoco Products Company, a textile manufacturer based in Hartsville.
The majority of the members have been singing together since the 1940s.
Singing a variety of gospel, hymns, and traditional music, the members profess no formal training, only a fondness and appreciation for the songs they learned from their parents and grandparents.
The Sonoco Mens Club has spent countless hours every month to enrich the lives of the people living in their community.
They perform regularly at prisons, hospitals, and senior citizen centers throughout the region.
Alvin J. Wall began playing hillbilly and "old-time" music before it was dubbed bluegrass.
In 1941 Wall and his band won an amateur contest that launched his subsequent career.
While in the Navy during WWII, Wall was exposed to several other musicians and recalled that he "gained great inspiration from his father."
Wall also learned to play from neighborhood friends who had a similar passion for what would later be called bluegrass.
A retired dairy industry executive, Wall not only plays bluegrass and country music, but writes on bluegrass for magazines and has authored two unpublished manuscripts on the subject.
Wall continues to play with legends like Pappy Sherrill and produce country, bluegrass, and gospel offerings at a variety of venues.
Bill Pinkney has been singing and performing gospel music for over 58 years.
At an early age, Pinkney was exposed to the gospel music of his hometown church in Dalzell, SC. Little did those church members know that Bill Pinkney would one day be a founding member of the highly successful group The Drifters.
Never parting from his gospel roots, Pinkney and the other members of the group forged a career that combined elements of beach, rock 
In 1988, Pinkney and his fellow Drifters were inducted into the Rock and Roll Hall of Fame.
Pinkney continues to perform in and around his hometown and trains numerous singers, doing his part to ensure that gospel music continues to be a vital part of the community.
Marquetta L. Goodwine will receive the Advocacy Award for the cultural preservation and promotion of the Gullah community.
Goodwine works tirelessly on a regional, national, and international level to promote the Gullah culture of the Sea Islands.
She is the founder and director of the Gullah/Geechee Sea Island Coalition and the performance troupe Gullah Cunneckshun.
Goodwine has been an active event organizer and participant for various organizations within her community including the annual Gullah Festival and the Penn Community Center 
Goodwine is also recognized as the first to teach online courses on Gullah and is also the co-author of several books of Gullah poetry.
A recognized historian and advocate, Goodwine simply refers to herself as an "art-ivist."
The Elizabeth O'Neill Verner Governor's Awards for the Arts
