Mailing Date: Oct. 22, 1997
COMMONWEALTH OF PENNSYLVANIA OFFICE OF ADMINISTRATIVE LAW JUDGE FOR PENNSYLVANIA LIQUOR CONTROL BOARD
PENNSYLVANIA STATE POLICE, BUREAU OF LIQUOR CONTROL ENFORCEMENT
: : :
Citation No. 96-1284
v.
: : :
Incident No. W4-146026
CAPRINO'S INC 559-563 GREENFIELD AVENUE PITTSBURGH PA 15207-1093 ALLEGHENY COUNTY LICENSE NO. R-AP-6722
: : : : : : : :
LID - 26564
BEFORE : JUDGE FRISK
APPEARANCES:
For Bureau of Enforcement:
For Licensee:
Stanley Wolowski, Esquire
James Wymard, Esquire
ADJUDICATION
BACKGROUND:
This proceeding arises out of a citation that was issued on July 3, 1996, by the Bureau of Liquor Control Enforcement of the Pennsylvania State Police (hereinafter Bureau) against Caprino's, Inc., License Number R-AP-6722 (hereinafter Licensee).
The citation charges Licensee with violation of Section 471 of the Liquor Code [47 P.S. §4-471] and Section 5513 of the Crimes Code [18 Pa.
C.S. §5513], in that on April 13, 14, 24, and 26, 1996, Licensee, by its servants, agents or employes, possessed or operated gambling devices or paraphernalia or permitted gambling or lotteries on its licensed premises.
CAPRINO'S, INC.
Citation Number 96-1284
An administrative hearing was conducted on May 6, 1997, at Two Parkway Center, 875 Greentree Road, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania.
The Bureau was represented by Stanley Wolowski, Esquire.
Licensee was represented by James A. Wymard, Esquire.
The Bureau began its investigation of this matter on May 20, 1996, and completed its investigation on May 20, 1996.
Thereafter, Licensee was notified of the nature of the violations disclosed by the investigation by letter sent by certified mail on May 29, 1996.
Counsel for Licensee stipulates that the notice provisions of Section 471 of the Liquor Code have been satisfied.
After hearing the testimony presented, and upon review of the evidence submitted, the following Findings of Fact and Conclusions of Law are entered:
FINDINGS OF FACT :
April 13-14, 1996
1.
On April 13, 1996 at 11:00 p.m., Pittsburgh Police Detective Rebecca Wilson entered Licensee's premises in an undercover capacity and took a seat at the bar.
During this visit, Detective Wilson observed five "Cherry Master" video slot machines in an area located to the left of the bar.
Detective Wilson noted that at least four of the five machines were illuminated, and that a male was playing one of the machines.
(N.T. 29-31)
2.
Detective Wilson further observed the aforementioned male placing U.S. currency into the "Cherry Master" video slot machine, and observed symbols rotating on a screen during the course of various games played on this machine.
On some occasions, this male was observed allowing the symbols rolling on the grid to stop on their own, while on other occasions, this male pushed a button which caused the rolling to immediately stop to display various combinations of symbols.
(N.T. 31-32)
3.
At approximately 12:00 midnight, the aforementioned male sought the attention of Licensee's Corporate Officer and Shareholder, Wayne Caprino, who was tending bar.
(N.T. 32)
4.
Mr. Caprino approached the slot machine which the aforementioned male had been playing, removed a set of keys from his right pants pocket, and unlocked the cabinet from which he removed an undetermined amount of United States currency.
Mr. Caprino handed this money to the male, locked the cabinet, and placed the keys back into his pocket.
Mr. Caprino then pushed a series of buttons located on this "Cherry Master" video slot machine, which allowed the graphics to change as the credits were cleared.
(N.T. 33-34)
5.
The aforementioned male then proceeded to place additional currency into the same video slot machine and continued to play.
(N.T. 34)
CAPRINO'S, INC.
Citation Number 96-1284
6.
Approximately 15 to 20 minutes later, now being April 14, Detective Wilson again observed the aforementioned male seek the attention of Mr. Caprino who approached the same cabinet, removed an undetermined amount of United States currency which he provided to this male, and subsequently cleared the accrued credits from the machine in the same manner as described above.
(N.T. 34-35)
7 Following these observations, Detective Wilson approached one of the machines, placed money into the bill slot and proceeded to play.
During this play, Detective Wilson observed a three by three grid which rolled upon placing a bet, and either would stop on its own, or could be stopped by pushing a button.
Various symbols appeared at random, which symbols determined the number of credits won or lost.
Detective Wilson played this machine until there were four credits remaining on the screen, which no longer permitted her to proceed without placing additional currency into the money slot.
At this time, Detective Wilson discontinued play, and returned to her seat at the bar.
(N.T. 35-40)
8 Moments later, Detective Wilson observed that the aforementioned male was again playing the same "Cherry Master" video slot machine, and had sought the attention of Mr. Caprino, who opened the cabinet, removed an undetermined amount of United States currency, provided that currency to the male who had accrued credits on the machine, and cleared the accrued credits from the machine in the same manner as previously described.
(N.T. 40)
9.
Mr. Caprino then cleared the four remaining credits on the machine which Detective Wilson had been playing by pressing a series of buttons, causing those credits to be cleared.
(N.T. 40-41)
10.
At 12:45 a.m., Mr. Caprino provided an undetermined amount of United States currency to the aforementioned male for again accruing credits on the same "Cherry Master" video slot machine in the same manner and sequence as previously described.
(N.T. 41)
April 24, 1996
11.
On April 24, 1996 at 10:30 p.m., Detective Wilson entered Licensee's premises in an undercover capacity and took a seat at the bar.
Detective Wilson noted that the five "Cherry Master" video machines remained on the premises in the same area located to the left of the bar.
Corporate Officer and Shareholder Wayne Caprino was observed on the premises.
(N.T. 42, 45)
12.
Approximately an hour later, Detective Wilson played one of the "Cherry Master" video machines by placing currency into the money slot and betting various credits which outcome was based on the rolling of a three by three grid.
The winning combinations were posted in a "guide" located on the left side of the machine.
Detective Wilson played this machine until 48 credits appeared, at which time she simultaneously pressed three buttons on that machine causing the 48 credits to be cleared.
(N.T. 42-44)
CAPRINO'S, INC.
Citation Number 96-1284
13.
During this visit, Detective Wilson noted that the other four "Cherry Master" video machines were illuminated and appeared to be operational.
(N.T. 42, 44)
April 26, 1996
14.
On April 26, 1996 at 11:50 p.m., a detail of Pittsburgh Police detectives, including Detective Rebecca Wilson and Detective Anthony Hildebrand, entered Licensee's premises and served a Search Warrant on Licensee's Corporate Officer and Shareholder Wayne Caprino.
At this time, Detectives Wilson and Hildebrand observed three "Cherry Master" video machines on the premises.
(N.T. 45)
15.
Detective Hildebrand is an expert in the operation of video gaming devices, including "Cherry Master" video slot machines.
(N.T. 65-66)
16.
Detective Hildebrand proceeded to examine the three "Cherry Master" video machines and determined that each machine contained internal accounting capabilities in addition to a method of clearing accrued credits.
Detective Hildebrand further played each machine, and determined that the machines required no skill to play.
(N.T. 66-79)
CONCLUSION OF LAW :
On April 13, 14, 24 and 26, 1996, Licensee, by its servants, agents or employes, possessed or operated gambling devices or paraphernalia or permitted gambling on its licensed premises, in violation of Section 5513 of the Crimes Code, which constitutes "sufficient cause," as that term is used in Section 471 of the Liquor Code, thereby subjecting Licensee to the penalties provided by that Section.
DISCUSSION:
Licensee argues that the decision of the Court of Common Pleas of Allegheny County in Commonwealth v. Kratsas, et al.
(Criminal Division, February 27, 1997) is binding upon the Office of Administrative Law Judge.
Licensee further asserts that the Kratsas decision compels the Office of Administrative Law Judge to dismiss the civil/administrative matter brought by the Bureau against Licensee in the present case.
CAPRINO'S, INC.
Citation Number 96-1284
Counsel for the Bureau argues that in the Kratsas case where the Pennsylvania State Police filed criminal gambling charges, the defendants filed motions to dismiss those charges alleging that their due process rights were violated.
The Court of Common Pleas of Allegheny County held evidentiary hearings.
At those hearings, the defendants presented evidence through the testimony of numerous witnesses including one of the defendants.
Based upon that evidence, the Court made numerous findings of fact which were set forth in its opinion.
The Court's factual determinations are summarized as follows: (1) that various municipalities in Allegheny County collected licensing fees for video poker and slot machines; (2) that the municipalities in which the defendants' machines were located charged higher licensing fees for video poker machines and slot machines as opposed to other vending machines, because the municipalities knew that the poker and slot machines generated higher revenues as they were used for gambling; (3) that various public officials within the municipalities in which the defendants placed their video gambling devices acknowledged that the use of gambling devices was open and notorious; (4) that within the municipalities in which the defendants placed gambling devices and paid licensing fees, the local police departments never instituted criminal complaints against the defendants for gambling; and (5) that public officials are aware of the use of gambling devices for gambling, but permit such conduct because people want them and municipalities derive substantial revenue from the licensing fees.
(See Kratsas Slip Opinion, pp. 2-13).
Additionally, the Court made a crucial finding of fact based upon the testimony of one of the defendants.
44.
Because of the licensing practice of the various municipalities identified above, the lack of enforcement of 18 Pa.
C.S.A. 5513 by local police departments and many conversations had with various public officials and/or representatives, Defendants believe that their conduct with regard to video poker/slot machine gambling devices was not illegal.
(Kratsas).
Com. v. Kratsas, et al ., Slip Opinion, p. 12.
(Emphasis added).
The Common Pleas Court in its opinion in the Kratsas case relied on three United States Supreme Court decisions which stand for the following proposition: When government officials affirmatively mislead a person into believing that a law does not apply to particular conduct of that person, due process bars prosecution for that conduct, even if the conduct was otherwise unlawful.
United States v. Pennsylvania Industrial Chemical Corporation, (PICCO) 411 U.S. 655 (1972); Cox v. State of Louisiana, 379 U.S. 559 (1965); Raley v. Ohio, 360 U.S. 423 (1959).
(See Kratsas Slip Opinion, p. 14).
CAPRINO'S, INC.
Citation Number 96-1284
As the result of this rationale, the Kratsas Court then held that: "...the prosecution of the above defendants is barred as being violative of the due process clause of the United States Constitution and Article I, Section 9, of the Pennsylvania Constitution, both of which guarantee fundamental fairness in the treatment of all citizens."
See Kratsas Slip Opinion, Order of Court.
(Emphasis added)
In the opinion of this court, the Common Pleas Court's decision in Kratsas simply held that due process prohibited the criminal prosecution of three specific defendants because government officials affirmatively misled those defendants into believing that their conduct would not result in criminal prosecutions.
Licensee, however, argues that the narrow holding in Kratsas should be expanded to encompass civil/administrative proceedings against all owners and possessors of video gambling devices in Allegheny County.
Neither the case law nor the Kratsas decision itself supports Licensee's argument.
Licensee argues that this court should follow the findings of fact of the Kratsas Court.
For the reasons set forth below, Licensee's argument is meritless.
First, the Kratsas Court never made a finding of fact that Licensee was affirmatively led to believe that its conduct with regard to video poker machines was not illegal.
More significantly, the Court of Common Pleas never made a finding of fact that all owners and possessors of video gambling devices believed that their conduct was illegal.
Thus, there is no basis within the Kratsas decision itself for this court to adopt such a finding of fact.
Second, with regard to the Kratsas findings of fact relating to the licensing practices of various public officials, those factual findings are based upon evidence that was offered into the record in Kratsas.
The law is well settled that a court may not ordinarily take judicial notice in one case of the records of another case, whether in another court or its own, even though the contents of those records may be known to the Court.
Woolard v. Burton, 498 A.2d 445 (Pa.
Super.
1985).
"Thus, a court is admonished not to take judicial notice of the record of another case, if not pleaded."
Woolard, supra, 498 A.2d at 448.
Thus, there is no statutory or case law requirement compelling this court to adopt any findings of fact of the Kratsas Court.
To the contrary, pursuant to Woolard, supra, this court is precluded from adopting such findings.
Third, at the evidentiary hearing held on May 6, 1997, Licensee never introduced any evidence whatsoever regarding the licensing practices of any municipalities, the conduct of public officials which may give rise to an estoppel argument, or its belief regarding the ramifications of maintaining video gambling devices.
CAPRINO'S, INC.
Citation Number 96-1284
Since this court is prohibited from taking judicial notice of the record in Kratsas , and Licensee introduced no evidence at the hearing on May 6^th, there is no evidence supporting Licensee's due process argument for dismissal of this citation.
In the alternative, even if this court is bound to follow the holding of an Allegheny County Court of Common Pleas case, with regard to a liquor licensee located in Allegheny County, the Kratsas decision does not support Licensee's position: that the application of 18 Pa.
C.S. §5513 to video poker gambling is unconstitutional as violative of due process and equal protection guarantees.
The Kratsas Court never concluded that the due process rights of all owners and possessors of gambling devices in Allegheny County had been violated by the conduct of public officials.
Rather, the Kratsas Court limited its holding and its conclusion of law to the three specific defendants.
The narrow reach of the Kratsas decision is supported by the Common Pleas Court's language.
...the defendants in this case were affirmatively led to believe that they were acting within the prescriptions of the law in engaging in the conduct at issue in this case.
It is patently unreasonable to hold George Kratsas, John Kratsas and Amusement Supply criminally culpable for the conduct described in the information filed in this case...
(Government officials) allowed the defendants in this case to believe that they were engaging in conduct that would not result in criminal prosecution."
Kratsas Slip Opinion, p. 28.
(Emphasis added)
This language clearly demonstrates that the Kratsas Court's determination of the due process violations was limited only to the three defendants charged in that case.
Therefore, there is no legal precedent that would justify the dismissal of the charges brought by the Bureau against Licensee in the present case, simply because the Kratsas Court found that the criminal prosecution of three specific defendants is barred on due process grounds.
CAPRINO'S, INC.
Citation Number 96-1284
In Kratsas , the Court of Common Pleas of Allegheny County primarily relied upon three United States Supreme Court cases in reaching this decision.
See Raley, supra; Cox, supra; and PICCO, supra.
Those cases involved the application of the due process clause to criminal prosecutions.
As noted by the Kratsas Court: "The clear, overriding evil sought to be remedied by the Raley, Cox and PICCO cases and their progeny is fundamental unfairness in the initiation of criminal prosecutions."
See Kratsas Slip Opinion, p. 28.
(Emphasis added).
In contrast, the case before this court is a civil matter.
As such, the Raley , Cox, PICCO and Kratsas holdings are not binding upon this court because criminal law rules and concepts do not apply to civil proceedings unless there is authority to that effect.
Although the exclusionary rule prohibits the introduction of illegally obtained evidence in a criminal case, such illegally obtained evidence may be introduced in an administrative proceeding.
See United States v. Janis , 428 U.S. 433 (1976); Immigration and Naturalization Service v. Lopez-Mendoza, 468 U.S. 1032 (1984); Sertik v. School District of Pittsburgh, 584 A.2d 390 (Pa.Cmwlth.
1990).
Likewise, the defense of entrapment as codified at 18 Pa.C.S.A.
§313 is only available in the context of a criminal prosecution.
In Smith v. Pennsylvania State Horse Racing Commission, 535 A.2d 596 (Pa. 1988), the Pennsylvania Supreme Court held that the common law defense of entrapment, which differs from the codified defense, is available in administrative proceedings.
Thus, since criminal law principles and concepts do not automatically apply to civil proceedings, Licensee must present authority for its argument that the Raley ¸ Cox, and PICCO line of cases apply to administrative proceedings.
In light of the foregoing, this court believes that Licensee's argument is not supported by relevant case law.
In R. v. Commonwealth, Department of Public Welfare , 636 A.2d 142 (Pa. 1994), the Pennsylvania Supreme Court stated that the due process guarantees of Article I, Section 9 of the Pennsylvania Constitution only apply to criminal proceedings.
They do not apply to administrative matters.
In conclusion, this court is not bound by the holding in the Kratsas decision since the present case is a civil/administrative proceeding.
Licensee argues that the administrative gambling charges should be dismissed because Crimes Code gambling charges would have been dismissed against Licensee, if they had been filed, based upon Kratsas .
CAPRINO'S, INC.
Citation Number 96-1284
However, this argument is contrary to relevant and controlling case law.
The Pennsylvania Supreme Court has specifically held that sanctions may be imposed under the Liquor Code against liquor licensees for gambling activity even though criminal charges based upon that same gambling activity have been dismissed.
V.J.R.
Bar Corp. v. Pennsylvania Liquor Control Board , 390 A.2d 163 (Pa. 1978).
Furthermore, the Commonwealth Court has held that an injunction against the criminal prosecution of the holder of a liquor license, for instances of maintaining and permitting gambling devices, as illegal discriminatory enforcement of gambling laws did not preclude the Liquor Control Board from imposing penalties upon that license holder for such gambling conduct.
Americus Hose Co., Inc.
Liquor License Case , 454 A.2d 1165 (Pa.Cmwlth.
1983).
The argument raised by the liquor licensee in the Americus Hose Co. case is similar to the argument raised by Licensee in this case.
In Americus Hose, the licensee contended that gambling charges brought under the Liquor Code should be dismissed because a common pleas court had enjoined the criminal prosecution of those gambling charges based upon a criminal law constitutional concept - selective and discriminatory enforcement.
The Commonwealth Court rejected that argument and stated that the licensee's contention was meritless.
The Court then reinstated penalties imposed by the Liquor Control Board.
Pursuant to Americus Hose , Licensee's contention that the administrative gambling charges must be dismissed because of a court of common pleas decision enjoining the criminal prosecution of gambling charges is meritless.
Therefore, based on the observations of gambling activities on Licensee's premises by Detective Wilson, and the examination of the three "Cherry Master" video slot machines by Detective Hildebrand, this court is of the opinion that the Bureau has established the violation as charged by a clear preponderance of the evidence.
Pennsylvania Liquor Control Board v. Leggens, 542 A.2d 653 (Pa.
Cmwlth.
1988); Omicron Enterprises, 449 A.2d 857 (Pa.
Cmwlth.
1982).
PRIOR RECORD :
Licensee has been licensed since November 8, 1990, and has had three prior violations, to wit:
Citation No. 92-1083.
Fine $650.00.
Waiver of hearing.
1.
Illegal gambling (poker machines).
March 9 and 25, 1992.
CAPRINO'S, INC.
Citation Number 96-1284
Citation No. 94-0082.
Fine $1,750.00.
Waiver of hearing.
1.
Sales to minors.
October 15 and November 28, 1993.
2.
Minors frequenting.
October 15 and November 28, 1993.
3.
Noisy and/or disorderly operation.
October 15 and November 25, 1993.
Citation No. 95-0586.
Three days suspension.
1.
Minor frequenting.
November 16, 1994.
PENALTY :
Section 471 of the Liquor Code [47 P.S. §4-471] prescribes a penalty of license suspension or revocation or a fine of not less than $50.00 or more than $1,000.00 or both for violations of the type found in this case.
The record discloses that Licensee has had a prior gambling offense at Citation Number 1083 of 1992.
Therefore, Licensee shall not be afforded consideration as a first offender.
The record further discloses that this citation represents Licensee's third involving a violation of the Liquor Code within the past four years.
Therefore, Section 471(c) of the Liquor Code mandates the imposition of a suspension of Licensee's restaurant liquor license.
For the foregoing reasons, a penalty shall be imposed in the amount of $1,000.00, and Licensee's restaurant liquor license shall be suspended for a period of one day.
ORDER :
THEREFORE, it is hereby ordered that Caprino's, Inc., License Number R-AP-6722, pay a fine of $1,000.00 within 20 days of the mailing date of this Order.
In the event the aforementioned fine is not paid within 20 days from the mailing date of this Order, Licensee's license shall be suspended or revoked and the bond forfeited.
IT IS FURTHER ORDERED that License No.
R-AP-6772 be suspended for a period of one (1) day BEGINNING at 7:00 a.m. on Monday, January 5, 1998 and ENDING at 7:00 a.m. on Tuesday, January 6, 1998.
CAPRINO'S, INC.
Citation Number 96-1284
Licensee is directed on Monday, January 5, 1998 at 7:00 a.m. to place the enclosed placard of notice of suspension (identified as Form No.
PLCB-1925 and as printed with red and black ink) in a conspicuous place on the outside of the licensed premises or in a window plainly visible from outside the licensed premises and to remove said license from the wall and place it in a secure location.
Licensee is advised if replacement placards are needed for any reason they are available at all Pennsylvania Liquor Stores/Wine 
The Bureau is directed to visit and monitor the aforementioned licensed premises for compliance with this Order.
Licensee is authorized on Tuesday, January 6, 1998 at 7:00 a.m. to remove the placard of suspension and return his license to its original wall location.
The fine must be paid by Treasurer's Check, Cashier's Check , Certified Check, or Money Order.
Personal checks, which include business-use personal checks, are not acceptable.
Please make your guaranteed check payable to the Commonwealth of Pennsylvania and mail to:
PLCB - Office of Administrative Law Judge Brandywine Plaza 2221 Paxton Church Road Harrisburg PA 17110-9661
Dated this ______________ day of ______________________, 1997.
__________________ Roderick Frisk, J.
bas
Disclaimer Send technical comments or problems to RA-LBWebmaster@state.pa.us © 2003, PENNSYLVANIA LIQUOR CONTROL BOARD
