text only skip navigation National Cancer Institute Cancer.gov dictionary site map search home cancer information clinical trials statistics research programs research funding about NCI Ovarian Epithelial Cancer (PDQ®): Treatment printable version Two versions of this document are available.
Select a tab below to switch between versions.
Date Last Modified: 12/16/2003
patient health professional
Ovarian Epithelial Cancer
* General Information about Ovarian Epithelial Cancer * Stages of Ovarian Epithelial Cancer * Recurrent Ovarian Epithelial Cancer * Treatment Option Overview * Treatment Options by Stage
* Stage I Ovarian Epithelial Cancer
* Stage II Ovarian Epithelial Cancer
* Stage III and IV Ovarian Epithelial Cancer
Treatment Options for Recurrent Ovarian Epithelial Cancer
Changes to This Summary (12/16/2003)
To Learn More
About PDQ
return to top
General Information about Ovarian Epithelial Cancer
Key Points for This Section * Ovarian epithelial cancer is a disease in which malignant (cancer) cells form in the tissue covering the ovary.
* Women who have a family history of ovarian cancer are at an increased risk of developing ovarian cancer.
* Some ovarian cancers are caused by inherited gene mutations (changes).
* Women with an increased risk of ovarian cancer may consider surgery to prevent it.
* Ovarian cancer is hard to detect (find) early because usually there are no symptoms.
* Tests that examine the ovaries, pelvic area, blood, and ovarian tissue are used to detect (find) and diagnose ovarian cancer.
* Certain factors affect treatment options and prognosis (chance of recovery).
Ovarian epithelial cancer is a disease in which malignant (cancer) cells form in the tissue covering the ovary.
The ovaries are a pair of organs in the female reproductive system.
They are located in the pelvis, one on each side of the uterus (the hollow, pear-shaped organ where a fetus grows).
Each ovary is about the size and shape of an almond.
The ovaries produce eggs and female hormones (chemicals that control the way certain cells or organs function).
Ovarian epithelial cancer is one type of cancer that affects the ovary.
(Refer to the PDQ treatment summaries on Ovarian Germ Cell Tumors and Ovarian Low Malignant Potential Tumors for information about other types of ovarian cancer.)
Women who have a family history of ovarian cancer are at an increased risk of developing ovarian cancer.
Women who have one first-degree relative (mother, daughter, or sister) with ovarian cancer are at an increased risk of developing ovarian cancer.
This risk is higher in women who have one first-degree relative and one second-degree relative (grandmother or aunt) with ovarian cancer.
This risk is even higher in women who have two or more first-degree relatives with ovarian cancer.
Some ovarian cancers are caused by inherited gene mutations (changes).
The genes in cells carry the hereditary information that is received from a personâs parents.
Hereditary ovarian cancer makes up approximately 5% to 10% of all cases of ovarian cancer.
Three hereditary patterns have been identified: ovarian cancer alone, ovarian and breast cancers, and ovarian and colon cancers.
Tests that can detect altered genes have been developed.
These genetic tests are sometimes done for members of families with a high risk of cancer.
(Refer to the PDQ summaries on Screening for Ovarian Cancer, Prevention of Ovarian Cancer, and Genetics of Breast and Ovarian Cancer for more information.)
Women with an increased risk of ovarian cancer may consider surgery to prevent it.
Some women who have an increased risk of ovarian cancer may choose to have a prophylactic oophorectomy (the removal of healthy ovaries so that cancer cannot grow in them).
It is not known if this procedure prevents ovarian cancer.
Ovarian cancer is hard to detect (find) early because usually there are no symptoms.
Some women who have early stage ovarian cancer may have symptoms such as vague gastrointestinal (GI) discomfort, pressure in the pelvis, pain, swelling of the abdomen, and shortness of breath.
Most of the time, there are no symptoms or they are very mild.
By the time symptoms do appear, the cancer is usually advanced.
When found in its early stages, ovarian epithelial cancer can be cured in many patients.
Women with any stage of ovarian epithelial cancer should consider taking part in a clinical trial.
Information about ongoing clinical trials is available from the NCI Cancer.gov Web site.
Tests that examine the ovaries, pelvic area, blood, and ovarian tissue are used to detect (find) and diagnose ovarian cancer.
The following tests and procedures may be used: * Pelvic exam: An exam of the vagina, cervix, uterus, fallopian tubes, ovaries, and rectum.
The doctor or nurse inserts one or two lubricated, gloved fingers of one hand into the vagina and the other hand is placed over the lower abdomen to feel the size, shape, and position of the uterus and ovaries.
A speculum is also inserted into the vagina and the doctor or nurse looks at the vagina and cervix for signs of disease.
A Pap test or Pap smear of the cervix is usually done.
The doctor or nurse also inserts a lubricated, gloved finger into the rectum to feel for lumps or abnormal areas.
* Ultrasound: A procedure in which high-energy sound waves (ultrasound) are bounced off internal tissues or organs and make echoes.
The echoes form a picture of body tissues called a sonogram.
* CA 125 assay: A test that measures the level of CA 125 in the blood.
CA 125 is a substance released by cells into the bloodstream.
An increased CA 125 level is sometimes a sign of cancer or other condition.
* Barium enema (lower GI series): A series of x-rays of the lower gastrointestinal tract.
A liquid that contains barium (a silver-white metallic compound) is put into the rectum.
The barium coats the lower gastrointestinal tract and x-rays are taken.
This procedure is also called a lower GI series.
* Intravenous pyelogram (IVP): A series of x-rays of the kidneys, ureters, and bladder to find out if cancer has spread to these organs.
A contrast dye is injected into a vein.
As the contrast dye moves through the kidneys, ureters, and bladder, x-rays are taken to see if there are any blockages.
* CT scan (CAT scan): A procedure that makes a series of detailed pictures of areas inside the body, taken from different angles.
The pictures are made by a computer linked to an x-ray machine.
A dye may be injected into a vein or swallowed to help the organs or tissues show up more clearly.
This procedure is also called computed tomography, computerized tomography, or computerized axial tomography.
* Biopsy: The removal of cells or tissues so they can be viewed under a microscope to check for signs of cancer.
The tissue is removed in a procedure called a laparotomy (a surgical incision made in the wall of the abdomen).
Certain factors affect treatment options and prognosis (chance of recovery).
The treatment options and prognosis (chance of recovery) depend on the patientâs age and general health, the type and size of the tumor, and the stage of the cancer.
return to top
Stages of Ovarian Epithelial Cancer
Key Points for This Section * After ovarian epithelial cancer has been diagnosed, tests are done to find out if cancer cells have spread within the ovaries or to other parts of the body.
* The following stages are used for ovarian epithelial cancer:
* Stage I
* Stage II
* Stage III
* Stage IV
After ovarian epithelial cancer has been diagnosed, tests are done to find out if cancer cells have spread within the ovaries or to other parts of the body.
The process used to find out if cancer has spread within the ovary or to other parts of the body is called staging.
The information gathered from the staging process determines the stage of the disease.
It is important to know the stage in order to plan the best treatment.
An operation called a laparotomy is usually done to find out the stage of the disease.
A doctor must cut into the abdomen and carefully look at all the organs to see if they contain cancer.
The doctor will also perform a biopsy (cut out small pieces of tissue so they can be looked at under a microscope to see whether they contain cancer).
Usually the doctor will remove the cancer and other organs that contain cancer during the laparotomy.
(See the Treatment Options by Stage section).
The following stages are used for ovarian epithelial cancer:
Stage I
In stage I, cancer is found in one or both of the ovaries.
Stage I is divided into: * Stage IA: Cancer is found in a single ovary.
* Stage IB: Cancer is found in both ovaries.
* Stage IC: Cancer is found in one or both ovaries and one of the following is true: + Cancer is found on the outside surface of one or both ovaries.
+ The tumor has ruptured the ovary wall.
+ Cancer cells are found in fluid from the peritoneal cavity (the body cavity that contains most of the organs in the abdomen).
The fluid may already be in the peritoneal cavity or it may be added by the doctor to wash the peritoneum (tissue lining the peritoneal cavity).
Stage II
In stage II, cancer is found in one or both ovaries and has spread into other areas of the pelvis.
Stage II is divided into: * Stage IIA: Cancer has spread to the uterus and/or the fallopian tubes (the long slender tubes through which eggs pass from the ovaries to the uterus).
* Stage IIB: Cancer has spread to other tissue within the pelvis.
* Stage IIC: Cancer has spread to the uterus and/or fallopian tubes and/or other tissue within the pelvis and one of the following is true: + Cancer is found on the outside surface of one or both ovaries.
+ The tumor has ruptured the ovary wall.
+ Cancer cells are found in fluid from the peritoneal cavity (the body cavity that contains most of the organs in the abdomen).
The fluid may already be in the peritoneal cavity or it may be added by the doctor to wash the peritoneum (tissue lining the peritoneal cavity).
Stage III
In stage III, cancer is found in one or both ovaries and has spread to other parts of the abdomen.
Cancer has spread to the surface of the liver.
Stage III is divided into: * Stage IIIA: The tumor is found only in the pelvis, but cancer cells have spread to the surface of the peritoneum (tissue that lines the abdominal wall and covers most of the organs in the abdomen).
* Stage IIIB: Cancer has spread to the peritoneum but is not larger than 2 centimeters (less than 1 inch) in diameter.
* Stage IIIC: Cancer has spread to the peritoneum and is larger than 2 centimeters in diameter and/or has spread to lymph nodes in the abdomen.
(Lymph nodes are small bean-shaped structures found throughout the body.
They filter substances in a fluid called lymph and help fight infection and disease.)
Stage IV
In stage IV, cancer is found in one or both ovaries and has metastasized (spread) beyond the abdomen to other parts of the body.
Cancer is found in the tissues of the liver.
return to top
Recurrent Ovarian Epithelial Cancer
RecurrentÂ ovarian epithelial cancer is cancer that has recurred (come back) after it has been treated.
return to top
Treatment Option Overview
Key Points for This Section * There are different types of treatment for patients with ovarian epithelial cancer.
* Three kinds of standard treatment are used.
These include the following:
* Surgery
* Radiation therapy
* Chemotherapy
Other types of treatment are being tested in clinical trials.
* Biologic therapy
* High-dose chemotherapy with stem cell transplantation
There are different types of treatment for patients with ovarian epithelial cancer.
Different types of treatment are available for patients with ovarian epithelial cancer.
Some treatments are standard, and some are being tested in clinical trials.
Before starting treatment, patients may want to think about taking part in a clinical trial.
A treatment clinical trial is a research study meant to help improve current treatments or obtain information on new treatments for patients with cancer.
When clinical trials show that a new treatment is better than the treatment currently used as âstandardâ treatment, the new treatment may become the standard treatment.
Clinical trials are taking place in many parts of the country.
Information about ongoing clinical trials is available from the NCI Cancer.gov Web site.
Choosing the most appropriate cancer treatment is a decision that ideally involves the patient, family, and health care team.
Three kinds of standard treatment are used.
These include the following:
Surgery
Most patients have surgery to remove as much of the tumor as possible.
Different types of surgery may include: * Hysterectomy: A surgical procedure to remove the uterus and cervix.
If the uterus and cervix are taken out through the vagina, the operation is called a vaginal hysterectomy.
If the uterus and cervix are taken out through a large incision (cut) in the abdomen, the operation is called a total abdominal hysterectomy.
If the uterus and cervix are taken out through a small incision (cut) in the abdomen using a laparoscope, the operation is called a total laparoscopic hysterectomy.
* Unilateral salpingo-oophorectomy: A surgical procedure to remove one ovary and one fallopian tube.
* Bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy: A surgical procedure to remove both ovaries and both fallopian tubes.
* Omentectomy: A surgical procedure to remove the omentum (a piece of the tissue lining the abdominal wall).
* Lymph nodeÂ biopsy: The removal of all or part of a lymph node.
A pathologist views the tissue under a microscope to look for cancer cells.
Radiation therapy
Radiation therapy is a cancer treatment that uses high-energy x-rays or other types of radiation to kill cancer cells.
There are two types of radiation therapy.
External radiation therapy uses a machine outside the body to send radiation toward the cancer.
Internal radiation therapy uses a radioactive substance sealed in needles, seeds, wires, or catheters that are placed directly into or near the cancer.
The way the radiation therapy is given depends on the type and stage of the cancer being treated.
Some women receive a treatment called intraperitoneal radiation therapy, in which radioactive liquid is put directly in the abdomen through a catheter.
Chemotherapy
Chemotherapy is a cancer treatment that uses drugs to stop the growth of cancer cells, either by killing the cells or by stopping the cells from dividing.
When chemotherapy is taken by mouth or injected into a vein or muscle, the drugs enter the bloodstream and can reach cancer cells throughout the body (systemic chemotherapy).
When chemotherapy is placed directly in the spinal column, a body cavity such as the abdomen, or an organ, the drugs mainly affect cancer cells in those areas.
The way the chemotherapy is given depends on the type and stage of the cancer being treated.
Other types of treatment are being tested in clinical trials.
Biologic therapy
Biologic therapy is a treatment that uses the patientâs immune system to fight cancer.
Substances made by the body or made in a laboratory are used to boost, direct, or restore the bodyâs natural defenses against cancer.
This type of cancer treatment is also called biotherapy or immunotherapy.
High-dose chemotherapy with stem cell transplantation
High-dose chemotherapy with stem cell transplantation is a method of giving very high doses of chemotherapy and replacing blood-forming cells destroyed by the cancer treatment.
Stem cells (immature blood cells) are removed from the blood or bone marrow of the patient or a donor and are frozen for storage.
After the chemotherapy is completed, the stored stem cells are thawed and given back to the patient through an infusion.
Over a short time, these reinfused stem cells grow into (and restore) the bodyâs blood cells.
This summary section refers to specific treatments under study in clinical trials, but it may not mention every new treatment being studied.
Information about ongoing clinical trials is available from the NCI Cancer.gov Web site.
return to top
Treatment Options by Stage
Stage I Ovarian Epithelial Cancer
Treatment of stage I ovarian epithelial cancer may include the following: * Hysterectomy, bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy, and omentectomy.
Lymph nodes and other tissues in the pelvis and abdomen are removed and examined under the microscope to look for cancerÂ cells.
* Hysterectomy, unilateral salpingo-oophorectomy, and omentectomy.
Lymph nodes and other tissues in the pelvis and abdomen are removed and examined under the microscope to look for cancer cells.
* Internal or external radiation therapy.
* Chemotherapy.
* Watchful waiting (careful observation without immediate treatment).
* A clinical trial.
Information about ongoing clinical trials is available from the NCI Cancer.gov Web site.
Stage II Ovarian Epithelial Cancer
Treatment of stage II ovarian epithelial cancer may be: * Surgery to remove the tumor, hysterectomy, bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy, and omentectomy.
Lymph nodes and other tissues in the pelvis and abdomen are removed and examined under the microscope to look for cancer cells.
After surgery, treatment may include the following: * Combination chemotherapy and internal or external radiation therapy.
* Combination chemotherapy alone.
* A clinical trial.
Information about ongoing clinical trials is available from the NCI Cancer.gov Web site.
Stage III and IV Ovarian Epithelial Cancer
Treatment of stage III and IV ovarian epithelial cancer may be: * Surgery to remove the tumor, hysterectomy, bilateral salpingo-oophorectomy, and omentectomy.
After surgery, treatment may include the following: * Combination chemotherapy.
* Combination chemotherapy followed by second-look surgery (surgery performed after the initial surgery to determine whether tumor cells remain).
* A clinical trial.
Information about ongoing clinical trials is available from the NCI Cancer.gov Web site.
return to top
Treatment Options for Recurrent Ovarian Epithelial Cancer
Treatment of recurrentÂ ovarian epithelial cancer may include the following: * Chemotherapy with or without surgery.
* A clinical trial of chemotherapy or biological therapy (treatment to stimulate or restore the ability of the immune system to fight cancer).
This summary section refers to specific treatments under study in clinical trials, but it may not mention every new treatment being studied.
Information about ongoing clinical trials is available from the NCI Cancer.gov Web site.
return to top
Changes to This Summary (12/16/2003)
The PDQ cancer information summaries are reviewed regularly and updated as new information becomes available.
This section describes the latest changes made to this summary as of the date above.
Editorial changes were made to this summary.
return to top
To Learn More
Call
For more information, U.S. residents may call the National Cancer Institute's (NCI's) Cancer Information Service toll-free at 1-800-4-CANCER (1-800-422-6237) Monday through Friday from 9:00 a.m. to 4:30 p.m. Deaf and hard-of-hearing callers with TTY equipment may call 1-800-332-8615.
The call is free and a trained Cancer Information Specialist is available to answer your questions.
Web sites and Organizations
The NCI's Cancer.gov Web site provides online access to information on cancer, clinical trials, and other Web sites and organizations that offer support and resources for cancer patients and their families.
There are also many other places where people can get materials and information about cancer treatment and services.
Local hospitals may have information on local and regional agencies that offer information about finances, getting to and from treatment, receiving care at home, and dealing with problems associated with cancer treatment.
Publications
The NCI has booklets and other materials for patients, health professionals, and the public.
These publications discuss types of cancer, methods of cancer treatment, coping with cancer, and clinical trials.
Some publications provide information on tests for cancer, cancer causes and prevention, cancer statistics, and NCI research activities.
NCI materials on these and other topics may be ordered online or printed directly from the NCI Publications Locator.
These materials can also be ordered by telephone from the Cancer Information Service toll-free at 1-800-4-CANCER (1-800-422-6237), TTY at 1-800-332-8615.
LiveHelp
The NCI's LiveHelp service, a program available on several of the Institute's Web sites, provides Internet users with the ability to chat online with an Information Specialist.
The service is available from 9:00 a.m. to 10:00 p.m. Eastern time, Monday through Friday.
Information Specialists can help Internet users find information on NCI Web sites and answer questions about cancer.
Write
For more information from the NCI, please write to this address:
NCI Public Inquiries Office Suite 3036A 6116 Executive Boulevard, MSC8322 Bethesda, MD 20892-8322
return to top
About PDQ
PDQ is a comprehensive cancer database available on Cancer.gov.
PDQ is the National Cancer Institute's (NCI's) comprehensive cancer information database.
Most of the information contained in PDQ is available online at Cancer.gov, the NCI's Web site.
PDQ is provided as a service of the NCI.
The NCI is part of the National Institutes of Health, the federal government's focal point for biomedical research.
PDQ contains cancer information summaries.
The PDQ database contains summaries of the latest published information on cancer prevention, detection, genetics, treatment, supportive care, and complementary and alternative medicine.
Most summaries are available in two versions.
The health professional versions provide detailed information written in technical language.
The patient versions are written in easy-to-understand, nontechnical language.
Both versions provide current and accurate cancer information.
The PDQ cancer information summaries are developed by cancer experts and reviewed regularly.
Editorial Boards made up of experts in oncology and related specialties are responsible for writing and maintaining the cancer information summaries.
The summaries are reviewed regularly and changes are made as new information becomes available.
The date on each summary ("Date Last Modified") indicates the time of the most recent change.
PDQ also contains information on clinical trials.
Before starting treatment, patients may want to think about taking part in a clinical trial.
A clinical trial is a study to answer a scientific question, such as whether one treatment is better than another.
Trials are based on past studies and what has been learned in the laboratory.
Each trial answers certain scientific questions in order to find new and better ways to help cancer patients.
During treatment clinical trials, information is collected about new treatments, the risks involved, and how well they do or do not work.
If a clinical trial shows that a new treatment is better than one currently being used, the new treatment may become "standard."
Listings of clinical trials are included in PDQ and are available online at Cancer.gov.
Descriptions of the trials are available in health professional and patient versions.
Many cancer doctors who take part in clinical trials are also listed in PDQ.
For more information, call the Cancer Information Service 1-800-4-CANCER (1-800-422-6237); TTY at 1-800-332-8615.
return to top
______________ Advanced submit search NCI CARRA Program Accepting Applications Past Highlights Press/NewsCenter CIS DIRECTOR'S CORNER [spacer.gif] Welcome Director's Update [bottom_center_dircorner.gif]
Resources Publications Locator and Catalog NCI Calendar of Scientific Meetings NCI Thesaurus Links to Other Web Sites
LiveHelp información en español Text
HOME SEARCH SITE MAP CONTACT US HELP ACCESSIBILITY PRIVACY POLICY National Institutes of Health Department of Health and Human Services FirstGov.gov
