South Carolina Arts Commission Skip navigation links about SCAC Arts Calendar Search Staff What is new Home end navigation links 2002 SC FOLK HERITAGE AWARD RECIPIENTS NAMED The Jean Laney Harris South Carolina Folk Heritage Awards were created by the SC Legislature in 1986 to recognize lifetime achievement in the state for traditional folk arts.
Administered jointly by the SC Arts Commission and McKissick Museum at the University of SC, this program annually selected up to four artists along with an advocate for traditional arts.
This year the recipients are:
Together as One Hymn Choir , York County
Harriett Bailem Brown, Sweetgrass Basketmaker, Mt. Pleasant
Neil D. Cost, Turkey CallMaker, Greenwood
James Brown, R
Advocacy Award: Jennings Chestnut: , Conway
The 2002 Jean Laney Harris Folk Heritage Awards will be presented in the House Chambers of the State House at noon on Wednesday, April 24th, during a joint assembly of the SC Legislature.
For more information, contact Craig Stinson, Folklife and Traditional Arts Director, SC Arts Commission, 803/734-8697,
Together as One Hymn Choir York County, SC
"The performances and recordings of Together as One have well represented the circle of church communities from which their members are drawn."
Debra Heintz, Director, Arts Council of Rock Hill and York County
Few regions in South Carolina or the nation retain the vitality of the hymn choir, or common meter, tradition like York County.
Emerging in the 1700's from English Calvinist worship and African ritual practices, hymn choir traditions took root in slave communities in South Carolina.
Today, the practice of lining out hymns through unaccompanied congregational singing is still alive and is embodied in the Together As One Hymn Choir of York County.
Deacon John Henry Walton is also the leader of the hymn choir at Boyd Hill Baptist in Rock Hill.
Deacon Walton remembers fondly the singing life of Deacon Richard "Son" Sandifer, the first leader of the Boyd Hill Hymn Choir and, as a young adult, he joined the choir under its second leader Deacon Ernest Walker.
Thus, Deacon Walton is only the third leader of a hymn choir that is almost one hundred years old.
Harriett Bailem Brown, Sweetgrass Basketmaker Mt. Pleasant, SC
"Harriett Bailem Brown not only provides for her family, but contributes to our community as well."
Adrienne Childs, Mt. Pleasant Docents
Taught the art of basket weaving with "sweetgrass" at four years of age by her mother, Harriett Brown has been creating unique designs for over 55 years.
There have been eight generations of basketweavers in her family, with five generations current practitioners.
The family has operated a basket stand by Christ Episcopal Church in Mt. Pleasant for almost 70 years.
Ms. Brown harvested sweetgrass until 1980 and believes this passed down artform will continue as long as the material exists.
Bull rush and other grasses are also woven into her designs to add texture and color variation; palmetto palm is used as a threading agent.
Brown has not only taught her children, grandchildren and great-grandchildren her skills, she has generously shared with her larger community by participating in local festivals; conducting weekly classes for adults and children through the Mt. Pleasant Art and Recreation Center; and traveling to other states to promote and explain this West African art tradition, often teaching the Gullah language along with basketmaking.
She also provides supplies and assists with repair of sweetgrass baskets from her stand on Highway 17.
Neil D. Cost, Turkey CallMaker Greenwood
"Neil has elevated the art of turkey callmaking to its pinnacle.
His careful selection of fine materials, measured steps of production and tuning, and an amazing feel for design are true hallmarks of genuine artistry."
Rob Keck, CEO, National Wild Turkey Federation, Edgefield, SC
Neil Douglas Cost of Greenwood is known as the premiere turkey callmaker in the United States.
According to Donna Branch of the National Wild Turkey Federation, "No callmaker has had more influence on the craft than Neil D. Cost."
Mr. Cost, a retired U.S. Army Sergeant who served in both World War II and the Korean Conflict, has been practicing his craft for over 70 years.
He learned the craft through observance while a young man, and perfected it through his many years of devotion to the craft.
He has made an estimated 5,000 double-sided calls in his career.
Through a great deal of experimentation with design, Mr. Cost has perfected the boat paddle turkey caller, a work of deceit that can make all the sounds and calls of the wild turkey.
In addition to his work as a craftsman, Mr. Cost is an author and conservationist.
He is an embodiment of devotion to his craft and education surrounding the sport.
As Earl Mickel, a leading authority on the subject of turkey calls, states, "Simply put, Neil Cost is the finest custom callmaker the country has ever seen."
James Brown, R
'What became known as soul music in the Sixties, funk music in the Seventies and rap music in the Eighties is directly attributable to James Brown."
Rock and Roll Hall of Fame
James Brown was born in 1933 in Barnwell, SC, where he spent his early childhood.
He developed his interest in music at an early age, performing gospel songs and playing first piano and later bass and drums.
By his teens, Brown joined a Gospel quartet known as the Gospel Starlighters.
Inspired by the growing popularity of rhythm and blues, Brown and fellow Gospel band-mate Bobby Byrd formed "James Brown and His Famous Flames."
Their signature song from 1959, "Please, Please, Please" led Brown to national attention.
By 1962, Brown recorded his classic album "Live at the Apollo," which is rich in the call and response, shouting, and groaning style of the African American sermonic tradition.
It clearly struck a chord with listeners, selling a million copies.
Mr. Browns most famous music style, called "funk," plays heavily with traditional African American secular music forms, placing emphasis on the downbeat and taking traditional music to new levels.
From his beginnings in rural South Carolina, to his national and international popularity through music deeply rooted in African American sacred and secular traditions, Mr. Brown has returned home to South Carolina, where he resides in Aiken.
He is an icon of the heights to which traditional music and culture can take an individual, and the force by which those roots call you home.
Advocacy Award: Jennings Chestnut: Conway, SC
"I realized that his art of instrument making was an expression of something of the heart...and illustrates well how passion motivates a need and creates a tradition."
Michelle Ross, Executive Director, SC Traditional Arts Network
A self-made craftsman, Jennings Chestnut has evolved into a master builder of mandolins, banjos, violins and guitars.
Born in 1942, Chestnut has been a fan of bluegrass music since he was six years old.
During the 1950's Chestnut played and sang country and bluegrass with several bands.
In the next decade, he traveled with his family to bluegrass festivals all over the country.
In 1971 he built his first mandolin and since 1985, he and his wife Willie have owned Chestnut Mandolins, a full service music store in downtown Conway.
The Chestnuts continued, over the years, to attend family-centered bluegrass festivals.
Jennings is considered an expert repairman of string instruments and is known to spend considerable time with musicians, adjusting their instruments.
Although each of his specialties - mandolins - take over 200 hours of labor to construct, Chestnut has donated instruments, totaling over $30,000 at a number of festivals to show his support for the presenters.
Since 1996 Jennings Chestnut has organized an annual festival called "Bluegrass on the Waccamaw," held under the bridge in downtown Conway.
Professional and local bands perform in this free, open to the public concert held the second Saturday in May.
Chestnut has secured volunteer help from community members - and the Chestnut family cooks the meals for the performers.
Jennings Chestnut also hopes to inspire other advocates through his presentation of an annual "Lifetime Commitment Award" for the promotion of bluegrass music.
About SCAC | Arts Daily | Search | Staff | What's New | HOME [rule.gif] Send comments or questions to Jeanette Guinn www.state.sc.us/arts updated 03/08/02 Copyright © 2000-2 South Carolina Arts Commission.
All rights reserved
