For immediate release Contact: Noelle Taylor Date: September 18, 2002 Phone: 919/716-6413 Attorney General Cooper stops family of work-at-home scammers, wins refunds Husband and wife scammers are parents of scammers busted in June Raleigh: Consumers who fell victim to an envelope stuffing scam will get their money back, thanks to an agreement worked out by Attorney General Roy Cooper and his consumer protection team.
"These scammers made ripping off consumers a family business," said Cooper.
"We put the daughter and her husband out of business, and now we've stopped the parents from peddling their phony envelope stuffing scheme."
Sandra Jean and Michael Malouin of Vale, North Carolina sold information on stuffing envelopes to 117 North Carolina consumers, all of whom will receive a full refund totaling $4,472.55 as part of an agreement reached with Cooper.
Consumers who file complaints through the end of 2002 are also entitled to refunds.
The Malouins have agreed to shut down their company, Mal-O-In, and are barred from operating or promoting any work-at-home scheme, either directly or through a family member.
Beginning in 1998, Mal-O-In lured victims via the Internet with claims that participants could earn $1,000 to $6,000 per week by stuffing envelopes.
For $29.95, consumers could receive a list of companies that the Malouins claimed might hire envelope stuffers.
Consumers paid up to $140 for mailing lists of people to whom they were to send solicitations on how to earn money by stuffing envelopes.
If anyone responded to the pitch and ordered information from Mal-O-In, the Malouins promised a commission to the original consumer who mailed the solicitation.
North Carolina law prohibits anyone from advertising work-at-home opportunities unless they actually pay a wage or fee to the people doing the work.
It is also illegal to require prospective workers to make any purchases or pay an up-front fee before they can start working.
Cooper's office learned about Mal-O-In while investigating another envelope stuffing operation, Tolbert Enterprises.
Investigators discovered that Mrs. Malouin had helped her daughter, Tracy Tolbert, start an envelope stuffing operation.
Tracy and husband Gerald Tolbert, also of Vale, agreed in June to shut down their business and pay refunds totaling $3,183.45 to 83 North Carolina consumers.
Reports of work-at-home scams are on the rise in North Carolina.
Thus far in 2002, the Attorney General's office has received 62 work-at-home complaints, 22 more than in all of 2001.
Work-at-home scams target stay-at-home moms, people with limited English-speaking ability, the disabled, and people who have been affected by lay offs.
In addition to roadside signs, work-at-home scams advertise on television, in newspapers and magazines, and over the Internet.
"Don't believe those road sign and website promises of quick and easy money while you work from home," said Cooper.
"With work-at-home scams, you'll lose money while the scammers get rich."
###
