Lesson Four: The Rock Cycle lesson gif ASSIGNMENT: Read Chapter Four, pages 85 - 110, in your textbook and the following discussion.
Complete the written work and e-mail it to your Division instructor.
OUTCOMES:
After completing this lesson, you will be able to:
1.
Differentiate between a rock and a mineral.
2.
Describe the rock cycle and the changes that a rock may undergo.
3.
Recognize magma and lava as the materials that cool to form igneous rocks.
4.
Contrast the formation of intrusive and extrusive igneous rocks.
5.
Contrast granitic and basaltic igneous rocks.
6.
Describe conditions that cause metamorphic rocks to form.
7.
Classify metamorphic rocks as foliated or nonfoliated.
8.
Explain how sedimentary rocks form from sediments.
9.
Classify sedimentary rocks as clastic, organic in origin.
10.
Contrast characteristics of strip mines and underground coal mines.
11.
List several environmental effects associated with coal mining.
DISCUSSION:
Rock Cycle Rocks, like landforms, do not remain in their original form forever.
They are always in the process of transformation.
Igneous rocks are weathered away and washed into the ocean.
rk-cycle Lava rises to the surface where it cools to form igneous rock.
Mineral particles sink to the sea bed where they are compacted into sedimentary rock.
Heat from lava changes surrounding sedimentary and igneous rock into metamorphic rock.
Since the first people used sticks, mud, and rocks to build their homes, stone has been used as a building material.
Today stone is still used for foundations, steps, and walls in buildings, supports for bridges, and decorations on all kinds of structures.
Ninety-nine percent of all building stone is used in crushed form.
Only one percent is cut in slabs or blocks, called dimension stone.
The best dimension stones are able to resist weathering because they have very few pores, or openings in their surfaces, where water can collect, freeze, and weather pieces of the stone.
Some of the best dimension stones are made of limestone, marble, granite, sandstone, and slate.
Structures built with these stones often last hundreds of years.
slimestone Limestone is an excellent building stone.
Even though it is hard, it's easy to cut and can be cut in any direction without splitting.
Usually limestone is gray, but it also can be white or black.
It is used in the foundations, walls, sills, steps, and floors of buildings.
Limestone in its crushed form is used in building roads, making cement and plaster, smelting iron ore, making paper and glass, purifying water, and treating soil.
Factories use limestone to clean waste gases and water before releasing them.
sparth Marble is an elegant building stone.
The ancient Greeks built the Parthenon in Athens out of marble.
They thought marble was beautiful.
They also knew that it was strong and both fire - and weather-resistant.
It must be carefully mined because it doesn't split easily.
It's usually white, but depending on the impurities mixed with its calcite, it can be red, yellow, or green.
Pure calcite marble is translucent; that is, light can partially penetrate the stone and is reflected back by inside surfaces.
Such marble was particularly valued for sculptures.
Marble is still used in buildings, monuments, and decorations today.
Crushed marble is used in road paving, roofing, stucco, and soaps.
Granite has been used for building since ancient times.
It's very strong and highly resistant to weathering, but it is hard to cut.
It's often used in public buildings and monuments because its surface can be polished to a shine.
Crushed granite is used in making concrete and rock-fill dams.
ssandstone Sandstone comes in many colors, from cream to red, brown, and green.
A reddish-brown sandstone used for constructing houses in the eastern United States is called brownstone.
Well-cemented with silica, sandstone is resistant to weathering.
Because early builders found that sandstone was easy to cut with hand tools, it was a very common building stone.
However, since the development of concrete, sandstone isn't used often as dimension stone.
It's used in crushed form in concrete.
It's also used in making pottery, porcelain, glass, and abrasives.
sslate Slate is a fine-grained rock that can be split into smooth, thin sheets.
This makes it ideal use for flooring and roofing.
It's both long-lasting and weatherproof.
Chalkboards were once made of slate.
Crushed slate is used in road surfacing and linoleum.
Look around you the next time you walk down a street.
Rocks aren't just under the ground; they are all around you, in the buildings, streets, bridges, piers, highways, and other structures of civilization.
Bottom Line
pencil Worksheet
