VIRGINIA RACING COMMISSION CHAPTER 140.
CONDUCT OF FLAT RACING.
11 VAC 10-140-10.
Definitions.
The following words and terms, when used in these regulations, shall have the following meaning, unless the context clearly indicates otherwise:
"Assigned weight" means the weight carried by a horse specified in the conditions of the race or by the racing secretary and printed in the daily racing program.
"Dead heat" means the finish of a race by two horses or more at the same time.
"Finish wire" means a real or imaginary line from the position of the photo-finish camera to a point immediately across and at right angles to the racing surface.
"Flat racing" means horse racing conducted over a surface without obstacles and includes racing with mounted riders for Arabians, Quarter Horses and Thoroughbreds.
"Highweight handicap" means a handicap race in which the weight assigned to the top horse is not less than 140 pounds.
"Match race" means a race between two horses.
"Official time" means the period from the time the first horse crosses the starting post until the first horse crosses under the finish wire.
"Overweight" means any weight of one pound or more over the assigned weight carried by a horse in a race.
"Place" means to finish second in a race.
"Post position" means the relative position assigned to each horse numbered from the inner rail across the track at the starting line, from which each horse is to start a race.
"Post time" means the advertised moment scheduled for the arrival of all horses at the starting post for a race.
"Produce race" means a race to be run by the produce of horses named or described in the conditions of the race at the time of entry.
"Purse race" means a race for money or other prize to which the owners of horses entered do not contribute fee of more than $100.
"Race" means a contest among horses for a purse, prize or other reward, run at a race meeting licensed by the commission in the presence of the stewards.
"Show" means to finish third in a race.
"Starter" means a horse that obtains a fair opportunity to start when the starter dispatches the horses.
"Starting post" means the starting point of a race.
"Underweight" means any weight less than the assigned weight carried by a horse in a race.
"Weigh in" means the presentation of a jockey to the clerk of scales for weighing after a race.
"Weigh out" means the presentation of a jockey to the clerk of scales for weighing prior to a race.
"Win" means to finish first in a race.
"Winner" means the horse whose nose reaches the finish wire first.
PADDOCK TO POST.
11 VAC 10-140-20.
Paddock time.
The trainer shall be responsible for the arrival in the paddock at the time prescribed by the stewards for each horse entered by the trainer.
11 VAC 10-140-30.
Weighing out.
No person shall help a jockey in removing from the horse the equipment that is to be included in the jockey's weight;
The following provisions shall apply to the weighing out of jockeys: 1.
His clothing, saddle, girth, pad and saddle cloth shall be included in a jockey's weight;
Number cloth, whip, head number, bridle, bit, reins, blinkers, safety helmet, tongue strap, tongue tie, muzzle, hood, noseband, shadow roll, bandages, boots and racing plates or shoes shall not be included in a jockey's weight;
When a substitute jockey is required, he shall be weighed out promptly, and the name of the substitute jockey and weight announced to the public;
No jockey may carry overweight in excess of two pounds, without the permission of the owner or trainer;
If the overweight is more than one pound but less than five pounds, the jockey shall declare the amount of the overweight to the clerk of scales no later than 45 minutes before post time;
6.
<
ll overweights must be announced to the public
;
A substitute jockey must be named, if the overweight exceeds five pounds;
If an underweight is discovered after wagering has commenced but before the start, the horse shall be returned to the paddock and the weight corrected;
9.
A jockey shall not be weighed out unless the prescribed fee has been deposited with the horsemen's bookkeeper; and
10.
Failure to have the prescribed fee on deposit with the horsemen's bookkeeper may be cause for the stewards to excuse the horse from racing.
11 VAC 10-140-40.
Prohibitions.
No person other than the horse's owner, trainer, employees of the owner or trainer, paddock judge, horse identifier, assigned valet, steward, farrier or outrider shall touch a horse while it is in the paddock.
The material used as a tongue tie shall be supplied by the horse's trainer, who shall affix the tongue tie in the paddock.
11 VAC 10-140-50.
Saddling horses.
The trainer shall be responsible for the saddling of the horse, and in his absence, he must assign an assistant or substitute trainer to saddle each horse entered by him.
All horses must be saddled in the paddock unless permission to saddle a horse elsewhere has been granted by the stewards.
11 VAC 10-140-60.
Changing equipment.
Permission must be obtained from the stewards for the following changes of a horse's equipment from that which the horse used in its last previous start:
1.
To add blinkers to a horse's equipment or to discontinue the use of blinkers;
2.
To use or discontinue use of a bar plate;
3.
To use or discontinue the use of a tongue tie;
4.
To race a horse without shoes or with a type of shoes not generally used for racing; and
5.
To race a horse without the jockey carrying a whip.
The stewards shall cause an appropriate public announcement or a display to be made in the paddock or elsewhere at the discretion of the stewards for the aforementioned changes of equipment.
11 VAC 10-140-70.
First-time starters.
Whips or blinkers may be used on two-year-old horses and other first-time starters, if the horses are schooled from the starting gate under the supervision of the starter, and approved by the starter and the stewards before the time of entry.
11 VAC 10-140-80.
Identifying equipment.
Each horse shall carry a conspicuous saddlecloth number and each jockey shall wear a number on his right arm, both of which correspond to the number of the horse as listed in the daily racing program.
In the case of a coupled entry, each horse making up the coupled entry shall carry the same number with a distinguishing letter.
11 VAC 10-140-90.
Inspecting equipment.
The paddock judge may, in his discretion, require that bandages on a horse's legs be removed or replaced.
11 VAC 10-140-100.
Post parade.
All horses shall parade past the stewards' stand and carry their assigned weight from the paddock to the starting post, unless excused by the stewards from the post parade.
The following provisions shall apply to post parades:
1.
The stewards, in their discretion, may excuse a horse from the post parade;
2.
Any horse excused from the post parade shall be led by an employee of the owner or trainer and shall carry its assigned weight from the paddock to the starting post;
3.
After passing the stewards' stand during the post parade, the horses may leave the parade to walk, canter or otherwise warm up on their way to the starting post;
4.
The post parade shall not exceed 12 minutes from the time the field enters the racing surface until reaching the starting post, except for unavoidable delays;
5.
If a jockey is thrown from a horse during the post parade, he shall remount the horse at the point where he was thrown from the horse;
6.
If a jockey is injured during the post parade or a substitute jockey is needed, then the horse shall be returned to the paddock where the horse shall be mounted by the substitute jockey;
7.
If a horse leaves the racing surface during the post parade, the horse shall be returned to the racing surface at the nearest practical point to where it left the course and then complete the post parade; and
8.
No person shall willfully delay the arrival of a horse at the starting post.
11 VAC 10-140-110.
Lead pony and rider.
A horse may be led to the starting post by a lead pony and rider, but the horse and lead pony shall pass the steward's stand during the post parade en route to the starting post.
Lead ponies and riders may be excluded from the paddock at the discretion of the stewards.
11 VAC 10-140-120.
Outrider.
Outriders shall accompany the horses during the post parade and be positioned to render assistance to a jockey riding an unruly horse or catch a loose horse from the time the horses enter the racing surface until reaching the starting post.
The outrider shall not help a jockey riding an unruly horse unless the jockey requests the assistance of an outrider.
After the start of the race, the outriders shall position themselves to help jockeys in pulling up horses, catch any loose horses or render assistance to any injured horses.
11 VAC 10-140-130.
Post time.
Post time shall be prominently displayed on the infield results board.
The starter shall endeavor to get the horses and jockeys at the starting post at post time so as to avoid any delay in effecting the start of the race.
STARTING A RACE.
11 VAC 10-140-140.
Starter.
The horses and jockeys, lead ponies and riders, and outriders shall be under the supervision of the starter from the time the horses enter the racing surface until the race is started.
While the horses, jockeys, lead ponies and pony riders are under his supervision, the starter shall:
1.
Grant a delay to allow for the substitution of an injured jockey or for the repairing of broken equipment;
2.
Load the horses into the starting gate in the order of their post position;
3.
Report to the stewards any delay in the start; and
4.
Recall the horses from a false start where a starting gate is not used.
However, the starter, in his discretion, may:
1.
Allow other jockeys to dismount during any delay;
2.
Unload the horses from the starting gate, if there is a lengthy delay in the start of a race; and
3.
Load a fractious horse out of post position order.
11 VAC 10-140-150.
Unmanageable horse.
If a horse is unmanageable at the starting post, the starter may recommend to the stewards that the horse be excused.
If the stewards excuse a horse from a race because it is unmanageable, they shall:
1.
Order all money wagered on the unmanageable horse deducted from the pari-mutuel pool and order a prompt refund; and
2.
Place the unmanageable horse on the stewards' list.
11 VAC 10-140-160.
Starting gate.
Each licensee shall maintain at least two operable starting gates as required by 11 VAC 10-20-190 et seq., Regulations Pertaining to Horse Racing with Pari-Mutuel Wagering.
11 VAC 10-140-170.
Fair start.
If a door on the starting gate fails to open, a horse is inadvertently loaded into an incorrect post position, or otherwise fails to obtain a fair start, then the starter shall immediately report the circumstances to the stewards.
In these circumstances, the stewards shall:
1.
Post the "inquiry" sign on the infield results board;
2.
Advise the public through the public address system and any other appropriate means to hold all mutuel tickets; and
3. Make a determination of whether the horse obtained a fair start after consulting with the starter, other appropriate persons and reviewing the video tape recordings of the race.
11 VAC 10-140-180.
Nonstarter.
If the stewards determine that the horse did not receive a fair start, then they shall declare the horse a nonstarter and follow the provisions of 11 VAC 10-20-340 et seq.
If the horse is declared a nonstarter in a stakes race, futurity or other special event, then any entrance or starting fees shall be refunded.
11 VAC 10-140-190.
Assistance prohibited.
Only the jockey may strike a horse at the start of a race.
Only the jockey shall be permitted to shout or otherwise assist in breaking the horse away from the starting gate.
During the running of a race, no assistance may be rendered by others.
POST TO FINISH.
11 VAC 10-140-200.
Leading horse.
A leading horse when clear of all other horses in the race is entitled to any part of the racing surface, but no horse shall cross or weave in front of other horses in any way to impede them, cause interference or constitute intimidation.
11 VAC 10-140-210.
Interference.
During a race, no jockey shall willfully strike, strike at or touch another jockey or another jockey's horse or equipment, or jostle another horse to interfere with that jockey or horse.
11 VAC 10-140-220.
Third party interference.
If a horse or jockey interferes with or jostles another horse, the aggressor may be disqualified, unless the interfered or jostled horse or jockey was partly at fault or the interference was wholly caused by the fault of some other horse or jockey.
11 VAC 10-140-230.
Control of horse.
A jockey shall be responsible for making his best effort to control and guide his mount during the running of the race so that it does not jostle, impede, interfere or intimidate another horse or jockey.
11 VAC 10-140-240.
Off course.
If a horse runs on the wrong side of a post, fence, beacon or flag, it shall be considered off course and the jockey must turn back, return to the point where the horse went off course and complete the proper course or be disqualified.
11 VAC 10-140-250.
Ridden out.
All horses shall be ridden to win or finish as near as possible to the first-place horse and show the best and fastest performance of which it is capable in the running of the race.
11 VAC 10-140-260.
Easing.
A jockey shall not restrain a horse without adequate cause, even if it has no apparent chance to earn a portion of the purse money.
A jockey shall not unnecessarily cause a horse to shorten its stride.
11 VAC 10-140-270.
Instructions.
All horses and jockeys are expected to give their best efforts during the race, and any instructions or advice to jockeys to ride or handle their mounts otherwise than to win, is forbidden.
11 VAC 10-140-280.
Reversal of form.
The stewards shall consider marked reversals of form and conduct inquiries of owners, trainers, jockeys and any other holders of permits that they deem appropriate to determine whether the horse was deliberately restrained or impeded in any way from winning or finishing as near as possible to the first-place horse.
11 VAC 10-140-290.
Use of whip.
Whips are to be used uniformly and the stewards shall conduct inquiries into excessive or non-use of a whip, or the dropping of a whip during the running of a race.
11 VAC 10-140-300.
Prohibited equipment.
No device other than the ordinary whip, shall be used to affect the speed of the horse during a race.
No sponge or other object may be used to interfere with the respiratory system of a horse.
11 VAC 10-140-310.
Weighing in.
After a race has been run, a jockey shall pull up his horse, ride promptly to the clerk of scales, dismount after obtaining the permission of the stewards, and be weighed in by the clerk of scales.
The following provisions shall apply to the weighing in of jockeys: 1.
The winning horse may be accompanied by an outrider after the horse has been pulled up and is returned to the clerk of scales;
2.
If a jockey is prevented from returning to the clerk of scales because of an accident or injury to either horse or rider, the jockey may be conveyed to the winners' circle by other means or excused by the stewards from weighing in;
A jockey must, upon returning to the clerk of scales, unsaddle the horse he has ridden and no other person shall touch the horse except by its bridle;
No person shall help a jockey in removing from the horse the equipment that is to be included in the jockey's weight;
5.
No person shall throw any covering over any horse at the place of dismounting until the jockey has removed all the equipment that is to be included in his weight;
6.
A jockey shall carry over to the scales all pieces of equipment carried when weighing out, but after weighing in, the equipment may be handed to a valet;
A jockey shall generally weigh out and weigh in at the same weight, and the stewards shall be informed of any underweight or overweight carried by the jockey;
If a jockey weighs in two or more pounds less than the weight at which he weighed out, the horse shall be disqualified;
and 9.
A jockey shall not weigh in at more than two pounds over the weight at which he weighed out, unless affected by weather or track conditions, and the stewards shall be notified immediately by the clerk of scales.
Return to Regulation Listings
