[eagle.gif] United States Senate Special Committee on Aging Senator Chuck Grassley, Chairman [hr_thin.gif]
-- Sen. Chuck Grassley, chairman of the Senate Special Committee on Aging, today fought for $100 million more for Alzheimer's disease research.
Grassley sent a letter to Senate appropriators urging them to approve the additional funding.
He also participated in a subcommittee hearing to encourage appropriators to consider the importance of Alzheimer's research.
Before testifying, Grassley held a news conference with the national Alzheimer's Association, which released new data underscoring the importance of more research into the disease.
"When baby boomers get older, we'll have an epidemic of Alzheimer's disease in this country unless we find ways to stop it," Grassley said.
"Our best hope of nipping this epidemic in the bud is researching the cause and cure of a disease that devastates its victims and their family members.
The cost of research now could save us all a tremendous amount later."
Grassley wrote a letter to the Labor, HHS, Education Subcommittee of the Senate Appropriations Committee urging the approval of an additional $100 million in the Fiscal Year 1999 budget for the National Institutes of Health for Alzheimer's research.
He also participated in the subcommittee's hearing on Alzheimer's research.
Testifying at the subcommittee hearing was Rosemary Cronin of Dubuque, Iowa, whose husband, Bob, has Alzheimer's disease at age 58.
The Cronins are involved in Alzheimer's research in the hope of preventing an Alzheimer's epidemic.
The Alzheimer's Association today released state-by-state data showing the large numbers of people at risk for the disease.
Early in the next century, almost one of every three people in the country -- the baby boomers -- will be the age of highest risk for the disease, according to the association.
An estimated 14 million people then will develop Alzheimer's unless research prevents it, the association finds.
In Iowa, 64,438 people currently have Alzheimer's disease, the Alzheimer's Association estimates.
There are 798,905 baby boomers in the state -- or 28 percent of the state's population --
who will be at the greatest risk for developing the disease early in the next century.
Medicare spends 70 percent more on beneficiaries with Alzheimer's disease than on other beneficiaries, even though Medicare pays for almost no long-term care, according to the Alzheimer's Association.
Federal funding for Alzheimer's research has not increased enough in anticipation of an epidemic, Grassley said.
The additional $100 million he is seeking would bring the total funding to $440 million for Fiscal Year 1999.
"Thanks to medical research, Americans are living longer than ever before," Grassley said.
"We need to do everything we can to make sure Americans don't have to live with Alzheimer's disease."
