EXECUTIVE SUMMARY OF TESTIMONY OF PROFESSOR KAREN GROSS New York Law School To be given on Feb. 8, 2001 at 10:00 a.m. to
THE COMMITTEE ON THE JUDICIARY: HEARING ON THE "BANKRUPTCY ABUSE PREVENTION AND CONSUMER PROTECTION ACT OF 2001"
(H.R. 333)
Although the proposed bankruptcy legislation has been pitched as a boon to women and children, the sad truth is that H.R. 333 (and its predecessor versions) will actually cause harm to financially troubled women and children.
Moreover, new provisions that could assist women and children are not included in the pending legislation.
Stated differently, it is time to look beneath the rhetoric and the labels to examine what the contemplated legislation would actually do to real women and children.
My reading of the legislation, my academic research (including an assessment of selected empirical data) and my experience working with women debtors enable me to state, without equivocation, that the legislation provides -- in the real world -- inadequate protections for the very people the proposed law seeks to protect - women and children.
So, who is most benefitted by the legislation: states and the federal government seeking to collect unpaid alimony, maintenance and child support; secured creditors and certain unsecured creditors.
While in certain instances current law does not give these identified groups adequate relief, it is disingenuous to suggest that (a) their interests are commonly consonant with the interests of women and children and (b) all provisions assisting these groups also benefit women and children.
My testimony will demonstrate: (1) that the proposed legislation only addresses the needs of a limited pool of women affected by the bankruptcy process and largely ignores the vast needs of many women who are debtors, creditors or third parties; (2) how specific legislative provisions (particularly those not labeled as "women and child protective") work to undermine (not improve) the benefits of bankruptcy for women and children by, depending on the situation, needlessly limiting or increasing the difficulty of their recovery of money that is legitimately owed them during a case and post-petition, curbing their ability to access the bankruptcy system as debtors in the first instance and narrowing the possibility of completion of successful Chapter 13 cases; (3) in which ways the needs of women could have been addressed but were, instead, ignored, including most significantly the failure to deal concretely with the enormous privacy implications of both the proposed legislation and online access to bankruptcy data; and (4) why the abortion clinic violence provision, not presently in the bill, is additive and not duplicative and is necessary to preserve the rights of women, limit unnecessary litigation and signal the unacceptability of using bankruptcy as a device to avoid liability for violence against women.
My remarks will be specific and will refer to the relevant statutory proposals.
Given the shortness of time in which I had to prepare this summary, I would ask that my more detailed written remarks be delivered at a later date and be included in the record of this hearing as and when same is released.
