JOINT STATEMENT OF JAMES E. JOHNSON, ASSISTANT SECRETARY (ENFORCEMENT)
DEPARTMENT OF THE TREASURY
AND
ISABELLE KATZ PINZLER, ACTING ASSISTANT ATTORNEY GENERAL
CIVIL RIGHTS DIVISION, DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE
CO-CHAIRS, NATIONAL CHURCH ARSON TASK FORCE
BEFORE THE HOUSE JUDICIARY COMMITTEE
MARCH 19, 1997
Mr. Chairman, Representative Conyers, and members of the Committee, thank you for the opportunity to appear today to update the Committee on the efforts of the federal government to investigate and prosecute individuals responsible for the deplorable act of setting fire to houses of worship.
At the outset, we want to commend this Committee and Congress for its leadership in speaking out against church fires and helping to bring these incidents to the forefront of national attention.
This Committee held hearings on the church fires in May of last year.
Those hearings, along with similar hearings the next month in the Senate, highlighted the determination within the Administration and in Congress to do everything possible to investigate these incidents and bring the perpetrators to justice, prevent further fires, and assist the victimized congregations to rebuild.
We also want to recognize the leadership of the chairman and ranking member in enacting the Church Arson Prevention Act of 1996, which has provided us with additional tools in combating these crimes.
As a result of these combined efforts, we have made remarkable progress.
The rate of arrest (34%) in the church arson cases is double the general arrest rate for arsons (16%).
Federal and state authorities have arrested 175 suspects since January 1, 1995, in connection with 126 fires at churches and other houses of worship.
Three quarters of all defendants arrested in the last two years were arrested since June 1996, when the President established the National Church Arson Task Force (NCATF or "Task Force") to oversee the investigation and prosecutions of incidents of church arson.
Since January 1, 1995, 68 defendants have been convicted in federal and state prosecutions in connection with fires at 55 houses of worship.
Overall, the NCATF has opened investigations of 369 arsons, bombings or attempted bombings that have occurred at houses of worship between January 1, 1995, and March 12, 1997.
Our testimony today will provide the Committee with the current status of the coordinated church fires investigations and prosecutions.
Rachel Rowland of the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) will describe the federal government's efforts in the area of arson prevention, Pat Glenn of the Community Relations Service (CRS) will discuss the services that CRS has provided local communities, and Jacquie Lawing of the Department of Housing and Urban Development (HUD) will discuss the joint efforts of HUD, the National Council of Churches, the Congress of National Black Churches and others in helping those congregations already victimized by fire.
Last summer, in June 1996, the President established the National Church Arson Task Force, which we co-chair, to formalize the coordination of investigations already underway.
The NCATF has brought together the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms (ATF), the FBI, Justice Department prosecutors, victim/witness coordinators, the Community Relations Service and the U.S. Marshals Service, in partnership with state and local officers and prosecutors.
Well over 200 ATF and FBI investigators have been deployed and are working with over 75 federal prosecutors and state and local authorities.
This is the largest current civil rights investigative effort and one of the largest series of arson investigations in history.
Each of the component agencies of the Task Force brings particular resources and talents to the Task Force efforts.
The expertise of ATF in conducting arson investigations, particularly in making cause and origin determinations, and the expertise of the FBI in conducting civil rights investigations has proven highly beneficial to the success of the NCATF.
The Civil Rights Division has extensive experience in hate crimes prosecutions and in enforcing the criminal civil rights statutes that are used in prosecuting racially motivated church arsons.
CRS and victim/witness coordinators work closely with victim congregations.
We have met at least once a week since June of last year with the Task Force representatives, and we report to the President through the Attorney General and the Secretary of the Treasury.
Coordination of Federal Effort
In an investigative effort of this size and scope, coordination among federal agencies and between state and federal law enforcement is essential.
To that end, the Attorney General directed United States Attorneys either to establish a local task force focusing on church arsons or to join an existing local task force.
These local task forces include state and local law enforcement and fire protection officials, as well as representatives of the ATF, FBI, the Community Relations Service and victim/witness coordinators.
In addition to the local task forces, the NCATF has an operations team in Washington staffed by special agents of the ATF and the FBI and prosecutors on detail from the United States Attorney's Offices around the nation and from the Criminal Section of the Civil Rights Division.
The director of this operations team is a senior experienced career prosecutor.
This team works with the local task forces to investigate incidents, analyze potential connections among incidents, and prosecute cases.
Due to the high priority of these matters, many federal cases are prosecuted jointly by an NCATF prosecutor and an Assistant United States Attorney.
The Task Force has taken the following steps in carrying out its responsibilities: * Investigative Protocol.
The NCATF has established a protocol for its investigations and prosecutions.
This protocol sets forth procedures for immediately exchanging information among task force agencies, developing an investigative plan for each incident, and ensuring that investigators pursue all lines of inquiry, including whether the crime was motivated by race or religion, and whether any given incident is connected to any other.
* Unified Database.
The NCATF has created a database of statistical information about ongoing investigations.
The ATF and FBI databases and computer systems are also used in Task Force operations to track and analyze evidence about attacks on houses of worship and to generate investigative leads.
* Training.
Last year, the NCATF conducted training among its constituent agencies.
ATF experts trained FBI agents and Department of Justice prosecutors in arson investigations.
Civil Rights Division prosecutors and FBI experts trained ATF agents in civil rights investigations and prosecutions.
* Tip Line.
The NCATF established a toll-free tip line for citizens to report information on church arsons.
That toll free number is 1-888-ATF-FIRE.
As of March 17, 1997, NCATF had received over 2000 calls through that service.
The ATF and FBI also are offering rewards for information in a number of arson cases.
* Threat Assessment Guide.
The NCATF updated and distributed a Church Threat Assessment Guide containing valuable information on the steps that may be taken to prevent fires at houses of worship and the steps to follow after an incident has occurred.
Working with FEMA, the Task Force has distributed over 300,000 of these booklets.
Outreach
Without the confidence and cooperation of the victim congregations, many of these investigations would have been destined to fail.
The NCATF took steps early on to ensure a solid, working relationship between law enforcement and the affected communities.
Less than a week after being formalized, the NCATF met with FBI and ATF Special Agents in Charge and United States Attorneys from the Southeast region to emphasize the critical importance of pursuing the investigations with vigilance, determination and dispatch, as well as with sensitivity to the needs of the victims.
President Clinton, Vice President Gore, Secretary of the Treasury Robert Rubin and Attorney General Janet Reno have worked to bring church arsons to national attention, speaking out forcefully of the commitment of the federal government to solve these cases, and meeting with ministers from the churches burned.
Secretary Rubin and Attorney General Reno instructed us to remain in close contact with the affected communities.
As part of that effort, last week we traveled to Western Tennessee to meet with investigators and prosecutors, as well as with pastors, congregations and community leaders.
This trip again gave us a chance to view personally the devastation that these fires have wrought.
It also gave us the chance to witness the renewed spirit of communities that have come together to rebuild their houses of worship.
We went to the Salem Baptist Church in a small town called Fruitland, an African American church that had been burned in November 1995, and met with congregants, pastors and community leaders from around that area.
We went to the Church of God of the Prophesy, a church with a predominantly white congregation in Dyersberg, Tennessee, that was burned in July of 1996.
We also met with the United States Attorney, ATF agents, FBI agents, and local law enforcement personnel, who briefed us on the current investigations in the district.
The Western District of Tennessee has seen significant success in investigating church arsons, and we have obtained several convictions.
There remain, however, other difficult cases that have not as yet been solved.
Most sadly, there was another fire in Middleton, Tennessee, just last month.
These visits highlight the importance of community outreach.
Working with CRS, the NCATF developed and distributed to every ATF and FBI supervisor and United States Attorney a "Best Practices" guide for conducting community outreach activities.
Statutory Authority and Resources
The support of Congress has been essential in responding to these crimes.
When the Task Force was formed, the federal government had authority under several statutes to investigate and prosecute suspicious fires at houses of worship.
These authorities include the Anti-Arson Act of 1982, which makes it a federal crime to use fire to destroy property used or affecting interstate commerce (18 U.S.C. 844(i)), and criminal civil rights statutes that make it a federal crime to desecrate religious real property or a house of worship or to conspire to deprive persons of their civil rights (18 U.S.C. 241 and 247).
On July 3, 1996, the President signed the Church Arson Prevention Act of 1996, which was sponsored by Chairman Hyde, Congressman Conyers, and Senators Faircloth and Kennedy.
This statute, passed unanimously by both Houses of Congress, amended 18 U.S.C. 247, to strengthen the criminal law against church burning and desecration.
The new law removed a cumbersome interstate commerce requirement, eliminated a $10,000 damage requirement, and increased the maximum sentence to 20 years imprisonment for arson.
There have been two successful prosecutions under the amended Section 247 so far:
one for the July 22, 1996, fire at the Church of God of the Prophesy in Dyersberg, Tennessee, and one for the September 19, 1996, fire at the Church of Christ in Henderson, Nevada.
The 1996 Church Arson Prevention Act also authorized a HUD loan guarantee program that can be used for church rebuilding, and authorized additional personnel at the Treasury Department and the Justice Department, including the Community Relations Service, to respond to the fires.
Congress has also provided essential resources for our efforts.
In August 1996, in a supplemental appropriation for fiscal year 1996, Congress provided $12 million dollars to support ATF's role in the Task Force.
Congress appropriated an additional $12 million dollars in ATF's fiscal year 1997 direct funding to support arson investigations, particularly those directed toward religious institutions.
Additional funds for Task Force activities by the Justice Department, the FBI and CRS were also appropriated or reprogrammed.
The Justice Department has also been able to provide immediate and direct assistance to local jurisdictions through the Department's Bureau of Justice Assistance (BJA).
Pursuant to the President's directive and congressional approval, BJA awarded grants to counties in 13 states to intensify their enforcement and surveillance efforts around vulnerable houses of worship.
The states were: Alabama, Florida, Georgia, Kentucky, Louisiana, Maryland, Mississippi, Oklahoma, North Carolina, South Carolina, Tennessee, Texas and Virginia.
Five hundred and eighty six counties received over $2.7 million in awards.
More than half of these funds were used to pay the overtime costs of increased police and sheriff patrols, or to hire additional part-time law enforcement officers.
Additional funds were used to pay for security measures, such as lighting and security systems, and educational efforts aimed at arson prevention.
In addition to the government effort to address church arsons, perhaps even more impressive has been the tremendous outpouring of assistance and support from the American people in response to these fires.
These attacks are rightly seen as a threat to our common sense of sanctuary and have generated a shared sense of outrage.
People have crossed lines of faith, race and region to engage in a united effort to rebuild and protect our houses of worship.
Religious groups, volunteer organizations, unions, insurance companies, financial institutions, and civil rights organizations have all pitched in to tackle this problem.
We would like to recognize one person in particular, whose efforts have inspired all of us to work that much harder in responding to this call.
Reverend Mac Charles Jones was a principal leader for the Burned Churches Fund at the National Council of Churches.
Mac died just last week, and the world is diminished by his loss.
We mourn the loss of a forceful leader, a constructive critic, and a friend.
Results to date
The men and women of the ATF, FBI, the Treasury and Justice Departments, together with their partners in local law enforcement have had striking success.
The Task Force has opened investigations of 369 arsons, bombings or attempted bombings that have occurred at houses of worship between January 1, 1995, and March 12, 1997.
This number does not include vandalism or other desecration at houses of worship, which continue to be investigated and prosecuted by the FBI, the Civil Rights Division and United States Attorneys.
Nor does it include fires that the investigators have determined are accidental.
Of these 369 arson investigations, at least 155 have been fires at African American churches.
Three quarters of the fires at African American churches have occurred in the southern United States.
As a result of the exceptional partnership among federal, state and local law enforcement, many of the incidents investigated have been solved, mainly by a combination of federal and state arrests and prosecutions.
Since January 1995, arrests of 175 suspects have been made in connection with 126 fires at churches and other houses of worship.
This rate of arrest (34%) is significantly higher than the general arrest rate for arsons, which is approximately 16%, according to Department of Justice statistics.
Since the formation of the Task Force, the number of arrests has increased significantly.
One hundred and thirty persons, representing three quarters of all defendants arrested since January 1995, were arrested following the June 1996 formation of the Task Force.
The 175 arrests have led to a number of convictions.
Since January 1, 1995, 68 defendants have been convicted in federal and state prosecutions in connection with fires at 55 houses of worship.
All but two of the remaining cases are still pending trial.^(1) These prosecutions include the first convictions under the 1996 Church Arson Prevention Act, 18 U.S.C. 247, as amended.
Federal charges are pending in a number of cases, and grand jury investigations are ongoing in many others.
State prosecutions also have been initiated in consultation with federal prosecutors or investigators.
The NCATF actively monitors these prosecutions to ensure that any federal interest is vindicated and to ensure that accurate information is compiled regarding law enforcement's response to attacks on houses of worship.
There are still many cases that have yet to be solved, however, and new fires continue to occur.
Arson cases are among the most difficult criminal cases to solve.
Forensic evidence is often destroyed with the fire.
Moreover, because some of the churches burned are located in isolated, rural areas, there are often no eye witnesses to the incident.
For these reasons, it can often take years to solve arson cases.
The Task Force remains committed to expending the necessary time, resources and effort to solving these crimes and prosecuting those who are responsible.
As you know, information relating to ongoing investigations may not be publicly released before the investigation is concluded.
Thus, we are constrained in the information we can provide.
We can, however, make some preliminary observations from the charges we have brought so far.
The number and proportion of fires at African American churches have raised the possibility of racial hostility as a motive.
Indeed, nine defendants have been convicted of federal civil rights charges in connections with six fires in Nevada, Tennessee and South Carolina.
We have found overall, however, that there have been a range of motives, from blatant racism and religious hatred to financial profit, to personal revenge, burglary or vandalism.
There is still much work to be done before charges are filed in other cases.
While it was the number of fires at African American churches that brought these crimes to national attention, the NCATF will continue to investigate and prosecute attacks on all houses of worship, regardless of their denomination or racial composition.
Burning a church may implicate federal anti-arson and civil rights laws and warrants swift and certain investigation and prosecution.
The work of the NCATF continues to be vital to our efforts to prevent these heinous crimes, and to prosecute those responsible, whether they are motivated by racial hostility, religious bigotry, financial profit, revenge, or simply a desire to burn down a symbol of authority in the community.
The commitment of resources and attention to this work by federal, state and local authorities has been essential to the success of the Task Force, and the Task Force remains dedicated to solving these crimes and bringing the perpetrators to justice.
In closing, we would again like to note that the Administration and Congress have worked together in addressing this issue.
We must continue our unified approach.
As the President said last summer: "We must rise up as a national community to safeguard the right of every citizen to worship in safety.
That is what America stands for."
Judiciary Homepage
1.
There have been two acquittals.
On November 21, 1996, a defendant was acquitted by reason of insanity for the June 10, 1996, arson at Our Most Sorrowful Savior Catholic Church in Soap Lake, Washington, and the June 14, 1996, arson at the Community Evangelical Church in Soap Lake, Washington.
He was indefinitely committed to the Eastern State Hospital.
In October 1996, a 13-year old defendant was acquitted of state arson charges stemming from a fire that caused $500 in damage to the Slaughterneck United Methodist Church in Milford, Delaware.
The fire appeared to have been caused when a pile of leaves was set on fire behind the church.
All of the other prosecutions have resulted in convictions or are still pending.
