Prepared Witness Testimony The Committee on Energy and Commerce W.J.
"Billy" Tauzin, Chairman _________________________________________________________________
Comprehensive National Energy Policy Subcommittee on Energy and Air Quality March 13, 2003 09:30 AM 2123 Rayburn House Office Building _________________________________________________________________
Mr. Marty Kanner Coordinator Consumers for Fair Competition 122 C Street, NW, Suite 500 Washington, DC, 20001 _________________________________________________________________
Mr. Chairman, members of the Subcommittee, my name is Marty Kanner; I am testifying today on behalf of the Consumers for Fair Competition (CFC), an ad hoc coalition of small and large electric consumer representatives, small business contractors, consumer owned utilities and others.
Consumers for Fair Competition was formed to advance policies necessary to promote effective wholesale competition and has been active in the restructuring debate and efforts to block repeal of the Public Utility Holding Company Act (PUHCA) absent sufficient replacement provisions designed to protect consumers and investors.
Much has transpired since this Committee last discussed electricity legislation.
CFC believes it is important to reflect on the turmoil that has occurred in the utility industry over the past few years and proceed cautiously, focusing on those provisions needed to prevent market manipulation and abuse and, thereby, restore consumer and investor confidence in the industry.
At previous hearings, CFC testified about the difficulties associated with transitioning the wholesale market from cost-of-service rate regulation to reliance on competitive market pressures.
The features of the utility industry the historic dominance of vertically integrated utilities, the financial and regulatory barriers to market entry and the physics of the electric system pose significant hurdles for effective competition and numerous opportunities for consumer abuse.
As witnessed over the past few years, these hurdles are real and the consequences are severe.
Lessons Learned
What are the lessons we can learn from events of the past few years? 1.
Its not just Enron.
When the full breadth of the Enron scandal became known, some discounted the revelations as an anomaly the distasteful actions of a rogue market player.
Regrettably, the problems are much broader.
A cursory review of the general and trade press compiled as an attachment to my testimony underscores the breadth of the problem.
A significant number of market participants, both traditional utilities and new market entrants, have been accused of, confessed to or been sanctioned for engaging in questionable activities, market manipulation and consumer abuse.
2.
Its not just California.
Again, a common assumption was that the problem was isolated to California (and those states with the bad fortune to be located close to it) and the result of Californias ill-conceived market rules or failure to foster construction of new generation.
While Californias overly complex system and short supply certainly created opportunities for abuse, similar problems have occurred throughout the country in Oregon, Minnesota, Kansas, Ohio, Pennsylvania, New England, Louisiana and elsewhere.
3.
3ood Markets Need Good Information.
Efficient markets require complete, accurate and timely information.
Reports of phantom wash trades intended to boost perceived revenues, trading volume and prices were fairly common in the electric industry.
Similarly, there have been multiple instances of parties reporting false information on gas prices to private clearinghouses.
Without good information, effective market oversight is compromised, market confidence and liquidity are shattered and consumers run the risk of paying excessive prices.
4.
Utility Diversifications Can Harm Consumers, Stockholders and Competition.
The record of utility diversification efforts is far from stellar.
An analyst with Williams Capital recently noted that utility investment rarely goes terribly wrong; non-utility investment rarely goes right.
But, unlike other industries, its not just the utility and its investors that suffer from bad investment decisions.
As detailed in a December 26, 2002 Wall St. Journal front-page article (which is attached to my testimony), utility customers suffer the consequences.
Utilities have inappropriately sought to charge consumers of their regulated entities for the costs of unrelated diversifications (i.e., buying unregulated assets at inflated prices and tap utility assets to back the debt of nonutility ventures).
Utility affiliates must stand on their own: utility consumers should not subsidize diversifications either through cash infusions, backing affiliate debt, or receiving inadequate compensation for services or assets provided by the utility for the benefit of unregulated affiliates.
5.
Enhanced Tools Are Needed to Oversee Markets.
As noted by Chairman Barton in a recent interview and FERC-nominee Joe Kelliher at his recent confirmation hearing: Reliants intentional withholding of generation in California was not illegal under the Federal Power Act.
I hope we all agree it should be.
If we are going to rely increasingly on markets, then FERC needs market oversight authorities and tools akin to those of the SEC.
6.
PUHCA Does Matter.
PUHCA includes a series of structural requirements designed to maintain financially healthy utilities, prevent abusive affiliate transactions and protect consumers and investors.
A central thesis of PUHCA that investors and consumers are better off when utilities concentrate on providing utility service has been borne out by recent events.
In fact, an October 2002 report by Moodys Investors Service noted a growing sense that the more traditional power company business model, once considered outdated, is again in fashion and that the credit ratings of these traditional utilities have remained relatively stable as they have exhibited solid financial flexibility.
7.
We May Only Have Seen the Tip of the Iceberg.
The allegations of market abuses are numerous.
There may be much more occurring under the surface but we may never know.
It is troubling that the two most glaring smoking guns the Enron memo detailing abusive trading schemes and the transcripts of Reliant traders and plant operators engineering artificial shortages in order to raise prices where disgorged by the offenders, not uncovered by any regulatory oversight body.
If such blatant manipulative tactics have evaded federal and state regulators, how many more covert abuses are occurring?
You are faced with an enormous challenge.
The problems plaguing the utility industry and its consumers and investors are numerous real and perceived market abuse, soaring and highly volatile prices, sinking financial conditions and a lack of consumer and investor confidence.
CFC would urge you to only take those steps that you are confident will address the shortcomings of the industry and our current system of regulatory oversight and provide the needed structural protections for consumers and investors.
CFC Recommendations for Electricity Legislation
Given the anticipated timeline for action, deferring action on electricity legislation may be the wise course of action.
However, if you choose to include electricity provisions in the pending energy bill, CFC believes that the following elements must be included: * Bar fraudulent and manipulative practices.
If Reliants activities were not illegal, they should be.
Rather than attempting to ban specific trading practices, any electricity legislation must make it unlawful for any entity, directly or indirectly, to undertake fraudulent, manipulative, or deceptive actions in wholesale energy markets.
* Facilitate effective market oversight.
Today, the nations financial markets require the recording and submission of transactional data.
This information provides an early warning system for potentially inappropriate trading practices and an audit trail for any resulting investigation.
FERC must have similar access to transactional data in utility markets.
* Provide genuine market transparency.
Efficient markets require timely and effective price discovery.
In addition, market transparency alerts market participants and market overseers with indications of anomalous trends that might suggest manipulative activities.
Actual not statistical or average price information must be required on a real-time basis.
* Separate regulated utilities and their unregulated affiliates and prohibit cross-subsidization.
Markets are distorted and consumers and competitors are harmed when utilities charge ratepayers for the costs of unregulated ventures or tap ratepayers revenues and ratepayer-financed tangible and intangible assets to fund their diversification.
FERC recently took a step in the right direction by barring the issuance of utility-backed debt for unregulated ventures.
While only a first step, this initiative should be codified and expanded to shield consumers from the risks and costs of utility diversifications.
In addition, federal law should clearly prohibit cross-subsidization and consideration should be given to the proper form of separation needed to truly protect consumers and investors and preserve competition.
* Review All PUHCA Exemptions.
Enron, after its acquisition of Portland General Electric, self-certified that it qualified for an intrastate exemption under Section 3 of PUHCA.
CFC has previously questioned Enrons qualification for that exemption and noted that had Enron been subject to the stricter PUHCA requirements for Registered Holding Companies many of Enrons improper activities could have been prohibited or detected.
Interestingly, an SEC judge recently ruled that Enron did not qualify for the intrastate exemption based on the percent of revenues Portland General Electric earned from interstate sales.
A mandated review of all outstanding Section 3 PUHCA exemptions is needed to ensure that those exemptions are still appropriate and in the public interest.
In addition, CFC would support amending the statutory PUHCA exemptions for merchant generation and telecommunications affiliates to require PUHCA Section 10(b) review to ensure that the interests of investors and consumers are protected.
* Gaps in the review of utility mergers must be closed.
The weakened financial condition of the utility industry may translate into a significant increase in mergers and acquisitions (in fact, low stock prices of some utilities may well encourage further acquisition efforts).
Such activities may be economically beneficial but that can be determined only after careful review.
Certain M
Congress must close this gap.
* Private exchanges must be run independent of market participants.
Enron benefited from the proprietary information it received from its private brokerage platform: Enron online.
The integrity of private trading platforms to facilitate third-party trading is dependent on their market neutrality.
The best means of achieving this neutrality is to bar utility ownership of exchanges that are designed to facilitate third-party transactions.
Comments on Discussion Draft
I have shared with you the views of CFC on what provisions should be included in any electricity legislation.
I would now like to share our comments on Title VII of the February 28 Discussion Draft.
While CFC commends Chairman Barton for his interest in promoting wholesale competition, Title VII of the Discussion Draft, unfortunately, does not include the needed provisions outlined in my testimony and in fact eliminates existing consumer protections in several key respects.
Consequently, CFC cannot support Title VII in its current form.
Most significantly, CFC opposes the proposed repeal of FERC merger review and repeal of PUHCA.
As we have testified, CFC believes that PUHCA should not be repealed and numerous national organizations join us in this view (see attached letter).
If PUHCA is to be repealed, it must be accompanied by strong consumer protections outlined above that are, regrettably, absent from the Discussion Draft.
Moreover, it is discouraging that the lone protection touted by repeal advocates access to books and records is an empty promise under the provisions of the Discussion Draft, which includes an expansive exemption that is likely to swallow the rule.
Mr. Chairman, our position on PUHCA repeal is clear.
Nonetheless, if the subcommittee is committed to lessening this important consumer protection statute, we would encourage you to consider targeted revisions designed to address specific limitations contained in PUHCA that the Committee finds unreasonably restricts a valuable activity.
This is the general approach taken by Congress in 1992 and 1996 and is a far preferable model to outright repeal.
We are similarly troubled by the legislations repeal of FERC review of proposed utility mergers.
As the primary utility regulator, it is appropriate and necessary for FERC to review proposed mergers.
This oversight is all the more important if we are to successfully transition to a competitive market.
Only FERC has the expertise to assess the competitive impacts of a proposed merger on regional power markets, and FERC is in the best position to condition a proposed merger to mitigate anti-competitive impacts and oversee the merged entitys compliance with those conditions.
Given the limited resources and utility expertise of the Justice Department and Federal Trade Commission, reliance on those agencies for utility merger review is inadequate.
Moreover, the simultaneous repeal of merger review under PUHCA is likely to create a regulatory black hole in which few proposed mergers receive the necessary scrutiny.
CFC appreciates that the proposal includes provisions intended to discourage or prevent abusive practices increased penalties, transparency and a prohibition on round-trip trades.
However, as outlined above, these provisions are not enough: * Increased penalties will have little effect if, like in the Reliant case, those actions are not illegal.
Moreover, without strong market oversight and enforcement, imposition of occasional penalties is a minor cost of business when companies can reap millions on profits from manipulative schemes.
* CFC supports transparency requirements and the language in the Discussion Draft is an improvement over prior proposals by removing the explicit submission of statistical data and narrowing the exclusion for sensitive information.
However, we remain concerned that the provision could still result in submission of averaged prices if volumetric reporting is not also explicitly required.
In addition, Congress must also require transparency and accuracy in gas price data submission.
* Barring a specific trading practice such as round-trip trades is unlikely to have the needed remedial impact.
In fact, it may be seen as a tacit suggestion that other shady transactions not specifically banned are deemed acceptable.
What is needed is a strong and unambiguous prohibition on any and all fraudulent, deceptive and manipulative practices.
I have heard some suggest that manipulative practices is an ill-defined term.
I would submit that so was the phrase just and reasonable when Congress passed the Federal Power Act in 1935.
The provisions on incentive- and performance-based transmission rates, as well as participant funding, are less prescriptive than those included in prior legislation.
While we appreciate those changes, we remain troubled by the tension created between these provisions and Sections 205 and 206 of the Federal Power Act.
Under accepted case law, FERC sets rates of return that reflect the risk of the relevant investment and sufficient to attract needed capital.
Admonishing FERC to set rates to reflect those factors as directed by the Discussion Draft and then require adherence to Sections 205 and 206 creates an ambiguity that could lead to unnecessarily high transmission rates.
I would note that, in an effort to encourage participation in the Midwest ISO, rates of return as high as 36 percent were proposed.
Simply inflating transmission costs will foster neither competition nor consumer benefits.
I will also note that the provisions on incentive rates and participant funding are in conflict: would a transmission owner receive an inflated rate of return for a transmission line that is participant funded? CFC would urge you not to adopt an inflexible system on participant funding.
Conclusion
There are significant differences between what CFC believes is needed in electricity legislation and what is included in the Discussion Draft.
As always, Mr. Chairman, we are committed to working with you, your staff and the members of the Committee.
However, we are skeptical that appropriate and beneficial electricity legislation can be negotiated and crafted at this time.
If Congress cannot include the provisions needed to detect, prevent and mitigate the opportunities for market manipulation and consumer and investor abuse, then CFC would urge deferral of action on electricity legislation until those provisions can be included.
On behalf of Consumers for Fair Competition, I thank you for this opportunity to testify.
Allegations of Market Flaws and Abuses
February 20, 2003 The Federal Energy Regulatory Commission launched an investigation into whether Enron illegally retained ownership of two cogeneration plants after it no longer qualified for sole ownership once it bought the Portland General Electric utility.
(Source: The New York Times)
February 19, 2003 Federal regulators asked Californias grid operator for more information on energy companies that may have engaged in questionable electricity trading tactics to avoid the states price caps in mid-to-late 2000
.
(Source: The Wall Street Journal)
February 6, 2003 A Securities and Exchange Commission (SEC) judge rejected Enrons request to retain its exemption from the Public Utility Holding Company Act (PUHCA), concluding that the companys significant revenues from sales outside the state of Oregon where its utility subsidiary is located disqualified the company for the exemption.
(Source: Reuters News Service)
February 5, 2003 Reliant Resources Inc. was fined $13.8 million in a settlement over allegations that the company intentionally withheld power in the California market in order to drive up prices during the states electricity crisis.
(Source: The Energy Daily)
January 30, 2003 Staff for the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission concluded that natural gas markets remain ripe for potential gaming this year despite stepped-up federal and industry scrutiny.
The report concluded that without proper monitoring, the likelihood of successful manipulation could increase under current tight supply conditions.
(Source: The Energy Daily)
January 7, 2003 The California ISO released a report charging that other companies engaged in Enron-like market manipulation tactics, including the creation of phantom transmission congestion.
(Source: Low Angeles Times)
January 6, 2003 FERC Chairman Pat Wood has decided to bring before the Commission an appeal that companies seeking to join the PJM Interconnection and Midwest ISO are earning enormous rates of return as high as 63 percent on their transmission assets.
(Source: The Energy Daily)
January 6, 2003 In a December report, the General Accounting Office determined that federal regulators are unprepared to police the deregulated market for natural gas.
(Source: Public Power Weekly)
December 26, 2002 Energy companies, burned by disastrous forays into commodities trading and other unregulated businesses, are increasingly seeking to pass some of the financial burden of these failed ventures on to their utility units and some experts are worried that this could lead to higher electricity rates for consumers in coming years.
For instance, Duke Energy Corp. agreed to pay $25 million to its utility customers to settle regulators accusations that the company improperly stuck its utilities with expenses that rightfully belonged to unregulated affiliates.
Similarly, Kansas regulators found that Westar Energy quietly shifted more than $12.95 billion of debt from unregulated affiliates onto the utility side of the business.
(Source: The Wall Street Journal)
December 20, 2002 The Commodities Futures Trading Commission (CFTC), in the first enforcement action over energy date reporting scandals, issued an order in which Dynegy Inc. agreed to pay a $5 million fine to settle charges that two affiliates for more than two years deliberately reported false gas market data to manipulate published price indexes.
(Source: The Energy Daily)
December 5, 2002 A former El Paso Corp. vice president and natural gas trader has been arrested and charged with knowingly providing false data to an energy industry newsletter that develops and publishes a monthly index of gas prices.
(Source: The Energy Daily)
December 4, 2002 In a letter to the Financial Accounting Standards Board (FASB), Florida-based Teco Energy said current price quotes are unreliable and misleading due to the lack of effective mechanisms to ensure accurate reporting by energy companies and data collection by publishers.
(Source: The Energy Daily)
November 19, 2002 A former energy trader and one-time employee at one of the countrys best-known index publishers told California legislators that misreporting of energy prices by large companies was routine, underscoring the scope of a practice now under review by federal regulators.
(Source: The Wall Street Journal)
November 16, 2002 A report by federal energy regulators made public after the Wall Street Journal sued to obtain the full record of the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission investigation details how two power companies, Williams Cos. and AES Corp. may have conspired to drive up prices during Californias 2000-2001 energy crisis.
The report lends credence to allegations that Californias generators colluded to withhold power from the state.
(Source: The Wall Street Journal)
November 13, 2002 A federal grand jury investigating the California energy crisis appears to be focusing on whether major electricity suppliers in the state worked together to rig prices in violation of the antitrust laws.
(Source: Los Angeles Times) October 28, 2002 Williams reported that employees misreported natural gas trades to industry publications that compile price indices.
The same story also reported that earlier in October Dynegy fired six people for similar actions.
(Source: Platts Power Markets Week)
October 28, 2002 A class action lawsuit has been filed against AEP, claiming that AEP investors were misled about the value of AEP stock based on false information created by AEP wash trades and manipulation of gas index prices through false transaction reporting.
(Source: Platts Power Markets Week)
October 24, 2002 FERC initiated an investigation to determine if ENRON improperly certified three wind generation facilities as Qualifying Facilities in 1997.
(Source: FERC Order Initiating Investigation and Hearing)
October 23, 2002 The Commodity Futures Trading Commissions inquiry into U.S. energy markets involves many companies and includes a review of intentional reporting of false price data to publications that produce indexes against which energy contracts are pegged.
(Source: The Wall Street Journal)
October 17, 2002 The head of Enrons energy trading operation in the West, Timothy Belden, agreed to plead guilty to a criminal charge for his role in manipulating electricity prices in California.
(Source: Los Angeles Times) October 9, 2002 American Electric Power dismissed five employees in their gas-trading unit for providing inaccurate price information to industry trade publications.
(Source: AEP News Release)
October 7, 2002 Standard 
(Source: Standard 
October 7, 2002 The Securities 
(Source: The Oregonian)
October 2, 2002 The Securities 
The SEC filed in civil court seeking disgorgement of all ill-gotten gains.
(Source: SEC News Release 2002-143)
October 1, 2002 An official with the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission said that owners of U.S. power plants and transmission lines may be required to take personal responsibility and certify that plant outages which impact market prices occur due to legitimate reasons.
September 24, 2002 Dynegy settled fraud charges with the Securities 
The SEC alleged Dynegy engaged in wash trading, selling and purchasing equal amounts of energy for the same price from the same counter party, and improper accounting for special purpose entities.
Dynegy agreed to a cease and desist order and paid $3 million, but was not required to admit to any wrongdoing.
(Source: SEC News Release 2002-140)
September 23, 2002 El Paso Pipeline was found to have withheld gas line capacity.
The Chief Judge found that El Paso had market power into the California markets and exercised that market power by withholding gas line capacity.
The Chief Judge went on to recommend that FERC impose penalties.
(Source: Initial Decision Docket # RP00-241-006)
September 18, 2002 The California Public Utility Commission alleges that five power generators deliberately withhold output during the states energy crisis in order to drive up prices.
(Source: The Wall Street Journal) September 13, 2002 The Commodity Futures Trading Commission reached a settlement with a former Avista Energy trader regarding his role in the alleged manipulation of forward electricity prices in California on the New York Mercantile Exchange.
The illiquidity in the market enabled price manipulation through large volume trades in the closing minutes of the exchange.
(Source: The Energy Daily)
September 10, 2002 IdaCorp admits violating FERC affiliate rules, saying that its trading unit did not always buy transmission access from its regulated utility affiliate on a third-party basis.
(Source: The Energy Daily)
August 19, 2002 Bill Hederman, the first director of the new FERC Office of Market Oversight and Investigation, said that the Commission does not yet have a clear definition of market power, and that a a hard and fast definition will be closer to a year away.
(Source: Clearing Up)
August 16, 2002 Utility regulators in several states are moving to ensure that the financial problems that decimated companies in the wholesale-energy sector dont unduly hurt consumers of the electric companies they regulate.
(Source: The Wall Street Journal)
August 14, 2002 The market monitor for the PJM Interconnection LLC said certain companies repeatedly created congestion in the Mid-Atlantic electricity grid by gaming the system.
Faulty incentives induced market participants to shift power flows to capture more profit, the monitor said.
(Source: The Energy Daily)
August 13, 2002 The Federal Energy Regulatory Commission launched a formal investigation into instances of possible misconduct by five companies alleged to have manipulated short-term electric and natural gas prices in the West.
(Source: FERC Press Release) July 23, 2002 The PJM Interconnection found discrepancies in prices sold from energy providers in neighboring regions, with marketers booking transactions along transmission paths that were different from the actual path used in order to distort congestion pricing.
(Source: The Energy Daily)
July 16, 2002 Duke Energy acknowledged that it made 23 round trip energy trades over the Intercontinental Exchange electronic trading platform, of which Duke is one of 13 equity owners.
(Source: The New York Times)
June 28, 2002 The biggest reason Californians paid $7 billion more for electricity in the summer of 2000 was the ability of power suppliers to ask for and get high prices, says a new study by university economists.
(Source: Los Angeles Times)
June 24, 2002 A report by the Pennsylvania Public Utility Commission alleged that PPL EnergyPlus deliberately withheld electricity from the capacity market in early 2001 to create an artificial shortage.
(Source: Public Power Weekly)
June 18, 2002 A study by the General Accounting Office concluded that the Federal Energy Regulatory Commission is not yet up to the task of protecting consumers and ensuring that electricity is sold at just and reasonable rates.
The report determined that FERC is hobbled by antiquated procedures, legislation and perhaps a mind-set more suited to the old days when energy producers were regulated monopolies.
(Source: The New York Times)
June 10, 2002 Traders at Xcel Energy and Mirant discussed games to profit from Californias chaotic electricity market in 2000 as they negotiated energy transactions, according to transcripts Xcel has given to federal regulators.
The Xcel and Mirant traders discussed schemes to schedule nonexistent power use and to take advantage of congestion payments on Californias overburdened electric grid.
June 8, 2002 Perot Systems was peddling ways to exploit market loopholes in the California energy market, which the company had helped develop.
(Source: Los Angeles Times)
May 27, 2002 As noted by the head of the PJM market-monitoring unit: I dont think any energy market is immune to manipulation.
(Source: Business Week)
May 15, 2002 In a 2001 probe of Enrons online trading system, FERC did not uncover either the looming financial collapse or its manipulative trading practices.
Senate Governmental Affairs Committee Chairman Joseph Lieberman faulted the investigation for being incomplete and more noteworthy for what it overlooked than for what it scrutinized, leaving consumers unprotected.
(Source: Wall Street Journal)
May 8, 2002 Electricity industry analysts warned yesterday that the memos showing how Enron Corp. manipulated Californias power supply in the past two years demonstrate that smart, very detailed market rules have to be devised and enforced.
(Source: The Washington Post)
May 7, 2002 Internal Enron documents outline trading strategies to manipulate prices in Californias power market.
(Source: Wall Street Journal) May 2, 2002 Coal plant developer alleges that Illinois Power is frustrating plant interconnection of the plant to favor a competing coal plant owned by an affiliate of the utility.
(Source: The Energy Daily)
March 5, 2002 Cambridge Energy Research Associates issued a report that noted were a decade into deregulation and most power markets remain ill-defined.
(Source: Wall Street Journal)
March 4, 2002 Staff of the Public Utility Commission of Texas accuse six (unnamed) market players of manipulating the market in Texas by intentionally mis-scheduling power needs to reap more than $1 million in load imbalance credits.
(Source: The Energy Daily)
January 11, 2002 A coalition of major generators complained to FERC that Entergy is charging excessive rates and deny comparable service to competitors.
(Source: The Energy Daily)
January 8, 2002 A coalition of generators (including Calpine, Exelon, Mirant and Reliant) charged that Entergy is abusing market power through its generator energy imbalance program, overcharging independent generating facility customers for imbalances resulting from generation under-deliveries.
The coalition alleged that Entergy claimed its incremental costs of meeting the imbalance were more than $100/mwh greater than the prevailing market rate.
(Source: Public Power Weekly)
October 5, 2001 FERC accused Exelon of illegally manipulating the transmission system in the Pennsylvania-New Jersey Maryland (PJM) Interconnection to enrich its power marketing affiliate (PECO Energy).
(Source: Energy Daily).
July 12, 2001 The Federal Energy Regulatory Commission (FERC) decided to develop new tests to determine whether power providers should be allowed to charge market rates for electricity.
(Source: Dow Jones Newswires)
June 29, 2001 a General Accounting Office study found that FERC lacked the information or analysis needed to conclude that generators in California had intentionally withheld electricity supply to influence prices.
(Source: GAO Report)
June 21, 2001 The New York Independent System Operator asked FERC for emergency action on a plan to police the market and guard against abuse in the wholesale electricity market.
(Source: Energy Daily)
May 24, 2001 NSTAR, a Boston utility, accused two independent power producers of charging excessive rates in the New England market during times of power grid congestion.
(Source: Energy Daily)
February 1, 2001 Consumer Federation of American and Consumers Union write President Bush claiming that FERC has repeatedly allowed sellers to charge market-based rates when the underlying market conditions are highly concentrated and the level of competition is far from sufficient to discipline abusive and anticompetitive behavior by electricity suppliers, or to ensure effective market functioning.
(Source: CFA/CU Letter)
January 13, 2001 Leading economists Paul Jaskow and Edward Kahn conclude that high wholesale prices observed in summer 2000 [in California] cannot be explained as the natural outcome of market fundamentals in competitive markets since there is a very significant gap between actual market prices and competitive benchmark prices.
(Source: CATO Policy Analysis)
September 6, 2000 Economists on the California ISO Market Surveillance Committee conclude that uncorrected market design flawshave enhanced the ability of market participants to exercise market power in the California electricity market and that these flaws caused or contributed to the June 2000 price spikes.
(Source: Market Surveillance Committee report)
July, 2000 The staff of the Federal Trade Commission found that as regulation is reduced and competition is encouraged, there is a significant potential that these utilities [vertically integrated utilities] will use their existing market power in generation, transmission and distribution services to deter competition that could benefit consumers.
(Source: FTC Staff Report)
May 24, 2000 New York State Electric and Gas claims that Consolidated Edison can use Local Reliability Rules to require use of its own generators regardless of price to relieve congestion and raise prices in the area in which NYSEG operates.
NYSEG claims a proposed merger between ConEd and Northeast Utilities will exacerbate this problem.
(Source: Energy Daily)
May 5, 2000 An analysis by Tabors Caramanis 
(Source: Dow Jones Newswire)
December 21, 1999 The East Central Area Reliability (ECAR) executive committee asserted that Cinergy showed blatant disregard for reliability rules.
The action was prompted by Cinergy leaning on the transmission grid and taking as much as 1,600 MW of power which they had not purchased -- during high-price periods.
The power would be returned when prices were lower.
_________________________________________________________________
The Committee on Energy and Commerce 2125 Rayburn House Office Building Washington, DC 20515 (202) 225-2927 Feedback
