STATEMENT OF JACQUIE LAWING GENERAL DEPUTY ASSISTANT SECRETARY FOR COMMUNITY PLANNING AND DEVELOPMENT U.S. DEPARTMENT OF HOUSING AND URBAN DEVELOPMENT
BEFORE THE HOUSE JUDICIARY COMMITTEE
MARCH 19, 1997
Mr. Chairman, Representative Conyers, and members of the Committee, thank you for the opportunity to represent Secretary Andrew Cuomo in speaking with you today regarding HUD's role in the National Rebuilding Initiative.
I am pleased to join the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA), the Department of Justice (DOJ), the Department of the Treasury, and the Community Relations Service (CRS) in updating you on the progress of the adjunct response to church burnings.
HUD joins with others in commending this committee and other members of Congress for your leadership on this issue.
Since January 1995, 369 arsons, bombings or attempted bombings have occurred at places of worship in this country.
At least 155 of the 369 arsons have been in African-American churches.
Mr. Chairman, strong communities must rise up against intolerance of any specific group.
The enactment of the Church Arson Prevention Act of 1996 and President Clinton's creation of the Church Arson Task Force signify the nation's intolerance for this type of hate crime.
As the President has said, arson attacks on churches are an affront to basic liberty and religious tolerance, posing a challenge not just to those houses of worship that are burned, but to the entire nation and our future as a common community.
HUD is proud to have a role in providing financial, technical and other support to aid churches in the rebuilding process.
The work begun under the strong leadership of Secretary Henry Cisneros is now being continued under Secretary Cuomo.
Under the Church Arson Prevention Act of 1996, HUD's Office of Community Planning and Development was given authority to administer a $10 million loan guarantee fund to assist with the rebuilding of non-profit institutions, including churches, damaged by arson or terrorism.
The Office of Community Planning and Development, under the direction of then-Assistant Secretary Cuomo, recognized that in order to maximize the opportunity presented by the loan guaranty and relief package, organizations from around the country should be involved in the rebuilding effort.
Before churches and other non-profit organizations could apply for a loan, they needed help completing loan applications and even more, in establishing workable rebuilding plans.
Assistant Secretary Cuomo facilitated the creation of the National Rebuilding Task Force, bringing private, public and non-profit resources to the table to aid in the rebuilding effort.
This coordination and these resources are enabling places of worship to establish workable rebuilding plans and to have all information necessary to effectively use the loan guaranty.
THE NATIONAL REBUILDING INITIATIVE
As you know, the Federal response to the church arson fires is focused in three areas: enforcement, prevention, and rebuilding.
HUD has taken a lead in rebuilding.
Through the Office of Community Planning and Development, HUD is working to support the rebuilding of affected churches and non-profit facilities in three ways: 1) administering loan guarantees; 2) co-chairing, along with the National Council of Churches and the Congress of National Black Churches, the National Rebuilding Task Force, and 3) sponsoring regional conferences.
Loan Guarantee Program.
The Loan Guarantee Program was signed into law as part of the Church Arson Prevention Act of 1996.
The purpose of the program is to guarantee private sector loans to assist nonprofit organizations in financing the rebuilding of facilities damaged or destroyed by arson or terrorism, including churches.
The Act allows the Secretary of HUD to guarantee up to an aggregate principal of $10 million in private sector loans, including a credit subsidy of $5 million.
HUD has established terms and conditions for the guarantees, and other program requirements and will guarantee up to 100% of the amount of the loan.
Although the availability of Federal loan funds offers an important option to churches that are short on capital necessary to rebuild, many churches shared with HUD that they need increased technical capacity to complete loan fund applications and to formulate a plan for financing a rebuilding process.
As you can understand, some churches are unable or reluctant to take on additional debt burdens.
The National Rebuilding Task Force launched a series of Regional Conferences to help organizations understand and effectively use the guaranty fund.
National Rebuilding Task Force.
Mr. Chairman, one of the most exciting results of the National Rebuilding Initiative has been the formation of a national partnership for rebuilding.
The National Rebuilding Task Force coordinates all aspects of the rebuilding effort and is co-chaired by the Department of Housing and Urban Development, the National Council of Churches and the Congress of National Black Churches.
The partners are working together not only in disseminating information and sponsoring conferences but also in working one-on-one with each congregation impacted by the burnings.
This process includes assessments of the financial support system each place of worship needs to rebuild.
Resources available through the National Rebuilding Initiative include: grants, low-interest loans, materials and in-kind donations, volunteers, pro-bono professional legal, architectural design, and insurance services, as well as hate crimes counseling and arson prevention programs.
Key to the success of the rebuilding task force is the wide array of partners it involves.
Private sector entities and non-profit entities, such as Habitat for Humanity, worked side-by-side with HUD in a series of regional conferences designed to ensure that affected churches and non-profits receive all the assistance that they need to rebuild.
Regional Conferences.
In the Fall of 1996, HUD held five regional conferences, in cities like Memphis, TN and Columbia, SC, which provided information about HUD's loan guarantee program as well as other aspects of rebuilding.
Each conference offered different sessions with expert panelists, providing construction and architectural advice as well as loan application assistance.
HUD coordinated the conferences with other Federal agencies, the Governors' offices and many other organizations, including the National Council of Churches, Habitat for Humanity, the Enterprise Foundation and the American Institute of Architects.
This collaboration on training conferences was just one example of the overall multi-agency collaboration of the National Rebuilding Task Force.
At these conferences, we saw all sectors of the community come together to help rebuild the houses of worship: the faith community, the business community, the non-profit community and the governmental community have all taken a role in assisting the rebuilding process.
ADDITIONAL SOURCES OF FINANCING THROUGH THE TASK FORCE
While administering the Federal loan guarantee program, HUD has worked with its partners on the National Rebuilding Task Force to leverage additional financial resources to support rebuilding.
As you might imagine, some churches are reluctant to take on additional debt, making it necessary for the Task Force to seek alternative sources of funds.
The National Council of Churches (NCC) has been an integral partner to the National Rebuilding Initiative, raising over $7 million in direct and in-kind contributions to support the rebuilding efforts.
NCC has provided direct rebuilding grants as well as in-kind materials such as lumber and other building materials, pews, choir robes and hymnals.
In addition, NCC has joined with Habitat for Humanity to provide a network of volunteer specialists and laborers to assist with all aspects of the rebuilding efforts.
On January 27, 1997, the Congress of National Black Churches (CNBC) launched a $12 million initiative to complement the efforts of the National Rebuilding Initiative.
CNBC plans to provide rebuilding assistance to 50 churches over the next three years.
As a partner in the National Rebuilding Initiative, CNBC plans to coordinate these efforts with the rebuilding efforts already underway.
The Rebuilding Initiative has operated on two levels: first, it brought communities, nations organizations, government and others together to address this tragedy in a coordinated fashion, thereby strengthening their results.
Second, it has enabled HUD, NCC and CNBC to galvanize their resources, thereby maximizing the impact of their individual commitments.
RESULTS TO DATE
In summary, since the passage and signing of the Church Arson Prevention Act of 1996,
* Implementing regulations were published in September 1996 and became effective in October 1996;
* The public-private partnership has made available a variety of resources for the rebuilding of places of worship.
The partnership has held 3 major organizational meetings, 5 regional conferences and a total of 70 on-site assessments.
* The National Rebuilding Initiative has come into contact with 124 churches during Phase One with the following results: * 54 churches are eligible for a blended resources package consisting of HUD loan guarantees, NCC grant assistance, as well as volunteer and in-kind assistance * 6 churches are eligible for HUD loan guarantee assistance * 29 churches have received NCC grant assistance only * 25 churches need no assistance * 12 churches have been referred to Phase Two
Churches that have been destroyed recently have been targeted for help in Phase Two of the National Rebuilding Initiative.
Approximately 30 churches have asked for assessments, which will make up the preliminary Phase Two list.
* Grants from NCC have been made or allocated to 79 places of worship, composing about $7 million.
* 60 churches have been rebuilt or are under construction and 64 are in the pre-planning stage.
Now that assessments have been done, we expect even more results and implementation of rebuilding plans.
Vice-President Gore demonstrated true insight when he said communities "will become stronger" as a result of the tragedy they faced.
As you can see by all testimony today, communities have pulled together to address this issue.
The National Rebuilding Initiative is committed to providing the resources to rebuild not just the physical structure, but also to heal broken relationships and begin new ones.
HUD Secretary Cuomo looks forward to continuing to work with our national partners, Treasury, Justice, FEMA, and members of Congress to ensure that the nation's churches and communities are successfully and sustainably rebuilt.
[justice.gif] Judiciary Homepage
