EnjoyIndiana.com Where To Go Trip Planner Events and Festivals About Indiana Fun and Free Stuff Indiana Map Regional Getaways Seasonal Jaunts Road Trips Sports Zone Cultural Attractions Shopping Outdoor Indiana Make Reservations Northern Eastern Western Central South Central Southern [focusSS.gif ] [duboisROS.gif ]
Over 50 charming little gift shops await! Enjoy a horse-drawn carriage along the fabled bricked Main Street.
You may be tempted to stay the night at the Brick Street Inn.
This beautiful Victorian-style bed and breakfast offers a scrumptious breakfast.
For more info, call Greater Zionsville Chamber of Commerce at (317) 873-3836.
Hamilton County - Hamilton County CVB East of Zionsville lies Noblesville.
In search of the perfect antique? Noblesville offers 70 dealers on the courthouse square.
Then, take a load off and enjoy a train ride at the Indiana Transportation Museum.
South of Zionsville on Allisonville Road, you'll discover one of America's foremost outdoor living history treasures -- Conner Prairie.
This recreated 1836 prairie town village is the ultimate interactive experience.
Learn about pioneer life by chatting with costumed interpreters.
Also while in Hamilton County, drop by the Hamilton County Visitor Center for information on the many golf packages in Hamilton County! Explore the fascinating life and work of famous Hoosier poet James Whitcomb Riley.
The Riley Home Complex is a short drive southeast to Greenfield.
Then, head south to Shelbyville on State Road 9.
You'll want to stop for dinner at the world-famous, 150-year-old Kopper Kettle Inn in Morristown.
And once in Shelbyville, visit the Grover Museum with three changing galleries and model railroad layout.
Or swing over to Boggstown for a show at the Boggstown Inn 
While in town, have dinner at the famous St. Elmo Steak House.
Here are a few of Indy's best events and performance venues:
The Broad Ripple Art Fair -- Mother's Day Weekend.
The Indiana State Fair mid-August, and the Indy Jazz Fest -- third weekend in June.
A stellar performance at the American Cabaret Theater, Clowes Memorial Hall of Butler University, or the Indiana Repertory Theater.
Or catch a game at Conseco Fieldhouse, home of the Indiana Pacers.
See the Indianapolis Indians play baseball at Victory Field.
You won't believe your eyes or the massive screens of the Cine Dome Theater or the IMAX 3D Theater.
Or just, chill at the Slippery Noodle Inn, home of Indy's best blues.
Links:
Central Indiana -- City Sights and Small Town Treasures.
The art of athletics meets champion museums.
City skyscrapers watch over charming little neighborhoods.
The agenda is comfortably packed.
The menu offers something different every day and the shopping goes on forever.
Indianapolis Convention 
Trip Planner Check Central Indiana out in the Trip Planner.
Return to the top
Contact Us | Travel Guide Order | FAQ's | Media 
All rights reserved.
