STATEMENT OF PATRICIA GLENN NATIONAL COORDINATOR OF THE CHURCH BURNING RESPONSE TEAM COMMUNITY RELATIONS SERVICE (CRS), U.S. DEPARTMENT OF JUSTICE
BEFORE THE HOUSE JUDICIARY COMMITTEE
MARCH 19, 1997
Mr. Chairman, Ladies and Gentlemen:
My name is Patricia Glenn and I am the National Coordinator of the Church Burnings Response Team for the Community Relations Service, U.S. Department of Justice.
Thank you for the invitation to participate in this hearing and to report to you on the role of the Community Relations Service (CRS) in responding to the Nation's church burning crisis.
You have heard testimony from other Federal agencies about the investigation and prosecution of the criminal acts, and learned about Federal programs to help rebuild the damaged and destroyed churches.
I would like to tell you about a corollary Federal service provided over the past eight months to more than 125 towns and cities --- helping officials and citizens find ways to ease racial tensions and establish new ways of working together.
CRS has played a complementary role as part of the President's National Church Arson Task Force.
On behalf of Rose Ochi, Director Designate of CRS, I would like to express our appreciation to the Congress, and especially the leadership of this Committee, for their bipartisan support for a comprehensive national response to this challenge.
Let me begin by providing you with a brief explanation of our agency's mission.
CRS was created by Title X of the Civil Rights Act of 1964.
Under the Act, the agency is mandated to assist local communities to resolve debilitating racial conflicts and tensions, and prevent destructive racial violence.
In 1996, CRS, downsized to just 34 conflict resolution professionals across the country, responded to requests from Governors, Mayors, and other community leaders in more than 800 cases of community racial conflict.
CRS, viewed by our customers as the nation's premier conflict resolution experts, is the Justice Department's "peacemaker" for community conflicts and tensions arising from differences over race, color, and national origin.
Recently, CRS conciliation specialists responded to the deadly violence and costly disturbances in Los Angeles, California; Crown Heights, New York; and St. Petersburg and Miami, Florida.
In these cities and many others, CRS was "in the streets" helping police, local officials, and community leaders to end the violence and begin constructive dialogue.
Once stability was restored, CRS provided technical assistance and training to avert new violence and improve police-community relations.
So when the President called for a coordinated and comprehensive Federal response to the burning of houses of worship, it was appropriate that CRS should be called on to be a principal partner in the Federal response.
In response to the President's call and under the leadership of Director Designate Rose Ochi, CRS mobilized a Church Burning Response Team (CBRT).
It is chaired by Ozell Sutton, our Atlanta Regional Director; coordinated in Washington by a National Coordinator; and staffed by conciliation specialists drawn from our Regional offices, detailees from other Justice components, and former CRS mediators.
The CRS Church Burning Response Team has focused its work on those communities where Black churches have been burned or desecrated -- the sites where there is the greatest potential for racial conflict.
CRS recognizes that not all Black church arsons are motivated by racism and that some may have been accidental or motivated by other reasons.
However, quite often there are heightened racial tensions in black communities when houses of worship are burned.
The burning of Black churches brought back memories of the waves of terror during the 1960's when the attacks upon African-American churches were calculated acts of violence to disrupt the movement for racial justice.
CBRT Chairman Sutton put the church fires in perspective in a Congressional briefing in September 1996, when he said "A Black church to the African-American community is far more than a place of worship.
It is an attack on the very soul of the African-American community.
It is the source of their sense of humanity, their sense of self-worth, their fighter for dignity and equality, their leader and trainer in the struggle for freedom and justice."
To date, conciliation specialists on the CRS Response Team have helped ease racial tensions over the church fires in more than 125 rural, suburban, and urban communities.
They work "on the ground" with local communities helping to eliminate racial distrust and polarization, promote multiracial cooperative rebuilding efforts, train law enforcement and community leaders, and create partnerships between minority communities and law enforcement.
This effort would not have been possible without the leadership of Attorney General Janet Reno, Secretary Robert Rubin, and the bipartisan support of this Committee and other members of Congress.
Our ability to respond is directly linked to Congressional approval of the Attorney General's request to reprogram Department of Justice funds to underwrite the work of the CRS Church Burning Response Team.
These additional funds were necessary because the Agency's staff had been reduced from 90 to 41 employees in FY 1997.
With your approval, I would like to submit to this Committee for the record our "Interim Report on the Activities of the CRS Church Burning Response Team."
The Interim Report describes the Response Team's mission, goals, activities, and accomplishments.
Let me summarize briefly for you the contents of that report.
Director Designate Ochi established four goals for the CBRT:
(1) To resolve racial conflicts and reduce racial tensions in those communities in which the fires occurred;
(2) To create healthy relationships between law enforcement agencies and minority communities affected by the burnings;
(3) To reduce the likelihood of new church burnings in vulnerable communities through multiracial cooperative efforts; and
(4) To support the mission of the National Church Arson Task Force, by keeping lines of communication open among all the various agencies, groups, and individuals working on the church burnings.
CRS services are based on the application of established conflict resolution practices and procedures.
The type of service provided by CRS is determined by the results of an on-site assessment of racial tensions in a community.
CRS conciliators meet with elected and public officials, police chiefs, school heads, community leaders, clergy, and others.
Based on these discussions, CRS gains an understanding of the history and dynamics of race relations in the community where the fires occurred and learns about the impact of such an event on current race relations.
When racial conflict or tension is apparent, and local officials and community leaders are willing to work together in programs and activities to improve racial understanding and cooperation, CRS goes to work.
Assessments conducted in the church burning cases revealed different reasons for racial tensions and conflict.
In some communities, there were suspicions that a racist conspiracy was behind the burning of Black churches.
In others, there was concern over the pace of the investigations and perceptions that investigators were biased or insensitive.
Sometimes tensions resulted from misunderstandings or miscommunication among Federal, State, and local law enforcement agencies, and also, between law enforcement agencies and local minority groups and clergy.
For some communities, tensions revolved around access to insurance and building loans or the best way to undertake a rebuilding effort.
In other communities, there were no detectable racial tensions; levels of communication, trust, and cooperation were high.
The potential for racial tension and conflict is present not merely during the immediate aftermath of a church fire, but throughout each step of the criminal justice process.
The arrest, indictment, conviction, and sentencing of a church arsonist or vandal are all potential flashpoints for racial tension or conflict.
Anger may be directed at the person arrested, law enforcement officer, prosecutor, grand jury, jury, or a judge.
The source of conflict often can be over differences of perception between officials and citizens.
Without good ways to bridge these differences, racial tensions can escalate and conflicts may occur.
In anticipation of these possibilities, the National Church Arson Task Force issued guidance to law enforcement agencies on "Best Practices" to reduce the prospect of negative reactions.
There are five services which the CRS Church Burning Response Team has provided local communities:
The first service is to mediate community conflicts.
For example, in Tennessee, CRS helped two communities settle conflicts over the rebuilding of their churches.
When the Tigrett Mount Pleasant Baptist Church's application for a building permit was denied due to unsuitable soil conditions, CRS worked with the church's minister, and county and State officials to reach a settlement which cleared the way for new construction.
In Columbia, Tennessee, CRS mediated an agreement between the Friendship Baptist Church and city government over the location for the new church.
The second service is to ease racial tensions by facilitating dialogues between concerned officials and citizens.
In the aftermath of two church burnings in Boligee, Alabama, CRS facilitated a dialogue between the City Council and black residents.
This effort eased tensions and opened discussions between black and white citizens and between black and white government officials in Greene County.
As a result, a community group formed the "Rebuilding Community Relations Task Force," which will sponsor community projects exemplifying racial cooperation, including a "Fourth of July Homecoming Celebration" and renovation of the historic county court house as a cultural center and museum.
The third service is to design and present training programs for law enforcement and other public agencies.
Our assessments revealed that State and local law enforcement agencies wanted training programs to improve their management of community conflicts and to strengthen their relationship with local minority organizations and communities.
CRS is working with the Department of Justice's Bureau of Justice Assistance and FEMA in organizing training for State and local law enforcement agencies.
CRS will offer training programs requested by local and State law enforcement agencies on effective response to bias-motivated crimes and sound community relations practices.
Alabama was the site of the first statewide training meeting.
On October 24, 1996, CRS, the Bureau of Justice Assistance, and the Alabama Sheriffs' Association convened its first meeting in Birmingham, Alabama.
More than 30 law enforcement representatives from State, county, and local agencies discussed how to work together to respond to the needs of citizens and churches victimized by church burnings.
In June 1997, CRS will join with the U.S. Attorney and the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, and Firearms (ATF) in the Northern District of Alabama, to conduct training in arson prevention, community conflict resolution, and hate crime awareness.
The fourth service is to provide information about programs and services available to rebuild the churches.
The CRS Church Burning Response Team has assembled information about church rebuilding programs available from charitable organizations and government agencies, including the Federal Loan Guarantee Recovery Fund administered by the U.S. Department of Housing and Urban Development.
Many of the affected churches are located in remote areas, have small memberships and limited resources, and are unfamiliar with the government processes associated with funding applications.
At conferences in Tennessee and North Carolina, CRS provided information on sources, processes, and contact points for rebuilding funds.
The fifth service is to provide technical assistance on the establishment of church arson prevention programs.
For example, in Houston and San Antonio, Texas, CRS helped establish community education seminars on church arson prevention.
Community and religious leaders, and representatives from the U.S. Attorney's Offices, FBI, ATF, police and fire departments, and insurance companies joined the programs.
Local police departments in both cities have instituted church arson prevention patrols as a result of these seminars.
The well-being of a community can be measured by how government and citizens come together during times of crisis.
Crimes motivated by racial animosity require a special response.
The Community Relations Service takes pride in the important work it has rendered over the past eight months to more than 125 communities affected by church burnings.
As devastating as these attacks have been, they have proven to be challenges for these communities to discover their own strengths.
They have shown us how people of good will can come together, joining hands in rebuilding not merely the physical structure of the church, but weaving a new community fabric with the threads of trust and faith.
CRS's work is not finished.
Church burnings continue.
In those communities where there is racial antagonism, CRS mediators will be available to provide conflict prevention and resolution services.
Thank you for the opportunity to report on the work of the Community Relations Service Church Burnings Response Team.
[justice.gif] Judiciary Homepage
