STATEMENT FOR THE RECORD OF THE HONORABLE JAMES L. WITT DIRECTOR OF THE FEDERAL EMERGENCY MANAGEMENT AGENCY BEFORE THE JUDICIARY COMMITTEE UNITED STATES HOUSE OF REPRESENTATIVES
WASHINGTON, D.C.
MARCH 19,1997
It is a pleasure to submit testimony today on behalf of the President's National Arson Prevention Initiative.
The inclusion of the Federal Emergency Management Agency (FEMA) today at this hearing is a clear indication of the partnership and cooperation that exists within the Federal government to combat the terrible crime of arson.
Not only is the Federal goverm-nent unified in its commitment to apprehend those responsible for burning houses of worship and prosecute them to the fullest extent of the law, but the agencies represented here today, and several who are not present, are committed to preventing an arson fire from happening in the first place.
Let me first explain the National Arson Prevention Initiative in the context of the overall Administration's church arson efforts.
You have heard today about the investigation and prosecution activities of the National Church Arson Task Force, and from Housing and Urban Development about the Church Rebuilding Initiative.
While the National Arson Prevention Initiative has its roots in the tragic series of church fires that have occurred, the scope of the Initiative itself is much broader.
The church fires have been a catalyst for bringing the issue of arson to a national stage.
Arson is a serious national problem.
Arson robs, injures, and kills thousands of family and friends every year.
In the United States, it is the leading cause of property loss due to fire and the second leading cause of fire death.
Billions of dollars are lost in arson fires every year.
The indirect economic losses from arson are even greater.
Arson is a violent crime of malicious intent.
Arson is a troubled kid with a lighter.
Arson is a hate monger with an axe to grind or gang member with something to prove.
Arson is the urban disease that eats away at the core of our cities -- and a pestilence in our rural communities.
Arson is a serious national problem -- but it is fundamentally a local problem.
The goal of the National Arson Prevention Initiative is to promote arson awareness and prevention efforts to individuals and communities.
In the end, communities must take ownership of their particular arson problems and be part of their solutions.
Real and lasting arson prevention can be Federally inspired; it cannot be Federally driven.
When the President announced the National Arson Prevention Initiative in late June of last year, he asked FEMA to coordinate public and private sector resources to combat arson.
From the outset, this Initiative has tried to apply available resources to support local solutions to this local problem.
FEMA has been joined in the arson prevention cause by the Departments of Justice, the Treasury, Housing and Urban Development, Education, Agriculture, the U.S. Commission on Civil Rights, and the Corporation for National Service.
The cooperation has been unprecedented.
But it is not just Federal agencies that are involved in this Initiative.
A wide range of constituent groups and stakeholders have taken up the charge.
Early on, the leaders of eight national fire service organizations resolved before the President to work within communities across the country to prevent arson.
The two million members of the fire and emergency services remain committed to this effort.
In addition, FEMA continues to work closely with the national law enforcement organizations, church and voluntary groups, the insurance industry, and a myriad of crime prevention organizations.
All of these organizations have a core of strong members and extensive networks that we have capitalized on to promote arson prevention.
We also continue to be impressed by the interest and involvement of the Southern governors who have demonstrated leadership on the issue of arson prevention.
With the cooperation among all levels of government, national organizations, and the private sector, we have been able to accomplish quite a lot, in a relatively short period of time.
The efforts of the National Arson Prevention Initiative have been focused in three critical areas: public education and outreach, coordination of resources, and coalition building.
PUBLIC EDUCATION AND OUTREACH
Within days of the announcement of the Initiative, FEMA established the National Arson Prevention Clearinghouse available through a toll-free number (1-888-603-3100) and accessible through FEMA's World Wide Web Site (www.fema.gov).
In the last eight months, we have received over 12,000 telephone inquiries from all fifty States, the District of Columbia, and the Caribbean territories, and have filled requests for some 410,000 packets of arson prevention information.
Through this Clearinghouse, we provide information on available arson prevention training and grants.
Working with the Insurance Committee for Arson Control and the fire service, we are able to provide fire safety and security inspections of houses of worship to those that request it.
We also coordinate the delivery of arson prevention workshops across the country with the International Association of Arson Investigators.
Callers to the Clearinghouse can not only find out how to organize arson and church watch programs, but also request more intensive technical assistance in fire investigation and arson task force evaluations.
We have even been able to place arson inspection canines in communities with the support of State Farm Insurance.
In recent months, the issue of juvenile Presetting has received a great deal of attention from local news outlets, national media, and talk shows.
The Clearinghouse has served as a referral center for parents of juvenile firesetters to get help from trained mental health professionals.
Fortunately for FEMA, a number of organizations have donated materials for distribution through the Clearinghouse.
The Church Mutual Insurance Company, the National Fire Protection Association, the Grinnell Mutual Insurance Company, and the International Association of Arson Investigators have made significant contributions of camera-ready art and printed materials to support this Initiative.
The National Church Arson Task Force updated the Church Threat Assessment Guide, and FEMA has reproduced and distributed this document through the Clearinghouse with great results.
In fact, we completed a massive distribution of information in cooperation with the National Council of Churches last Fall.
In addition to sending out arson prevention brochures and pamphlets, the Clearinghouse collects reports of exemplary practices and successful models in arson prevention.
We also refer questions about rebuilding houses of worship, donating monies to churches, insurance availability, and, of course, ongoing investigations to the appropriate organizations and agencies.
All of the partners of the Initiative noted earlier have aggressively promoted the Clearinghouse and the assistance available through it.
COORDINATION OF RESOURCES AND GRANTS
Within the Federal government, resources were redirected and programmed to support State and local arson prevention efforts as part of this Initiative.
These resources were closely coordinated as part of the Initiative to maximize their benefit.
Columbia to enhance State and local arson investigation and prevention capabilities.
This funding has afforded increased access to arson investigation training programs
offered by our U.S. Fire Administration's National Fire Academy, by allowing more
regional and direct deliveries of these courses.
By the end of this fiscal year, an estimated
2,500 students will receive arson investigation training through resident, regional, and
direct deliveries.
Additionally, this fiscal year, we will be providing a total of $635,000
to support arson prevention programs in each of the States, the District, and the
territories.
There were 1,291 counties in 13 targeted Southern States eligible to apply for the $6
million announced by the President last June to enhance church surveillance and arson
prevention efforts.
The Bureau of Justice Assistance of the Department of Justice made
grants of $4,600 to the 586 counties that applied.
Of the approximately $2.7 million
awarded, 13.5 percent has been used to hire part-time officers, 60.9 percent was used for
law enforcement overtime, and 25.6 percent for other church arson prevention activities.
The remaining funds will be used to provide 13 Statewide Church Arson Prevention
Training Conferences in the targeted States, and four conferences outside the southern
region, as well as provide technical assistance and support to State and local
governments.
The Department of Housing and Urban Development authorized the use of existing
Community Development Block Grant (CDBG) and Public Housing Assistance (PHA)
funds to support arson and other crime prevention strategies in communities.
These are
funds that communities receive annually.
PHA funds may be used for developing place
based crime prevention strategies.
CDBG funds can also be used to help prevent crime or
arson directed at churches or other vulnerable institutions.
under the Safe and Drug-Free Schools and Communities program for hate crime
prevention activities.
Seven grants were awarded to public and private non-profit
organizations, including educational institutions, in Arizona, California, Connecticut,
Mississippi, New Jersey, New York, and Pennsylvania.
All of the projects are designed
to have a broad impact within the State.
Prevention Act of 1994.
Resulting projects on arson case management protocols,
investigative training programs, domestic violence as a cause of arson, and juvenile
firesetters should serve as models to share with States and communities nationwide.
Participating in these demonstration grants are the States of Arkansas, Colorado, Illinois,
land, Michigan, Minnesota, Nevada, New Mexico, and a consortium from New England
includes Connecticut, Massachusetts, New Hampshire, and Rhode Island.
If additional resources are made available to support State and local arson prevention efforts, these ill be closely coordinated among the Federal agencies.
COALITION BUILDING
There are two key community-based efforts in arson prevention that should be highlighted.
The first involves the community outreach of the Federal agencies, and the second involves a coalition building effort that is currently underway.
Perhaps the greatest example of the emphasis of the Initiative on grassroots action has been the efforts of AmeriCorps and VISTA volunteers in six Southern States.
Last year, 44 volunteers from the Corporation for National Service were assigned to 18 rural communities in which church arsons had occurred, and to 73 potentially vulnerable communities in Alabama, Georgia, Mississippi, North Carolina, South Carolina, and Tennessee.
Volunteers performed 129 church threat assessments and organized over 70 community meetings on arson and fire prevention.
Nearly 50 in-depth community arson vulnerability assessments were initiated.
Many low cost improvements were made to church properties to make them less vulnerable to arson.
Church arson watch groups were started in southwest Georgia and South Carolina.
In many States, business partners pledged financial support for arson prevention efforts.
Many donations of goods, services and cash were made to assist churches with arson and general fire prevention activities.
Over the last several months, Treasury's Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco and Firearms, and Justice's U.S. Attorneys, Community Relations Service, and the Federal Bureau of Investigation participated in hundreds of community meetings on church arson prevention.
FEMA has recently launched a pilot project in four communities to build grassroots coalitions for arson prevention.
Three of the pilot communities have been touched in some way by a house of worship fire.
Macon, Georgia, Nashville, Tennessee, and Charlotte, North Carolina were selected based on an analysis of a number of factors including recent fire and arson activity, population size, community leadership, fire and law enforcement support, and access to media outlets for public education.
These communities have already started to come together and form grassroots, partnerships for arson prevention.
This past week we kicked off another pilot outside the South in Utica, New York.
This community is experiencing a serious arson problem and has asked to participate in the pilot effort.
I plan to participate with the Governors and local leadership in the launching of all of these coalitions nationally in April and May.
These pilot communities will serve as prevention models for the nation.
The lessons they learn coming together to combat arson will assist other communities across the country.
The concept of forming coalitions to address local problems is not a new one.
However, it is new in arson prevention, and FEMA, the other Federal agencies, and the communities are leaniing a great deal from the experience.
Yet with all of our best efforts in arson prevention in communities throughout the nation -- the Federal agents, the fire chiefs, sheriffs, church leaders, small business owners, and teachers -- the work is still not done.
Arson is a problem that just will not go away.
The cooperation in evidence at the hearing today has been focused on a symptom of a much larger problem in this country.
A problem that we must all remain committed to solve.
FEMA is committed to the cause of arson prevention and to working to support communities in keeping America from burning.
By the end of the fiscal year, the National Arson Prevention Initiative of FEMA will be merged into the United States Fire Administration's program.
Thank you, Mr. Chairman, for the opportunity to provide this testimony for the record.
I would be pleased to answer any questions you or the other Members of the Committee might have.
[justice.gif] Judiciary Homepage
