I. Introduction
Mr. Chairman and Members of the Committee, I am grateful for the opportunity to testify before you today on behalf of the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People (NAACP).
I am Harold McDougall, Director of the Washington Bureau of the NAACP.
The NAACP is the nation's oldest and largest civil organization, with over 600,000 members in the fifty states and the District of Columbia, and throughout the world.
The NAACP is committed to the protection of the civil, legal, political, economic and human rights of African-Americans, and other citizens of color here in the United States.
The rash of arson attacks on churches in the African-American community in particular, and especially in the Southern United States, troubled us greatly, and we greatly appreciate the Committee's leadership in passing the Church Arson Protection Act of 1996 into law.
II.
Summary
Since 1995, 330 African-American churches have been burned nationwide.
Only about
25% of these cases have been resolved.
Nelson Rivers, our Southeast Regional Director, testified before the House Judiciary Committee on May 21, 1996 regarding the rash of church fires that broke out in the Southeastern United States last year, the NAACP Southeast Region Church Fires Task Force was formed to co-ordinate the collection and distribution of information on church fires throughout the Southeast.
Mr. Rivers testified that the fires raised the specter of a painful, ugly, and not-too-distant past in America, reminding the African-American community of vigilante tactics which had been used historically to terrorize us, and intimidate us from exercising our fundamental constitutional rights.
Some of us are old enough to remember the firebombing of the 16th Street Baptist Church in Birmingham, Alabama in 1963, when four young black girls were killed while attending Sunday school.
Southern rural black churches were rallying points for the civil rights movement of the day, and still perform important functions in the post-civil rights era.
Thirty years later, the Mt. Zion Baptist Church of Boligee, Alabama, in Green County, where I myself did voter registration work in 1965, was completely destroyed by fire on December 22, 1995.
To this date, that crime has not been solved.
As early as January 1996, the NAACP asked Attorney General Janet Reno to launch an investigation, and she gave special orders in this regard to the Federal Bureau of Investigation (FBI) and the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, and Firearms.(ATF)
At the committee hearing in May, Mr. Rivers made the following suggestions:
That the Department of Justice should coordinate the federal response, forming an inter-agency task force for that purpose.
That the ATF and FBI should review and revise their interview technique, where necessary, and make good use of the Justice Department's Community Relations Service in this regard.
That the FBI and ATF should schedule a series of meetings in the communities where fires occurred to give updates on the investigations, answer questions, and address concerns of community members.
That Congress should consider field hearings as part of a continuing investigation.
The upshot of Mr. Rivers' testimony was that as a result of the church fires the African-American community, and the nation as a whole, faced a direct and unacceptable threat to physical safety and religious liberty.
A forceful and compassionate response was necessary, well-coordinated and funded, that would not only have the objective of bringing the perpetrators to justice, but also sending a message from our nation's foremost opinion leaders that this type of cowardly bullying, of vicious intimidation, has no place in our country or among our people, and that none of our citizens is worth so little that they can be subjected to this kind of intimidation with impunity.
III.
NAACP Southeast Region Church Fires Task Force
The Task Force sponsored the Church Fires Workshop July 10, 1996 during the 87^th Annual National Convention of the NAACP in Charlotte, North Carolina, in which Deval Patrick, Assistant Attorney General for Civil Rights, and James Johnson, Assistant Secretary for Enforcement of the Department of the Treasury participated, along with representatives from the press and our state conferences in the South.
The Southeast regional office implemented NAACP policy adopted at the convention, working with the Lawyer's Committee for Civil Rights Under Law to provide free legal services to burned churches and their pastors.
The office also fielded phone calls regarding the NAACP's role from all over the world, and worked with the National Council of Churches and the Center for Democratic Renewal in identifying churches that had not yet received rebuilding funds.
IV.
Creation of Statewide Church Outreach programs
Through this program, the Regional Office alerted people to be vigilant, advising that rural, isolated churches were most at risk.
V.
The New Law
The new law amended 18 U.S.C. 247 to strengthen the criminal law against church burning and desecration, particularly where such crimes are racially motivated.
The law removed a cumbersome interstate commerce requirement, eliminated a $10,000 minimum damage requirement, and increased the maximum possible imprisonment for arson from ten to twenty years.
According to Gloria Sweet, our state conference president in Tennessee, the law as modified by the Church Arsons Act is a better law, more likely to deter hate crimes.
Before, she says, even if a perpetrator was convicted, he or she could get off on good behavior or with a very light sentence, especially if they had connections-- knew an important person, or were related to such a person.
Teenagers, especially, had no concern about repercussions.
The Act has not eliminated this type of thing entirely, and traditional attitudes about how things are done are still very much alive in the South.
For example, in Meridian, Mississippi, the Youth Court judge refused to certify three convicted teenagers as adults, over the objections of the FBI and local law enforcement officials.
As a result, the perpetrators were processed through the juvenile system -- one was sent to a youth training school, and another referred for psychological evaluation.
The new law also authorized additional personnel at the Treasury Department and the Justice Department, including the Community Relations Service, to respond to the fires.
This effort was organized under the rubric of the National Church Arson Task Force (NCATF) which issued an interim report to the President on January 17, 1997.
The legislation also authorized a HUD loan guarantee program that can be used for church rebuilding.
VI. Reflections on the NCATF
The NCATF interim report indicates that the ATF and FBI have investigated 328 arsons, bombings or attempted bombings occurring at houses of worship between January 1, 1995 and January 7, 1997.
This does not include vandalism or the desecration of houses of worship, nor does it include fires determined to be accidental.
Of the 328 cases investigated, at least 138 were fires at African-American churches, and three quarters of these were in the South.
"Arsons at all houses of worship continue to be reported in significant numbers," says the report.
Task Force members had some initial rough spots with local populations victimized by church arson and vandalism.
Part of this was caused by failure to recognize that the community not only needed to have the crimes investigated, but also needed help to feel whole again, to overcome its sense of violation.
Unfortunately, FBI and ATF officials in some cases adopted a purely prosecutorial stance, taking the position that everyone was a suspect, and acting accordingly.
Our branch presidents have told us of instances in which people who already felt victimized were subjected to long interrogations and cross-examinations, leaving them feeling victimized again, and exacerbating the suspicions they already held toward local law enforcement officials.
The Task Force has since taken steps to ease these tensions, including bringing in agents who are not native to the area.
They have also worked with CRS at Justice in trying to resolve these concerns.
We understand the posture of the Task Force to be "proceed with sensitivity, but also where the evidence takes you."
If this is the posture, it is very important that the CRS work actively in the community to address the other part of this problem-- that the community, violated, be helped to feel whole again.
That won't happen by treating everyone as a suspect.
These are by and large small churches in small communities.
The people are scared, intimidated, and suspicious.
The necessary ambivalence between the prosecutorial /investigative function of the Task Force and the function of calming the community after an episode of violence is best worked out by sensitivity training for investigators, and by more aggressive outreach and networking by CRS.
This demonstrates that the community at large cares about what happens.
People can thus feel better even if there are no arrests.
Now people can feel that someone is on their side.
If on the one hand, Task Force members may have been overzealous in their investigations in some cases, in others, they were "under-zealous."
This was particulary a problem where the FBI and ATF officers were local, and may have shared the tendency of local law enforcement to underplay the existence of hate crime activity in their own jurisdictions, perhaps out of embarrassment, perhaps for other reasons.
Local law enforcement, especially, has shown a tendency to make early statements to the press to the effect that "this crime was not racially motivated," before all the facts are in.
Such a case occurred in Charlotte, North Carolina, in which a thirteen year-old Caucasian girl was involved, which was reported as non-racial but which later proved to have both racist and satanic motivations, according to Nelson Rivers, our Southeast Regional Director.
In another case, near Macon, Georgia, reports from investigators close to the crime informed reporters that the perpetrators "knew it was a black church," but Milton "Buddy" Nix, Jr., Director of the Georgia Bureau of Investigation (GBI) insisted that there was no proof of racial motivation.
Victims must be assured that when they report a crime, the appropriate steps will be taken and their complaints will be treated seriously.
The community needs visible signs that both local and federal law enforcement officials will strive to protect them.
This is important evidence of the agency's concern and commitment to the community.
Finally, we are aware of continuing tension between local officials and Task Force officials.
VII.
Reflections on the HUD Loan Program
In our view, HUD has made a serious commitment in this emergency situation.
They came up with the resources, and worked hard with the Task Force and the White House.
But they were not getting through to these small rural congregations, filled with people for whom the paperwork of applying for HUD loans was very intimidating.
In addition, the notion of borrowing so much money, even at very low interest rates, was a daunting prospect.
Representatives from the Center for Democratic Renewal tell us that where people apply, they have no problems getting money.
However, the National Rebuilding Initiative Task Force, established by President Clinton, had by February identified only 13 churches it believed would qualify for government-backed loans.
(See Chris Burritt, Only 2 Churches Have Applied, Atlanta J
Feb 23, 1997 at C6.
According to the article, out of $10 million authorized, only $232,000 had been disbursed, between two churches which have applied for government assistance.)
HUD needs to increase its technical assistance.
We have spoken to HUD officials, and encouraged them to be more pro-active, taking a page from some of their other initiatives with faith communities, giving instructions on how to use HUD programs.
Certainly the National Council of Churches can continue to be helpful here.
VIII.
Further Recommendations
According to Mary Frances Berry, Chairwoman of the Civil Rights Commission, overall racial tension in the United States is the reason for racist church burnings, finding, especially in the South, "rigid pockets of segregation and an unmistakable undercurrent of racial animosity."
Approximately two-thirds of the suspects in church arsons against African-American churches are white.
In addition, negative or hate talk radio and political rhetoric minimizing the importance of discrimination have contributed to this resurgence of racial divisiveness and violent behavior.
I think we can all agree that these church burnings are events which should never have happened.
We can all, I think, congratulate ourselves for responding appropriately to the emergency as it arose.
But to prevent such emergencies, such crises, from becoming more and more recurrent in our society, more remains to be done, to root out the culture which supports such occurrences.
Enforce existing laws
Discrimination in housing, employment, education, and even public accommodations continues, and this creates an atmosphere in which hate crimes such as church fires can thrive.
We know that we still have deep racial issues in our culture -- Texaco and other revelations of corporate discrimination, the Rodney King videotape, the Good Old Boy Roundup that so embarrassed the country and revealed that the federal government itself is not immune to the virus of racism.
For laws to be enforced, law enforcement agencies must be funded.
The Department of Justice's Civil Rights Division, EEOC, the Department of Education's Office of Civil Rights, the Department of Labors' Office of Federal Contract Compliance, HUD's Fair Housing Enforcement Office, and the Department of Agriculture's Office of Civil Rights all need increased funding to address both the long-term and short-term problems associated with discrimination and with hate crime violence in the United States.
The President's budget calls for increased funding for all of these agencies.
Along with other members of the Leadership Conference on Civil Rights (LCCR), we encourage you to meet those recommendations and, indeed, to exceed them.
In addition, we urge you to reauthorize the U.S. Commission on Civil Rights, which was vigorous in its response to church burnings.
We urge you to restore funding for the Community Relations Service.
CRS has been a key factor in the church arson arena, reducing racial polarization, bridging law enforcement and minority communities, facilitating biracial rebuilding efforts, and training law enforcement on cultural diversity and race relations.
We reiterate our support for the work of CRS in collaboration with the FBI and ATF.
Renew America's commitment to vigorously combat hate crimes
It is very important to continue to improve data collection, of the numbers of minorities in our society as well as the number of instances in which they are subjected to intimidation and violence.
The perennial (or should I say, decennial) undercount of minorities in the Census results in underrepresentation in the legislature and makes it difficult for civil rights enforcement, both public and private, to do its proper job.
Regarding the collection of hate crimes data, hate crime reporting statues force an official acknowledgment of, and response to, every reported hate crime motivated by bigotry and bias.
Such laws can help shape and complement law enforcement response and build the growing societal awareness of the problem.
The Hate Crimes Statistics Act is very important in light of the continuing debate in the majority community over whether this is really happening.
Is it insurance opportunism? Juvenile pranks? Better statistics will put much of this controversy to rest.
In the absence of data, you simply cannot discern the scope of the problem.
The problem of local law enforcement agencies refusing to participate in HCSA in 1994 must also be addressed.
While there may be resistance among some local law enforcement officials to enforcing hate crimes laws, the majority of the American population supports prosecution of hate crimes.
We also need hate crimes reporting units, not only to collect information and statistics but analyze and process it, creating victim and offender profiles and motive and activity patterns to assist law enforcement in designing and directing law enforcement resources in response.
This will help victims targeted for characteristics over which they have no control, help them feel empowered to report incidents, and not feel that reporting will cause them to be targeted again.
Such units are needed in federal as well as local law enforcement agencies.
With the Leadership Conference, we urge that you make the receipt of Department of Justice technical assistance grants and Community Oriented Policing Services (COPS) funds contingent upon HCSA data collection.
As the LCCR Report on Hate Crimes states, "a combination of presence, prevention, and outreach to minority communities is the best deterrent to hate crimes."
It is also important to look at creating a mechanism, whether by law or by administrative practice, for processing "incidents" that do not have a criminal motive.
These can help create an atmosphere in which more serous offenses can take place.
IX. Conclusion
I conclude by urging Members of the Committee and the Congress to remember that these church burnings served as a reality check for us all.
While many believed that racism was dead, that we had achieved a "color-blind" society, the church fires, along with videotaped police beatings of black men and audio taped comments by corporate bigots, combined in 1996 to amplify that reality check.
The continuing issue of racial tension in this country requires programs and agencies to fight injustice and discrimination, as well as the public commitment of opinion leaders to fight a growing culture that says "racism doesn't really exist; therefore we can practice it with impunity."
The NAACP remains vigilant, but it should not stand alone.
From our beginnings as an organization we have felt proud to provide leadership to the entire country on finishing the unfulfilled promise of our founding democracy.
In the face of a thriving and growing racism industry in this country, we will step forward, as we always have,.
But we do not expect to be alone.
With the Church Arson Prevention Act, and with the energetic responses from the President, the Department of Justice, the FBI and the ATF, we see that we have allies in this fight upon whom we can depend.
We are committed, by an 87-year old mandate, to eradicate all vestiges of discrimination on the basis of race.
We expect no less of our government, We expect no less of you.
Thank you.
Primary Sources
Associated Press, "Congress Passes Tougher Penalties for Church Burnings," Florida Today, June 28, 1996.
Penny Bender, "Black Churches Pledge to Rebuild, Groups Unite for $8 Million in Renovations," Florida Today, January 28, 1997.
William Booth, "In Church Fires, a Pattern but No Conspiracy; Investigators Say Climate of Racism, Not Hate Groups, Drives Arsonists," Washington Post, June 19, 1996.
Chris Burritt, "Around the South/Church Fires Aftermath: Only 2 Churches Have Applied for U.S.
Loans," Atlanta Journal and Constitution, February 23, 1997.
The Christian Century, "Rights Panel Reports on Church Burnings," Vol. 113, 1996.
Michael Fletcher, "No Linkage in Black Church Arsons; Justice Department Lists 28 Attacks in 17 Months," Washington Post, May 22, 1996.
Michael Fletcher, "Church Fires Said to Reflect tension; Problem Deep-Rooted, Rights Agency Asserts," Washington Post, October 10, 1996.
Dorothy Gilliam, "The Political Tinder for Church Arsons," Washington Post, July 6, 1996.
Joe Holley, "Who Was Burning the Black Churches?," Columbia Journalism Review, Vol. 35, 1996.
Leadership Conference Education Fund 
National Church Arson Task Force, "Interim Report of the President," January 1997.
Jim Nesbitt, "Hate Crimes as American as Pie, Experts Call "isms" Deeply Rooted," New Orleans Times-Picayune, June 16, 1996.
Peter Steinfels, "Beliefs," New York Times, October 19, 1996.
[justice.gif] Judiciary Homepage
