The Statement of Rev. Earl W. Jackson, Sr.,
National Liaison for Community Development,
Christian Coalition
Mr. Chairman and members of the Committee, thank you for inviting me to appear before you today.
The enactment of the Church Arson Prevention Act of 1996 is very important to us as a country and to me personally.
The desecration of churches prohibits individuals from practicing the most basic freedom for Americans, the right to worship.
I appreciate that the U.S. Congress is overseeing the implementation of this act at this early juncture.
It was almost one year ago when I first testified before this distinguished committee to discuss the rash of church arsons.
Thanks to the leadership of Chairman Hyde and Ranking Minority Member Conyers, Congress approved the Church Arson Prevention Act of 1996 which will facilitate federal prosecution of these acts of violence.
Such swift and certain action of the part of Congress sent a clear message that such attacks on religious houses will not be tolerated.
Following the decisive legislative action, Christian Coalition stepped up its own efforts to ease the suffering of the pastors and parishioners who lost their churches to arson.
On June 18, 1996, Christian Coalition held a summit in Atlanta, Georgia and called together many pastors of firebombed churches from across the nation to identify other solutions to put a halt to these attacks.
Also invited were representatives from the National Association for the Advancement of Colored People and the Anti-Defamation League.
At that summit, we launched a broad campaign against bigotry and announced the establishment of the "Save the Churches Fund," a special fund at the Christian Coalition to provide financial assistance to churches that needed to be rebuilt.
In addition to financial assistance, the fund would be used to provide building security to include such items as motion detectors, alarms, floodlights and smoke detectors for churches that have been or could be targets of arson.
We subsequently sent an appeal to our church network and requested a special collection for "Racial Reconciliation Sunday" to raise an estimated $1 million to go directly toward rebuilding burned and bombed churches.
I am very pleased to report to this committee that to date, we have awarded $850,000 toward our goal of giving grants totaling $1 million which has helped more than 40 churches.
On October 17, 1996, members of the Christian Coalition met on the grounds of a burned church in Richmond, Virginia to begin the distribution of the generous donations collected during the summer and fall to help restore or rebuild many firebombed churches.
The ceremony at the Glorious Church of God in Christ in Richmond included a presentation of $25,000 to Elder Morris Mahoney to help rebuild that church.
The in kind and financial gifts enabled us to help churches with grants from $5,000 to $25,000.
In Texas we helped the Holy Cross Church of God in Christ, pastored by Reverend Vernon Reed, with a grant of $25,000.
Rev. Vernon Reed recently told me that his congregation's church is virtually rebuilt and they have a new spirit and appreciation of community activism.
This is due to the rebuilding of their church and their partnership with the evangelical churches that provided support.
Pastor Brenda Stevenson, of New Outreach Christian Center in Charlotte, North Carolina, who on Monday met with the Speaker of the House of Representatives, indicated that the grants gave her church a new hope and opened the door to new opportunities.
These relationships that were forged out of the destruction of her church have opened the door to create new friendships with churches that were otherwise not present.
These two examples illustrate that while churched burned and the physical churhc was ruined, the spiritual church came back stronger than before the desecration.
Both churches have now incorporated faith-based community outreach programs to aid their neighborhoods, and have started a spirit of Samaritism that is spreading throughout this country.
I commend the Congress for passing The Church Arson Prevention Act of 1996.
This act brought attention to the issue of church burnings.
I now call on Congress to show the same initiative not only to protect the structural integrity of churches, but also to revitalize the church as the focal point of the community.
The bill sponsored by Congressmen J.C. Watts, Floyd Flake and Jim Talent (H.R. 1031, the Community Renewal Act) is an excellent step in this direction.
The Christian Coalition recognizes the need to strengthen churches and rebuild neighborhoods as well.
We launched the Samaritan Project in January 1997 to help faith-based organizations and churches in poor and minority communities.
Revitalization of the church is a key aspect in returning the proper sense of honor, self worth and morality to families and communities in this country.
Over the past three decades our government has weakened the role of the church in American society.
This must no longer continue if we are going to reduce the downward trend of immoral behavior that is victimizing our youth and demoralizing the citizens.
The negative statistics of children of poor and minority communities are almost to the point where the negative is about to consume the positive.
I encourage this committee to explore ways to help the growth of families, churches, and communities.
A good starting point would be to remove the restraints that may prevent places of worship from fully serving their communities.
Luke 10:33,34 states "But a certain Samaritan, who was on a journey, came upon him; and when he saw him he felt compassion."
It continued, "And came to him, and bandaged up his wounds, pouring oil and wine on them; and he put him on his own beast, and brought him to an inn, and took care of him."
This statement is the basis for the Samaritan Project.
The problems that are ravishing our communities are not isolated to just poor and minority communities.
It is an American problem.
As we are working to reduce the size of the bureaucracy, we must look toward new or existing initiatives that already help individuals where the government has not or cannot.
These programs, faith-based and private, alreadly exist but in many cases lck the financial support or have government regulators needlessly interfering with their efforts.
I encourage this committee and your colleagues on other committees to take the following actions to help churches rebuild their communities.
The passage of a Charitable Tax Credit would enable the citizens of the nation to provide greater support for community-based service organizations.
This will create a greater community bond and reduce the burden placed upon the federal government for solving community problems.
This past Thursday while in Houston, I met with Carol and Hurt Porter to discuss her community-based program called "KidCare."
This is a program that feeds hungry children throughout Houston every day of the week.
Mrs. Porter, with the aid of her husband, feeds approximately 20,000 children a MONTH.
This program that receives its money from charitable gifts would grow if more individuals could help with financial support.
The Charitable Tax Deduction enables individuals to do so.
As a transition toward a new way of providing for those in need, we must offer effective programs that will teach individuals how to make the transition from dependent to independent.
In Houston, Texas, Women off Welfare, led by Renea Gray, a recent recipient of a grant from the Samaritan Project, does not receive money from the government.
This is just one example of a community-based program that is working effectively to move women from dependency on welfare to an independent lifestyle.
Specific community programs are more effective than government programs at removing people from the ailments of society.
This program and many others are in dire need of donations, and a charitable tax deduction would enable them to obtain necessary funding
The Congress must also work to reduce the governmental intrusions and prohibitions which face many faith-based organizations and churches when they attempt to serve poor communities.
For example, government regulators require that many individuals who are serving these communities have multiple graduate degrees and meet other requirements, although their programs are working without these requirements.
Many faith-based programs are effectively working to get individuals off welfare and out of criminal elements.
We recommend that the Congress conduct oversight hearings to review government obstacles to effective private, faith-based programs.
We have found that the programs that are successful are working because they understand that you cannot simply provide work for a former recipient of AFDC or a reformed gang member.
You must provide the spiritual backing to improve the self-esteem and outlook of the individual.
Without an understanding of who they are spiritually, we are merely creating a temporary solution.
Faith-based programs are effective because they do more than just show individuals how to type, build, or cook.
They show them the way of the Lord.
They encourage the individuals to look within themselves and show them that they can do better with a boost from the Lord, and that the Lord will take care of all willing and able.
Community groups can also take an active role in their neighborhoods.
For example, the faith-based group, Clergy United for the Renewal of East Baltimore, or CURE, works to remove the drug element from neighborhoods, rehabilitate individuals, and provide a safe and communal environment.
The Senior Baptist Church, within CURE, has purchased property in the surrounding neighborhood, to have its congregation return to the neighborhood.
They work to remove the drug-dealers and prostitution from the neighborhood with the hopes of having the good citizens of the neighborhood return to the community.
They have knocked out the negative and have started to rebuild with a positive neighborhood spirit.
Until the Congress: 1) admits that these programs can work and at times with greater success than government programs; and, 2) reduces the regulations that prohibit the efforts of these organizations, we will remain in a holding pattern rather than moving forward.
So I thank the members of this committee for following up on the church burning issue and challenge you to look beyond just the physical renewal of these Churches but beyond.
The Christian Coalition will work to achieve many of the objectives I have outlined here today.
In addition, we will work to provide hope and opportunity scholarships for all students because I believe a key to success in America is education.
We will help communities to create safer environments for both the adults and the children, because nowhere in this country should a child be in danger of playing freely in the park or the front yard.
We will encourage the Congress to allow for tax credits and deductions for charitable giving.
We will encourage others to adopt an attitude of racial reconciliation as this country begins to mold itself to accept different cultures and ethnicities.
Finally, we will work to remove the barriers and discrimination from the mind set of bureaucrats who believe that faith-based organizations are ineffective.
We must begin to work now to prohibit anything that does not effectively allow us to create better neighborhoods, strengthen free enterprise, enrich families, or create a stronger religious framework.
These items are the basic tenets for our existence here in America, and as we work to strengthen these items we strengthen our country.
Thank you Mr. Chairmen and committee members.
God Bless.
[justice.gif] Judiciary Homepage
