Return from Noble Eagle, Page 5 Running Down an Assailant, Page 9 PRSRT STD U.S. Postage PAID Permit #3071 Syracuse, NY
In Memoriam:
Sgt. Heath McMillin
Volume 11, Number 4
July-August 2003
KeepingOur Guard Up Selected NY units return home; others prepare for deployment Guard Times Staff
LATHAM
I
n the six months since the declared end to major combat actions, the New York National Guard has seen troops both return home from Operation Iraqi Freedom and prepare for deployment to support the rebuilding efforts of the coalition.
"The transition from dictatorship to democracy will take time, but it is worth every effort," said President George W. Bush during his address from the USS Abraham Lincoln on May 1, 2003.
"Our coalition will stay until our work is done.
Then we will leave, and we will leave behind a free Iraq," he said.
Hundreds of members of the New York Air National Guard as well as Naval Militia members of the Marine Corps Reserve returned from duties throughout the Middle East this summer even as other Army National Guard units received initial alert orders for mobilization.
"While our families, friends, and communities welcome home our brave men and women of the National Guard, we remain all too aware that this conflict is not yet over," said Maj. Gen. Thomas P. Maguire, The Adjutant General.
"Our nation is at war and we shall continue to provide troops for federal missions still to come," he said.
Other units continue to support the Homeland Security missions for Operation Noble Eagle, with security operations continuing at New York's Air National Guard bases and state active duty service throughout New York City and key power plants in the state.
The sustainment of Guard and Reserve forces for the nation's Global War on Terror is the largest since World War II.
"Our war against terror is a contest of will in which perseverance is power," said President George W. Bush in his State of the Union Address in January of 2003.
"In the ruins of two towers, at the western wall of the Pentagon, on a field in Pennsylvania, this nation made a pledge: Whatever the duration of this struggle, and whatever the difficulties, we will not permit the triumph of violence in the affairs of men -- free people will set the course of history."
The soldiers from the 27th Infantry Brigade's 2nd Battalion, 108th Infantry are expected to mobilize later this fall for deployment to Iraq in 2004.
Other New York National Guard units prepare for possible mobilizations in the new year as part of the nation's rotation of forces throughout Central Command.
1st Sgt.
John Morey sets the example for his soldiers undergoing premobilization readiness checks from B Company, 2nd Battalion, 108th Infantry in Gloversville.
Photo by Staff Sgt. Steven Petibone.
Guard Family Mourns Combat Loss, Page 7
Page 2
Guard Times
July-August 2003
Guard Notes Bush Establishes Medals for Global War on Terror WASHINGTON, D.C.
(American Forces Press Service) -- President Bush issued an executive order establishing two military awards for actions in the global war on terrorism.
The president signed the order March 12 establishing the Global War on Terrorism Expeditionary Medal and the Global War on Terrorism Service Medal.
A White House spokesman said the medals recognize the "sacrifices and contributions" military members make in the global war on terror.
The Global War on Terrorism Expeditionary Medal will be awarded to service members who serve in military expeditions to combat terrorism on or after Sept. 11, 2001.
Operation Enduring Freedom is the prime operation the medal may be awarded for.
Personnel assigned to operations in Afghanistan and the Philippines are examples of service members who will receive the award.
The Global War on Terrorism Service Medal will be awarded to service members who serve in military operations to combat terrorism on or after Sept. 11, 2001.
Operation Noble Eagle is an example of the type of operation the medal may be awarded for.
The awards do not take the place of the Armed Forces Expeditionary Medal, established Dec. 4, 1961, or the Armed Forces Service Medal, established Jan. 11, 1996.
"Any member who qualified for those medals by reason of service in operations to combat terrorism between September 11, 2001, and a terminal date to be determined by the Secretary of Defense, shall remain qualified for those medals," the executive order reads.
"Upon application, any such member may be awarded either the Global War on Terrorism Expeditionary Medal or the Global War on Terrorism Service Medal in lieu of the Armed Forces Expeditionary Medal or the Armed Forces Service Medal."
No one may be awarded more than one of the four medals for service in the same approved expedition or operation to combat terrorism.
No one is entitled to more than one award of the Global War on Terrorism Expeditionary Medal or the Global War on Terrorism Service Medal.
The medals may be awarded posthumously.
DoD and military service officials, including the Coast Guard, are working on provisions to award the medals.
TAG Talk Impact of 9-11 will Guide our Lives for Years to Come It goes without saying what extraordinary times we live in.
And, the citizensoldiers, airmen and women, and sailors and Marines of New York State's military forces, are surely on the cusp of these momentous days.
The facts are that since Sept. 11, 2001, no American has entirely escaped either the physical consequences, or emotional toll, of the terrorist attack on America, the World Trade Center and The Pentagon.
That's monumentally so for members of the U.S. Armed Services -- across-the-board ­ and particularly New York's National Guard.
It was literally a matter of weeks and hours after I was sworn in as your Adjutant General, in August, 2001 , that travail and uncertainty were thrust upon the Guard as a whole, as well as on our professional and personal lives.
The Sept. 11, 2001 terrorist assault on America is still as piercing and poignant to me and so many fellow soldiers today, as it was that crisp, sunny but eventually devastating Tuesday morning.
Though we will collectively have just marked the 2nd anniversary of 9-11, it appears to many of us that we've lived practically a lifetime.
In the succeeding months, since those intense moments when two terrorist hijacked passenger planes careened into the Twin Towers, the United States, in rapid fire order, launched the War on Terrorism, established Homeland Security with Operation Noble Eagle, organized Operation Enduring Freedom, invaded Afghanistan, and successfully toppled the tyrannical Taliban dictatorship from power.
Barely pausing for a reasonable break, U.S. and coalition forces went on in quick fashion to put together Operation Iraqi Freedom, uprooting the nefarious regime of Saddam Hussein, thus setting Iraq on an irreversible course towards representative government and democracy.
Throughout it all, the President and the Department of Defense have counted heavily on the National Guard and reserve force components to augment and power U.S. and coalition combat forces to victory.
Such is likely to continue for the foreseeable future.
In this edition of National Guard Times, readers will find news of successive deployments and redeployments of Guard forces, as they continue to make top of the TV news hours and front page coverage, not only with local and regional media, but state and nationwide as well.
You'll read about the tragic loss of the National Guard's first combat casualty in Operation Iraqi Freedom, Sergeant Heath McMillen, age 29, of Clifton Springs, near
Maj. Gen. Thomas P. Maguire, Jr., The Adjutant General Canandaigua, NY.
The father of three, Sergeant McMillen was patrolling a convoy route 20 miles south of Baghdad with other members of his unit, when an enemy explosive device was triggered next to his humvee.
The blast ripped through the vehicle, mortally wounding Sergeant McMillen, and injuring his comrade, Spc. Brett Goheen of Medina, NY.
Our deepest and heartfelt thoughts and condolences go out to Sergeant McMillen's widow, Kelly, the children, Mom and Dad, the entire family, friends and loved ones.
The truth is that words on occasions like these are woefully inadequate.
You'll examine, also, the return of 230 soldiers of the NYARNG's 1st Battalion, 127th Armor Regiment from their one-year mobilization to support Operation Noble Eagle.
Deployed to federal sites throughout the northeast, the soldiers left behind families, friends and their heavy main battle tanks for security duty such as vehicle searches, patrols and checkpoints.
"Homeland security is teamwork at its finest.
Each of you were on the front lines for families, friends and neighbors," City of Buffalo Mayor Anthony M. Masiello told returning soldiers at the headquarters company arrival ceremony.
Across from this page you'll be reading, too, about Governor George Pataki's signing of the far-reaching Patriot Plan Law, July 3, 2003, at the Lexington Avenue armory in Manhattan.
From a state perspective, and historically speaking, this benefits law is a de facto Magna Carta for National Guard members and reservists throughout New York.
As I proudly stated in the previous issue of the Guard Times, you'd have to go back to the days of Nelson A. Rockefeller (19591974) or Al Smith (1919-1921, 1923-29) to find a Governor even approaching the level of devotion and concern Governor Pataki has provided to his soldiers, airmen, sailors or Marines.
It is an absolute priority of mine to help make the promise and hope of the Patriot Plan a reality for all the troops and their families it is intended to assist!
Deployment Stipends to Continue in New Fiscal Year WASHINGTON, D.C.
(Army News Service) -- Soldiers deployed to high threat areas will continue to receive Imminent Danger Pay and Family Separation Pay when the new fiscal year starts Oct. 1, said Department of Defense officials Aug 15.
In April, Congress authorized an increase in both Family Separation Allowance, from $100 to $250 and Imminent Danger Pay, from $150 to $225.
These increases were part of the FY 03 DoD Supplemental Funding.
This funding was temporary and will expire Sept. 30 at the end of this fiscal year.
If Congress doesn't vote to renew the increases in Family Separation and Imminent Danger Pay, the DoD will use "other authority available to the department to make up for any shortfalls," a DoD press release stated.
This means troops serving in Iraq and Afghanistan will not see a cut in their takehome pay.
"We are not going to reduce their compensation," said David S.C.
Chu, defense undersecretary for personnel and readiness.
Shades of Green at Disney World to Reopen in 2004 ORLANDO, FL (American Forces Press Service) - The refurbished Armed Forces Recreation Center Shades of Green on Walt Disney World Resort won't open until March 1, 2004, instead of the originally planned Dec. 15, 2003, date.
Unexpected construction delays caused officials to move the date back 76 days, according to Peter F. Isaacs, chief operating officer at the U.S. Army Community and Family Support Center.
The Army serves as the executive agent, operating AFRCs for DoD.
The renovation and expansion project that began in April 2002 was driven by high demand that kept the original 288 rooms at or near 100 percent occupancy.
The hotel is financially self-sufficient, and no taxpayer dollars are used in the operations or for the new construction.
When it reopens, there will be 586 new or renovated rooms, 500 new covered parking spaces and 7,500 square feet for special events.
The current room rates of $66 for E-1 through E-5 will only go up $4 to $70.
Other rates are computed on a sliding scale based on rank.
The Armed Forces Recreation Center is open to DoD ID-card holders in all branches of military service: active duty and reserve components, DoD civilians, both military and civilian DoD retirees, and their families.
"The information about our new opening date and reservations is on our web site," said McCrindle, adding, "The best way to make a reservation is to use the Web site as the phones tend to be overloaded."
For more information, access www.shadesofgreen.org or call 1-888-593- 2242.
July-August 2003
Guard Times
Page 3
Patriot Plan Signed Into Law Guard Times Staff of Veterans' Affairs to make health provider informas the nation prepared to celebrate the Fourth tion concerning of July, Governor George E. Pataki joined military-related illmore than a hundred servicemen and women from nesses, available various branches of the United States military at the New to military personYork National Guard's Lexington Avenue Armory to sign nel and their famithe historic "Patriot Plan" into law.
lies via a 1-800 teleThe "Patriot Plan" provides a comprehensive package of phone hotline.
new benefits and enhanced protections for New York's State Family Limilitary personnel and their families.
The plan will assist aison Officers: Ditroops and their families who face potential added exrects the Adjutant penses and disruptions caused by being called to active General to desigduty in the nation's ongoing war against terrorism.
nate Family Liaison "As our nation celebrates the patriots who fought for our New York State Governor George E. Pataki signs the Patriot Plan into law at the Lexington Avenue Armory Officers to assist country's independence, the people of New York are proud on July 3rd, 2003.
With Pataki are (left to right) Maj. Gen. Thomas P. Majuire, The Adjutant General, Brig. families of military Gen. Robert Klein, Commander of the N.Y.
Army National Guard, Brig. Gen. Thomas Barraga of the N.Y. to recognize and support the modern-day patriots who are Guard, N.Y.
State Senator Betty Little, Assemblyman Daniel Hooker and Maj. Gen. Richard Colt, personnel during fighting to defend freedom both at home and abroad," Commander of the 77th Army Reserve Command at Fort Totten.
Photo by Staff Sgt. Steven Petibone. deployments.
Governor Pataki said.
MERIT ScholarUnder the new "Patriot Plan," New York's military personship Program: Provides the children, spouses and depennel called to duty will be eligible for a broad array of new State University campuses and libraries to family members dents of New York military personnel killed or severely and benefits and protections.
The provisions of the Plan inof activated troops.
permanently disabled during the Persian Gulf conflict (retclude: Employer Recognition: Creates a "NY-USA Proud" emroactive to 1990), the war on terrorism or current military Protection against Military Status Discrimination: Exployer of distinction award to recognize companies that action in Iraq with undergraduate awards to cover the cost pands the protections of Human Rights Law to military show exceptional support for Guard and Reserve members.
of attending State or City Universities, or a commensurate personnel to ensure that they are not discriminated against.
Patriot Discount Program: Establishes a voluntary, stateamount to attend a private college or university in New Termination of Vehicle Leases: Permits military personsponsored program for merchants who agree to provide York. nel to terminate a car lease if called to active duty.
reduced price discounts for merchandise and services for Educational Military Leave of Absence and Tuition ReInterest Rate Cap on Installment Loans: Caps rates of all military personnel.
lief: Requires an educational military leave of absence for interest on installment loans at 6 percent while the indiWaive License Fee Renewals: Waives teaching license students called to active duty.
In addition, colleges and vidual is on state active duty.
fees for licenses that lapse during deployment and extends universities would be required to provide a tuition refund Health Insurance Benefits: Directs the Insurance DeEMT and First Responder certifications that expire during or credit to students who are forced to suspend their partment to protect the rights of military personnel to deployment.
Professional licenses and continuing educastudies because of a military leave of absence.
continue, suspend or convert health insurance benefits tion requirements are also extended during deployment.
during periods of active duty.
Also requires the Division Telephone Rates: Requires OGS and DMNA to negotiate School Stability: Children of overseas deployed parents bulk telephone rates on bewill be permitted to remain in same school, without disruphalf of those on active milition for period of deployment.
tary duty and their famiEvictions: Prohibits evictions of a member of a soldier's lies.
family during a period of active duty military service.
Video Conferencing: Extends mortgage foreclosure exemption for those called to Provides for access to active duty from three to six months following deployment.
video conferencing at seInsurance Provisions: Life insurance policies cannot lected sites for families to lapse during period of active deployment or 45 days followcommunicate with their ing return.
loved ones overseas.
Free Hunting and Fishing Licenses: Provides free huntRetirement Loan Repaying and fishing licenses to members of the Guard, Reserve ment: Permits the suspenand state militia.
sion of loan payments for In addition, Governor Pataki has continued via Executive public employees who Order the following provisions: borrowed against their reFree Park Access: Provides free access to state parks for tirement system savings families of reservists and members of the National Guard while on active duty.
and their families.
Electronic Transfer of Supplemental Pay: The Governor expanded the supplePaychecks: Provides that mental military leave program established after 9/11 to paychecks of public emensure that all state officers and employees called to active ployees activated for forduty in the war against terror suffer no loss of salary as a eign deployments will be result of their service.
made by electronic transEditor's Note: At press time, the various state agencies fer if desired.
implementing the Patriot Plan were coordinating the inFree Access to Highstructions for National Guard members to apply for benefits.
Governor Pataki meets with members of the New York National Guard Joint Forces Color Guard Speed Internet: Provides Visit the Division of Military and Naval Affairs website at following the signing ceremony to make the state's Patriot Plan a law.
The Patriot Plan provides free high-speed Internet www.dmna.state.ny.us or contact the Legal Office at (518) comprehensive benefits to New York's military service members to recognize their sacrifice and access at places such as 786-4541 for more information and details. service in the global war on terror.
Photo by Staff Sgt. Steven Petibone.
NEW YORK CITY
A
Page 4
Army National Guard
July-August 2003
Rainbow Leaders Gain Corps Perspective Sgt. 1st Class Corine L. Lombardo HQ, 42nd ID (M)
FORT LEAVENWORTH, KS eaders and soldiers from the 42nd Infantry `Rainbow' Division witnessed first hand the complex battle and staff responsibilities of an Army Corps during recent training at the Battle Command Training Program.
In mid-July, nearly 250 soldiers from the 42nd Inf. Div. deployed to Fort Leavenworth, Kansas for a two-week battle simulation exercise.
The contingent of Rainbow soldiers replicated an Army Corps headquarters and functioned as the higher control and command cell or `HICON' for more than 1,200 soldiers from the Army National Guard's 29th (Light) Infantry Division, Fort Belvoir, Virginia.
The computer simulation exercise, called Warfighter, mirrors the demands of modern warfare and places division leaders and their staff against a "free thinking" opposing force.
The intent is to sharpen planning and coordination skills for combat operations and provide doctrinally based training assistance across all battlefield operating systems and specialties.
The fast paced and high stress environment is designed to demonstrate what combat division staff elements will face while preparing for and conducting contingency operations throughout the world.
Last year more than a thousand members of the Rainbow Division deployed for it's own multi-echelon Warfighter exercise.
"The significant experience we gained last year allowed us to effectively guide the 29th Division through theirs" said Brig. Gen.
L
Vincent Lucenti, 42nd Inf. Div. Deputy Commander for Maneuver, adding, "this is an exceptional example of using all the lessons learned from our own Warfighter."
In addition to traditional combat warfare issues, the soldiers faced other challenges that portray the nature of current Army combat missions: political and ethnic unrest, synchronizing information operations, media on the battlefield, dealing with non-government organizations, handling displaced civilians on the battlefield and coordinating assistance to reestablish a nation's infrastructure.
"Although our primary focus was to support the 29th Infantry Division, the Rainbow took advantage of this opportunity to fine tune our own `cross talk' between staff sections, to ensure information is shared quickly and often," said Col. Mark Heffner, Division Chief of Staff.
"The HICON mission came at a time when the Rainbow was developing new primary staff and formulating cohesive working relationships that will cement the groundwork for our own future deployments," Heffner said.
Brig. Gen. Vincent Lucenti (at left), the 42nd Infantry Division Deputy Commander for Maneuver, presents a Rainbow Division coin and certificate of appreciation to Lt. Gen. Joseph R. Inge.
The Rainbow Division headquarters deployed its soldiers to the Battle Command Training Center at Fort Leavenworth, Kansas in July to provide command and control as a corps headquarters for the Army National Guard's 29th Infantry Division.
Photo by Sgt. 1st Class Corine Lombardo.
The Battle Command Training Center at Fort Leavenworth provides staff training for commanders at the Brigade through Corps level, their staffs, major subordinate commanders and supporting special operations forces.
It provides a framework to conduct highly realistic and stressful combined arms training according to Army doctrine.
Most notably, it replicates uncooperative and adaptive opposing forces that fight to win.
Combined with exercise controllers, trainers and senior observers, the training reflects the challenges of the contemporary operational environment.
"the Rainbow took advantage of this opportunity to fine tune our own `cross talk' between staff sections, to ensure information is shared quickly and often," Simulating the higher command at this year's Warfighter provided Rainbow soldiers with an opportunity to experience the comprehensive obligations that U.S. Army Corps' sustain during combat operations.
"With the large number of mobilizations and real-world deployments facing the Rainbow in 2004 and beyond, this training marks our first steps for training and preparation," Heffner said.
Representatives of every 42nd Division Headquarters Staff receive congratulations from the First U.S. Army Commander, Lt. Gen. Joseph R. Inge.
Inge served as the Corps Commander during the exercise, with soldiers from the 42nd Division supporting as the corps staff.
Photo by Sgt. 1st Class Corine Lombardo.
July-August 2003
Army National Guard
Page 5
From 60 Tons of Steel to 6 Pounds of Kids 127th Armor Leaves Tanks at Drum and Returns to Families By Maj. Richard Goldenberg HQ, 42nd ID (M)
BUFFALO ith hundreds of enthusiastic family members waiting, soldiers from the Rainbow Division's 1st Battalion, 127th Armor Regiment returned home from their one-year mobilization to support Operation Noble Eagle on Thursday, July 31st.
The 230 soldiers, more than half of the battalion's total strength mobilized one year ago for homeland security missions.
Deployed to federal sites throughout the northeast, the soldiers left behind families, friends, and their heavy main battle tanks for the security duties of vehicle searches, patrols, and checkpoints.
W
"Each of you were on the front lines for families, friends and neighbors" "Homeland security is teamwork at its finest.
Each of you were on the front lines for families, friends and neighbors," Buffalo Mayor Anthony M. Masiello told returning soldiers at the headquarters company redeployment ceremony.
"You allowed us to maintain our ability to work and live our lives in safety."
"There are really two great stories here," said Major Burch, the acting battalion commander.
"One is the completion of our mission for the Army and the Nation, but the other is the reunion today with our families who supported us during this deployment," he said.
Every company in the 127th Armor deployed soldiers for the security mission.
Troops manned security check-
points, provided quick reaction forces and conducted local security patrols.
"We all have a role to play and sometimes it doesn't seem all that significant when you are there on the ground," said Sgt. Timothy Makai from A Company, "but every role in the war on terror is pivotal."
The National Guard soldiers spent nine months of service at locations such as the U.S. Military Academy at West Point, the U.S. Army's War College at Carlisle Barracks, the Army's Picatinny Arsenal and the Letterkenny Army Depot.
Spc.
John Mateer holds his baby daughter Haley following the redeployment ceremony for the Headquarters Company, 1st Battalion, 127th Armor Regiment in Buffalo on July 31st.
The battalion returned from their nine month long deployment for Operation Noble Eagle.
At left, M1 Abrams Main Battle Tanks from A Company based in Dunkirk conduct field maneuvers at Fort Drum.
The tank training was to reestablish the unit training program for the battalion's armor crews.
Below and bottom left, members of the 1127th celebrate their family reunions as part of the battalion's release from active duty.
More than 200 members of the armor battalion provided security assistance to key Army installations across the northeast since last year.
Photos by Major Richard Goldenberg.
"I could not have asked for more from any of our soldiers and their leaders," Burch said in his remarks.
They all returned to their home armories in Buffalo, Dunkirk, Jamestown, Olean and Ithaca from recent training in July at Fort Drum.
The battalion consolidated at Fort Drum for more than four weeks of intensive training to refamiliarize the tank crews with their primary role, armored warfare.
The companies rotated between field training and simulator training to refresh their armor skills.
"Really, this just came back easily," said Spc. Brian Laskey, a tank driver with 2nd Platoon, A Company.
"Just like riding a bike," he said.
Staff Sgt. James Robinson, also with A Company, agreed.
"We really needed to just jump back into it," he said about the training.
"The support of families and employers over the past year made this deployment successful," Burch added.
"Family life, now that will be a real good thing," echoed Sgt. Kevin Black from C Company.
Page 6
Army National Guard
July-August 2003
Orion to Mobilize Soldiers for Iraqi Freedom 27th Brigade Troops to Join National Guard Brigades in Iraq Rotation Guard Times Staff
SYRACUSE
L
ight Infantry soldiers from the 27th Enhanced Separate Infantry Brigade began planning for a possible battalion-sized mobilization later this year as part of the Army's troop rotation in Iraq.
Announced in late July by General Jack Keane, the Acting Chief of Staff of the Army, the Orion soldiers will deploy as part of the mobilization of two Army National Guard brigades for duties overseas.
The two brigades from the Army National Guard, totaling 10,000 soldiers, will deploy to Iraq next year to support two active Army divisions earmarked to replace troops now engaged in Operation Iraqi Freedom next spring, according to Keane.
The 30th Infantry Brigade from North Carolina and the 39th Infantry Brigade from Arkansas have been alerted and "may participate in the Army unit rotation plan for Operation Iraqi Freedom," the Army announced July 26.
"We intend to alert, mobilize, train and deploy for operations and then re-deploy" The 27th Brigade similarly received alert notices for two of its infantry battalions to prepare for any possible mobilization.
Soldiers of the 2nd Battalion, 108th Infantry Regiment and 1st Battalion, 105th Infantry began reviewing soldier records and conducting prescreening of individuals for mobilization later this year.
Individual armories across the state began soldier readiness checks and records reviews to identify the most likely soldiers for deployment.
The brigade's third infantry battalion, the 1st Battalion, 108th Infantry is currently supporting federal mobilizations for Operation Noble Eagle and providing soldiers for homeland security duties in the state.
The two brigades are part of the Army's plan to replace units anxious to return to their homes after leading coalition forces to victory over the regime of Saddam Hussein and to maintain the force required to stabilize that country.
"We intend to alert, mobilize, train and deploy for operations and then re-deploy," said Gen. Jack Keane, the acting Army Chief of Staff, during a briefing to reporters July 23.
"The entire deployments (for these brigades) from alert to redeployment and return to home station will last up to eighteen months."
The Orion soldiers from New York will augment Army National Guard troops from North Carolina's 30th Brigade.
A battalion from the Oregon Army National Guard's 41st Infantry Brigade will augment the 39th Brigade.
One brigade would deploy with the 1st Cavalry Division sometime between February and April of 2004 to replace the 1st Armored Division that is currently serving around Baghdad.
The other brigade would deploy with the 1st Infantry Division sometime during March or April to replace the 4th Infantry Division that is serving in northern Iraq.
The two Guard brigades would be replaced by two other Army Guard enhanced separate brigades "based on the needs of the theater," Keane said.
The intent of the National Guard brigades deployment is to sustain the level of forces that Gen. John Abizaid, the
U.S. Central Command's commander, needs to continue operations in Iraq, Keane added.
Ground forces in Iraq currently total 156,400, including 133,300 members of the active Army, the Army National Guard and the Army Reserve.
Another 34,000 Army troops are in Kuwait.
All told, 15 of the Army Guard's 45 battalions from the enhanced separate brigades have been deployed overseas during this fiscal year that began last October, and 74,551 of the Army Guard's soldiers are currently deployed around the world.
That is 21 percent of the Army Guard's 352,000 citizen-soldiers.
"These deployments mark the Army's most ambitious use of National Guard brigade-size elements since World War II, when three infantry regiments from Washington state, California and Georgia, were used to round out three Army divisions," said Maj. Les Melnyk, an Army Guard historian.
The 27th Division, then a New York Army National Guard division, also mobilized for service just prior to World War II.
The 27th Division saw extensive combat service in the Pacific, with the Guard soldiers serving on active duty for
operations next year in Bosnia and Kosovo.
Rainbow soldiers from New York, Vermont and New Jersey will fill those force requirements in 2004-05.
An additional Rainbow battalion from Kentucky is scheduled to serve in the Sinai in 2004 while other Guard soldiers from the 42nd Division deploying to Europe and Guantanamo Bay for security force missions.
The enhanced separate brigades date from the 1993 Bottom-Up Review conducted by the Defense Department.
The primary mission of the National Guard's enhanced brigades is to deploy on short notice and destroy, capture or repel enemy forces, using maneuver and shock effect.
The mobilization of troops of the 27th Enhanced Separate Infantry Brigade occurs as the unit prepares some of its subordinate units for transformation.
This fall, soldiers from the 1st Battalion, 156th Field Artillery began conversion as part of new units in the New York Army National Guard.
Some of the Field Artillery troops were reflagged as new members of the Rainbow Division's 1st Battalion, 258th Field
Two North Carolina Army National Guard soldiers with the 30th Infantry Brigade, train to blow a hole in a barbed wire obstacle with inert Bangalore torpedoes at the Army's National Training Center, Fort Irwin, Calif.
The 30th Brigade, along with the Oregon Army National Guard's 41st Infantry Brigade were identified bythe Army for deployment to Iraq in 2004.
Light infantry soldiers from the 27th Enhanced Separate Infantry Brigade's 2nd Battalion, 108th Infantry Regiment are also preparing for federal mobilization with the 30th Infantry Brigade later this year.
Both Army Guard units will roundout active duty Army Divisions as part of the scheduled rotation of troops to Iraq next year.
The soldiers are expected to serve in Iraq for up to twelve months, with additional federal service spent in predeployment training.
Photo by Master.
Sgt.
Bob Haskell.
some six years before returning home in 1945.
The 27th Division was the longest serving National Guard Division during World War II.
In addition to the Guard presence in Central Command, Army Guard brigades from the 42nd Infantry Division, based in Troy, New York are scheduled to conduct peacekeeping
Artillery while others joined the newly formed 1st Battalion, 101st Signal Battalion.
Other brigade units will undergo similar transformations in the years ahead.
Editor's Note: Master Sgt.
Bob Haskell, a journalist with the National Guard Bureau, contributed to this article.
July-August 2003
Army National Guard
Page 7
Military Police Soldier Killed in Iraqi Ambush Veteran NCO is NY National Guard's First Combat Casualty since Korean War By Lt. Col. Paul Fanning Guard Times Staff At the request of Kelly McMillin to honor her late husband's memory and his dedication to military service, he New York Army National Guard suffered its first a military funeral was provided with full honors.
The combat casualty in more than 50 years following an military honor detail included members of the New York ambush in Iraq on July 27.
Army National Guard and the U.S. Marine Corps ­ in honor Sergeant Heath McMillin, age 29 and father of three from of Sgt. McMillin's Marine Corps service.
Military honors Clifton Springs, was patrolling a convoy route 20 miles were rendered at the arrival of the sergeant's body at the south of Baghdad with other members of his unit, the 105th Rochester International Airport and subsequent escort to Military Police Company, when an the Patrick-Halstead funeral home in explosive device was triggered Manchester.
Military honor guards were next to his humvee.
The blast posted at the funeral home entrance and ripped through the vehicle, mornext to the coffin during the viewing hours tally wounding McMillin and infor the family and later to the public.
There juring Spec.
Brett Goheen from was a military escort to St. Mary's Church Medina. in Canandaigua where the funeral was "The vehicle was in bad shape," held with military pallbearers, a color guard, said Sgt. Fred Salber, a member of and honor guard lining the steps, and then McMillin's platoon, a friend and onto St. Rose Cemetery in Shortsville, former civilian co-worker of where a full firing party from the Guard McMillin's sister-in-law back in rendered a salute and an Army Reserve Canandaigua.
Salber was called musician played taps.
A "missing man" up with McMillin and the rest of helicopter fly over was also provided from the unit in January as part of Opthe Guard's Rochester-based flight facileration Iraqi Freedom and both ity.
The colors were folded and presented were team leaders.
Salber was later to Sgt. McMillin's widow by The Adjuchosen by the unit commander to tant General following the presentation of accompany Sgt. McMillin's body the Army Purple Heart and Bronze Star home for the funeral on August 4.
medals.
"After the blast, Belliard was able The funeral at St. Mary's Church was to drive the vehicle for a couple of crowded to the point of overflowing.
Parhundred meters with all the tires ticipating officials included Governor flat, just to get out of the kill zone," George Pataki, Maj. Gen. Thomas Maguire, said Salber.
Specialist Anthony The Adjutant General, Maj. Gen. Donald Belliard, a Rochester police ofRyder, the Commanding General of the Members of the New York National Guard's military forces honor guard join with family members to farewell ficer, normally drives Salber's Sgt. Heath McMillin at his funeral service in Canandagua, New York.
McMillin was killed in an ambush while Army's Criminal Investigation Command serving with the 105th Military Police Company in Iraq.
Photo by Lt. Col. Paul Fanning. humvee.
On that day he switched from Fort Belvoir, VA and Col. Emory with McMillin's regular driver, Helton, the 10th Mountain Division garriSpec.
Pedro Quinones, who is also son commander at Fort Drum.
There were many other Guard Full Military Honors from Rochester.
After coming to a stop, the humvee that officers, NCOs and enlisted members who joined the hunwas behind them rushed forward and the soldiers immediThe McMillin family learned of the tragedy from an active dreds of area veterans, civic leaders, family members of ately began to care for McMillin.
duty Army Casualty Notification Officer appointed by Fort other deployed National Guard members from the 105th MP "Even though he was wounded with a burst eardrum and Drum.
A Casualty Assistance NCO from the New York Company and other units and members of the community shrapnel in his side, Goheen stayed in the turret at his Mark Army National Guard from Rochester was appointed to who attended the funeral.
19 (grenade launcher) providing security, monitoring his help the family.
"We knew that you would want to handle During his funeral address, Governor Pataki referred to sector, and calling out for others to check Sergeant Mack," this support because the deceased was one of your own," Sgt. McMillin as a quiet hero, as one of the courageous said Salber.
Finally, Goheen was ordered down and the said Lt. Col. Bryan Hilferty, the 10th Mountain Division and members of the Guard he had called to state active duty on medics examined him.
"Mack was already gone," he added.
Fort Drum installation public affairs officer.
Capt. Mike 9-11, 2001 to go to New York City while others "were leaving Fowler, the unit commander in Iraq called Kelly McMillin in fear."
The Governor posthumously awarded the New A Real Pro to convey sympathy, to explain what had happened and York State Medal of Valor to Sgt. McMillin and presented answer questions.
Fowler is a deputy sheriff from Monroe Sergeant Heath McMillin had joined the New York Army the medal to his wife at the church on behalf of the State of County.
Calling the family was his idea and something he National Guard after four years of active duty in the Marine New York.
felt he had to do.
"His call helped a lot," said Kelly.
"Hearing Corps.
Like all others from his unit, McMillin was called up "What makes this country great is the brave men and what happened from him meant a lot to me and the other following the terrorist attacks on 9-11 at the World Trade women of our country who put on the uniform," said the family members," she said.
Center in New York and served two weeks of state active Governor.
"We will never forget him.
We will always honor Governor George Pataki also called Kelly to express his duty there.
his memory," he said.
sympathy and his gratitude for Sgt. McMillin's service to "He was very proud of his time in the Marine Corps and Sgt. McMillen is survived by his father Mark and stepthe state and to the nation.
There were other calls from he joined the Guard to continue his service," said Kelly mother Deborah, his mother Etta LaMott and her longtime members of New York's congressional delegation.
The McMillin, Heath's wife.
"That is him.
He really cared about companion Ray Croteau, his wife Kelly Crowley McMillen messages of sympathy, the support from friends in the serving, and when 9-11 happened, he just went forward like and three children Mary, age seven from Phelps, Robert, community and, even though the family declined most all the rest."
age three from California and Michael, 11 months.
Sgt. press invitations for interviews, the news stories in area "Mack was in good shape.
He always was athletic, and McMillen also had four siblings, brothers Jason and John newspapers and television news programs were well rehe was especially good with the younger troops," said from Clifton SPrings and Lyons and sisters Jennifer McMillen garded by family members.
Salber.
"He developed them, taught them discipline and from Rochester and Cassie Sabatino of Maine.
SOUTH OF BAGHDAD, IRAQ
T
skills and gave them confidence.
He was absolutely loyal and didn't mince words.
He would say what he needed to, and when he needed to.
He had a calming affect on the nervous and was a good instructor.
He was especially good on the guns," he added.
"When the patrol and the medics' vehicle got back to camp, word got around fast about what had happened.
We were shocked, all of us," said Salber.
Page 8
Army National Guard
July-August 2003
Humble Heroes Take Center Lane Story and photos by Tech.
Sgt. Paul Dean 107th Air Refueling Wing Judging from the applause the 865th generated along the parade route, the shadow is now as small as one cast by a ilitary road sidewalks in Niagara Falls took a pinhead at high noon. drenching of red, white and blue Aug. 16 - people Joanne Reagan of Niagara Falls stationed herself, with three of her friends, about midway along the parade route from Western New York and beyond were - wearing a quirky variation of a Colonial Militia style hat, showering local military members and their families with thanks.
in fuzzy velour, blazoned with the American flag.
The sky Giving up on efforts to dampen the excitement, a heavy, was sweating all over Joanne and her friends, but they just dribbling sky was no match for the horns, whistles, sirens kept smiling - determined to show their support.
and cheers carrying the gratitude of civilian military sup"I couldn't be more proud of these people.
Every last one porters young and old.
of them.
There should be more of this kind of thing, and I'm Balloons struggling in thick, humid air; candy scattering so glad that so many came out for it," she said.
Joanne's enthusiasm was contagious, humbling many of here and there - thrown from handsome floats to children the people representing their units in the parade.
"I'm not and those with a sweet tooth alongside the traveling salute, and flags of all sizes dancing about in triumph.
It was one used to this kind of welcome," said Air Force Capt. Robert of the biggest parades Niagara Falls ever saw, according Ruminski, 914th AW Aeromedical Squadron.
"I feel kind of out of place, but I'm glad that it gives the public a chance to 107th Air Refueling Wing Community Manager Maj. to say a bit of a thank you," he added.
Barry Griffith.
The chance to say thank you stretched over quite a distance.
More than a mile upstream from the beginning of the parade route, as lead vehicles were arriving at the reviewing stand, so many groups and organizations had pledged support that many of them were still waiting for their cue to march.
The parade was not only for the members of the local units.
An important theme was public recognition of military families.
Intermingled with men and women in BDUs, husbands, wives, children and pets joined their loved ones, as all were applauded for sacrifices on behalf of their neighbors.
Sean McKinney looked forward to marching with his father, Air Force Maj. Kevin Rogers, 107th ARW.
"I just think Representing the 914th AW, Air Force Capt. Robert Ruminski (left) is joined by fellow that it's great that everyone's back and members of the wing, Capt. Ted Nadelen (center) and Tech.
Sgt. Ron Nowasell. that I have my dad around to talk to again," Sean said.
The Niagara Military Affairs Council, local government Karen, who's "just glad to see him home," was marching officials and area businesses who coordinated the "Homewith her husband, Air Force Master Sgt. Tom McGuire, town Heroes Parade" were responsible for creating an 107th ARW, and their two sons: Michael and Patrick.
atmosphere where nothing but good things could happen.
Michael is happy that his father is home because "I missed Service men and women -- and their families -- from the building models and playing football with him," he said.
New York Air National Guard's 107th Air Refueling Wing The event was red, white and blue ­ a color scheme not (ARW), the Air Force Reserve's 914th Airlift Wing (Niagara only favored by Americans - it's a blend also appreciated Falls Air Reserve Station); and the Army Reserve's 865th by Canadian supporters of the U.S. military in general, and Combat Hospital Unit (CHU) and 277th Quartermaster Company, Niagara Falls, were all standing tall, accepting the acclaim with dignity, grace and humility.
Center stage (lane) and front of the pack was offered to the hometown heroes as a token of thanks; leading a column of citizen-patriots between lanes of Americana was their honor.
"It's so great to see the city do this, not only for those of us who went over, but also those serving here - and their families," said Army Sgt. 1st Class Delcey Pulvino, 865th CHU.
"We're all one big family.
We all did this together.
I'm glad that we're here together and that the people appreciate us," she added.
Army Sgt. 1st Class Gordon Stewart, also of the 865th CHU, agreed with Pulvino; happy that their Army Reserve unit was included in the parade.
"We're usually in the shadow of the 107th and get overlooked.
Many people don't know Families of local military supporters made sure children had that we're [in Niagara Falls] but this seems like a great plenty of patriotic attire so that everybody could join the festivities affair," he said.
during the Hometown Heroes Parade in Niagara Falls.
NIAGARA FALLS AIR RESERVE STATION
M
Leading the formation of airmen and soldiers, the honor guard of the 107th ARW stays in step.
Organizations from all across the area marched in the parade to support the members and families of local military units.
the Western New York men and women in particular.
Joe and Donna Muskat traveled to Niagara Falls from St. Catharines, Ontario, specifically for the parade.
"Americans are the most important people when it comes to freedom.
We have to honor that, appreciate it and show our support," Joe said.
"Americans don't just `think' about things.
You go out and do it ­ take action.
We're really proud of everything these people have done," added Donna.
Bonnie Isaacs of Niagara Falls was echoing the Muskat's sentiments.
Her message to the men and women of the military community: "We love you all.
God bless you.
We're so proud of you," she said.
As hundreds of people, vehicles and floats were passing the reviewing stand at the end of the parade route, visiting military dignitaries joined in the chorus of support for the 914th, 107th, 865th and 277th.
Air Force Maj. Gen. James Bankers, 22nd Air Force commander; Air Force Brig. Gen. William Racjcak, deputy to the Chief of Staff of the Air Force Reserve, and Air Force Col. Robert Knauff, New York Air National Guard Chief of Staff, each waving to, applauding and saluting those who were saluting them.
"This is one of those true hometown community events, which shows that the [military] is absolutely a part of this community.
You don't see that in many places," said Knauff.
"It shows how much support there is around here for military organizations," he added.
As the tail of the parade passed the reviewing stand, people were folding chairs and tucking away umbrellas.
Children were holding balloons with fierce grips and police were removing barriers, opening the busy commercial street for the Saturday shopping crowds.
The Niagara Region civilian community, well known for giving so much support to the local military community, had done a great thing.
July-August 2003
Air National Guard
Page 9
Call to Action Answered: Values prompt guardsman to save life, thwart home invasion Story and photos by Tech.
Sgt. Paul Dean 107th Air Refueling Wing Public Affairs Office "I wouldn't have left her.
If I'm willing to lay down my life for my country then why wouldn't I do it for a neighbor?" Cox said.
ater crashed over the honeymooners' falls just As Cox chased Carlisle down, talking to a Niagara Falls a few hundred yards upstream.
A man was in the Police dispatcher on her cell phone at the same time, she middle of the Niagara River, darkness falling saw Carlisle look back a couple of times.
"I could see the over him and the swift current, which carried a 48-degree fear in his eyes.
I realized that he was a punk and I wasn't chill through him, possibly numbing the pain of the bangs going to let him get away with what he had done," Cox said.
and bruises suffered as he crashed down the walls of the The chase had started at Cross' house several minutes gorge. earlier.
Cox was getting some things out of her car across Friday the 13th of June wasn't going as planned for Steven the street from Cross' house and heard a scream.
Another Carlisle, but after being chased off of a cliff and into the scream seconds later called her to action.
"It was a terrible river, he probably thought the worst was over and that he scream.
It was horrifying," Cox said.
was close to getting away.
But the person on the rim of the Cox darted toward the neighbor's house.
"I turned gorge had other plans.
She held a cell phone high above around about half way across the street though.
I had a her head, allowing law enforcement officers across the funny feeling, you know, a really scary feeling," she said.
gorge to pinpoint Carlisle's location in the water directly She grabbed her cell phone, turned around again, and below.
headed for the screams.
Looking in the screen door of her The person with the cell phone was the same one who neighbor's house, she saw Cross on her knees and Carlisle interrupted Carlisle as he allegedly assaulted an elderly was strangling the elderly woman.
woman during an alleged home invasion.
It was the same Cox's presence startled Carlisle and he fumbled with a person who chased him more than three blocks, hurdling statement that Cross owed him money.
Cox didn't believe guardrails, across a busy main street, talking on the cell Carlisle, and Cross screamed as best she could how Carlisle phone as she closed the distance.
was trying to rob and kill her.
Cox dialed the 9-1-1 disSenior Airman Tina Cox, an administrative journeyman patcher, and tried to block Carlisle's exit from the house.
with the 107th Air Refueling Wing in Niagara Falls, was The two neighbors were aware each other prior to June teaching Carlisle about Air Force core values as she bore 13th, but had never spoken.
"I knew she was in the military.
down on him.
"I really think that the `service before self' I had seen her in her uniform," Cross said.
"Thinking back part of core values played a big part in what I did," she said.
to that night, I remember thinking that it was like a dream Cox was undaunted by the differences in physical stature when I saw Tina at the door.
I felt such a strong positive between her and the alleged assailant: she is 5' 7", 130 presence," she added.
pounds; he is 6 foot, 180 pounds, with a muscular build.
With Cox at the door, screaming for an explanation, Carlisle obviously knew that it was time to leave Cross' house - he had already broken two of her ribs.
"He barged his way past me and started to walk down the block.
I started to follow him so that I could give the police a description," Cox said.
Then he started to run so I kicked off my slippers and gave chase.
"I don't like when people do [bad] things and then get away with it.
This guy couldn't get away with this and just disappear into the night.
I wanted him caught," she added.
With darkness falling, it was 8:30 p.m., and with only socks on her feet, Cox stayed on Carlisle's heels until he went over the edge of the gorge and police arrived.
Her four years of high school track and field had paid off.
This isn't the first time that Cox aided a Senior Airmen Tina Cox (left) and Joanna Blackburn look down into the victim.
Just a week earlier, Cox and Senior Niagara River Gorge.
Cox chased a home invasion suspect into the gorge Airman Joanna Blackburn, assigned to the and the river June 13 and is credited with saving the life of the home invasion victim.
The suspect spent the first several days after the alleged crime in the 107th Aerial Refueling Wing's Logistics Squadhospital after Cox chased him off of a cliff and into the Niagara River.
ron, were in Cox's apartment when they heard screams outside.
A 17-year-old male was pulling his 14-year-old girlfriend's hair.
Cox yelled at him Carlisle's physical presence had demoralized Betty Cross, and he started to run away.
Cox chased him down, gave him the woman he had lifted by the throat, feet off of the floor.
a lecture and made him go back and apologize to the girl.
"As soon as I saw [Carlisle] in my house I knew I was up "That's just how she is," said Blackburn of Cox.
"She against something which would conquer me," Cross said.
doesn't like to see people taken advantage of, she's a really "Thank God [Cox] didn't leave, she could've just walked caring person," she added.
away," she added.
NIAGARA FALLS
W
Senior Airman Tina Cox comforts her neighbor, June 21.
Cox foiled an alleged home invasion and is credited with saving the neighbor's life June 13 as she thwarted an alleged home invasion.
Cross agrees with Blackburn's assessment of Cox and also feels that being in the military has a lot to do with Cox's attitude.
"I'm sure that she is one of those really good people.
But being in the military and having the two parts together gave here what she had to do," Cross said.
Capt. John Soltys, Chief of Detectives for the criminal investigation division of the Niagara Falls Police Department, also gives credit to Cox and her military bearing.
"It's commendable what she has done.
It's great when people get involved in their communities and it shows what can be done when they do," he said.
"I really believe that her commitment to duty went a long way in her choices and decisions to do what she did," he added.
Cox is taking the whole thing in stride.
She has no doubt that she would do the same thing again; has no doubts that she could have acted differently; and is humbled by statements from Cross and the police pointing toward a belief that she probably saved Cross' life and is solely responsible for Carlisle's capture.
"I don't know what to say.
This is the way I was trained - I learned discipline, integrity first, service before self and excellence in all that we do.
I'm positive that my training had a lot to do with what I did," she said.
Note: The victims name has been changed at her request to protect her identity.
The suspect spent the first several days after the alleged crime in the hospital after Cox chased him off of a cliff and into the Niagara River.
As of June 25 the suspect was still in jail awaiting grand jury action for determination of the charges against him.
Page 10
Air National Guard
July-August 2003
Summer Fun at Stratton By Maj. George Alston HQ, 109 AW
STRATTON AIR NATIONAL GUARD BASE, GLENVILLE
M
ore than 30 local area children, ages 8-12, participated in the Galaxy-Hercules program here this summer.
Sponsored by the 109th Airlift Wing's Family Support Office, the Galaxy-Hercules is an annual, free of charge, five-day-long youth camp open to dependents of all Stratton Air National Guard assigned personnel.
Galaxy-Hercules centers and builds on the concept of Dreams plus Action equals Reality.
"Galaxy is an important part of our overall base youth program, and we hope to continue and expand it in the future, said Beverly Keating, the Air Wing's Family Support Coordinator.
The children built and launched model rockets and gliders, flew a flight simulator at Empire State Aerosciences
Children tour the Stratton Air National Guard Base during the Galaxy-Hercules Summer Camp in August.
At right, the youth get hands on experience with video camera equipment in the 109th communications flight television production studio.
Courtesy photos.
Museum and visited the Schenectady Museum where they built solar clocks and star charts.
Additionally, the children toured the Stratton Air Base Fire Department and played with all the "toys" in the TV production studio in Multimedia and in Life Support Sections.
The camp completed its week with a 109th Airlift Wing Honor Guard demonstration and tour of an LC-130 aircraft.
Get Moving: New Air Force PT Test to Debut Next Year Armed Forces Press Network
WASHINGTON, DC eginning next year, Air Force officials will imple ment a new fitness test completely different than what airmen today are familiar with.
The more functional test will include a 1.5-mile timed run, a muscular-fitness test of push-ups and crunches and a body composition test.
It is designed to measure the general health of airmen, said Maj. Lisa Schmidt, chief of health promotions operations at the Air Force Surgeon General's Office.
In many respects, the fitness test will more closely resemble the Army's Physical Fitness Test, which includes push-ups, sit-ups and a timed 2 mile run.
"The goal is to have a healthy, fit force that can deploy at any time," Schmidt said.
"Our goal is to prevent the onset of diseases such as heart attacks, stroke, high-blood pressure and high cholesterol.
Basically, it is about keeping members healthy so they will perform optimally, in-garrison and deployed.
Healthy members are more heat-, stress- and fatigue-tolerant, and less prone to illness and injury."
To measure airmen's overall fitness, Schmidt's office and a panel of health and fitness experts developed a threecomponent measurement system that looks at aerobic fitness, body composition and muscular fitness, she said.
B
"The goal is to have a healthy, fit force that can deploy at any time" An airman's performance in each of the three component areas will earn points.
They can earn a maximum of 50 points on the aerobic portion of the test, 30 points on the body composition portion and 20 on the muscular fitness portion.
The total number of points earned on the fitness test will put the airman into one of four categories: 90 or greater is excellent, 75 to 89.9 is good, 70 to 74.9 is marginal, and less than 70 is poor, Schmidt said.
Airmen at Bolling Air Force Base near Washington, D.C. participate in physical-fitness training.
Their routine, which includes push-ups, crunches and a 1.5-mile run, mirrors the proposed Air Force fitness standards, which will be implemented in January 2004.
U.S. Air Force photo by Master Sgt. Jim Varhegyi.
People scoring marginal on the test will attend a two-hour healthy-living workshop that focuses on improvements to lifestyle behavior, time management and fitness education, Schmidt said.
Intervention for people scoring in the poor category involves the healthy-living workshop, an individualized exercise program and a weight-loss program for those who exceed body fat standards.
It also involves mandatory exercise five days a week, she said.
The test for body composition is still being finalized, but it will measure how much body fat a person has, Schmidt said.
Tests for other components of the fitness standard have already been determined.
A 1.5-mile run will determine aerobic fitness.
Airmen who are not medically cleared to run will take the cycle-ergometry test.
Muscular fitness will be determined by both push-ups and crunches.
Airmen's scores on the new fitness test will also determine how often they need to retest.
People scoring "good" or "excellent" will retest after a year, while those scoring "marginal" will retest after six-months.
Airmen scoring "poor" will retest after 90 days.
Just how many push-ups and crunches airmen will have to do, or how fast they will have to run, has yet to be finalized.
Schmidt's office has developed draft charts for the composite score.
The fitness standards on a draft chart are tailored to both age and gender.
While the draft charts are not available yet, airmen who are not already involved in some sort of exercise program should begin now, Schmidt said.
"If you are not doing anything now and have concerns, see your doctor first," she said.
"Begin slowly with an aerobic-exercise program , working up to at least 30 minutes on most days of the week.
Muscular fitness and flexibility also need to be part of a balanced fitness program.
If you have questions about starting a fitness program, you can contact your local (health and wellness center).
They can help develop a program that's right for you."
July-August 2003
Air National Guard
Page 11
Air Force Announces New Uniform Armed Forces Press Network said.
"This new utility uniform is another example of seeing a need for improvement and moving forward."
ir Force officials announced Aug. 6 plans for the A key step in bringing any new uniform item into service wear test of a new utility uniform to possibly is feedback from airmen in the field, Murray said.
replace the current battle dress uniform.
"I believe it's a uniform fitting of the world's greatest The blue, gray and green tiger-stripe camouflage enexpeditionary Air Force and one that we will be proud to semble is a departure from the current woodland pattern wear," he said.
"We want your feedback as well -- not uniform and includes many new features that are intended shoot-from-the-hip feedback, but feedback that comes to increase functionality and provide a distinctive look for from seeing the uniform in action and thinking about how airmen of the 21st century, officials said.
it will meet your needs based on your work environment.
Three-hundred uniforms will undergo wear testing from "It's important to remember that this is a wear test, and the January to July at Elmendorf AFB, Alaska; Hurlburt Field, decision about whether or not to adopt some, all or none Fla.; Langley AFB, Va.; Luke AFB, Ariz.; McChord AFB, of this uniform will be made after considering the results of Wash.; Ramstein Air Base, Germany; Robins AFB, Ga.; the test and feedback about how it meets airmen's needs," Vandenberg AFB, Calif.; and WrightMurray said.
Patterson AFB, Ohio.
The test will generAccording to officials, the washate feedback about fit, durability and funcand-wear uniform will be easier to tionality. maintain and will not require profes"Our intent is to create a uniform that will sional laundering or starching.
Offibe distinctive, practical, easy to maintain, cials estimate that home laundering comfortable and, most important, a uniwill potentially save between $180 form you will be proud to wear," said Air and $240 in laundry costs over the Force Chief of Staff Gen. John P. Jumper. course of a year.
"We have become a more expeditionary Unlike the current BDU, the new force, with less time at home to spend version comes in men's and women's caring for the uniform," Jumper said.
"In cuts.
The separate women's uniform the last 20 years, material technology has reflects the growth in the number of improved greatly.
As a result, we have women in the service.
In the late 1980s designed one uniform that can satisfy our women comprised less than 13 pervarious climates and utility needs, while cent of the total force; today nearly eliminating the need for professional ironone in five airmen are women.
ing to provide a polished appearance."
Officials said that preliminary study Jumper said the distinctive Air Force shows other possible advantages to Staff Sgt. Daryl Alford dons the test Air uniform is designed to fit well, look sharp the uniform include: Force utility uniform in the Pentagon's and require much less maintenance than -- Using the same fabric identified courtyard.
U.S. Air Force photo by Master Sgt. Jim Varhegyi. the current uniform.
by the Marines as the optimum mate"We (also) need to ensure our airmen rial for wash-and-wear characteristics; have a uniform that fulfills our unique air and space mis-- A camouflage pattern that corresponds to the jobs sions," he added.
airmen do in most situations that require a utility uniform, Chief Master Sgt. of the Air Force Gerald R. Murray, -- Recalling the "tiger-stripe" camouflage pattern used explains that great care is being taken to ensure the best during the Vietnam War, but with the distinctive Air Force possible uniform is created to meet future needs.
logo embedded into a color scheme that preliminary testing "I believe that one of the great strengths of our Air Force indicates may provide better camouflage.
and its airmen is the ability to adapt to new missions, new The uniform patterns are being cut, with production to technologies and an ever-changing world landscape," he begin in November.
Data collection and analysis, and any
WASHINGTON, DC
A
Second Lt. Arcelia Miller, from the Air Force's special security office, puts the Air Force test utility uniform through its paces.
The blue, gray and green tiger-stripe camouflage ensemble includes many new features intended to increase functionality while providing a distinctive look for the 21st century airmen.
The uniforms will undergo wear-testing beginning in January 4.
Airmen from a cross section of Air Force career fields will provide feedback on the fit, durability and functionality of the proposed ensemble which will come in men's and women's cuts.
U.S. Air Force photo by Master Sgt. Jim Varhegyi.
potential adjustments, will occur through October 2004.
A final decision on the uniform is expected in December 2004.
If approved, production could begin as soon as 2005, with a phase-in date to be determined.
Soldiers Hone Skills During Infantry Competition By Senior Airman Mike R. Smith HQ, 109AW
STRATTON AIR NATIONAL GUARD BASE, GLENVILLE
A
ugmentee soldiers assigned to the 109th Security Forces Squadron here recently competed against other soldier teams from Air National Guard bases across the state in rifle marksmanship, land navigation and obstacle course navigation at the New York National Guard Range Complex in Guilderland.
"The purpose of the meet was for us to `get back to our infantry roots' while having a friendly competition and, of course, get valuable training in the process," said Army Sgt. 1st Class Sherwood Scott, Army NCOIC for the Security Forces Squadron augmentee platoon.
Rifle marksmanship included assembly of an M16A2 while blindfolded, with a complete functions check followed by a qualification range.
Soldiers then conducted a daytime land-navigation to locate five terrain points within 2.5 hours, with points awarded for the quickest completion time and number of points found.
Night land-navigation included the simulated treatment and evacuation of an "injured" teammate and move the entire team to a grid location given by the NCOIC.
At their final point, the teams requested medical evacuation of their teammate using the proper procedures.
Points were awarded for proper first aid, navigating during hours of darkness with and without night vision
goggles, returning with the injured soldier and proper use of the 9-line medevac request.
The Obstacle course included using proper bounding and overwatch movements techniques as the soldiers proceeded through the course.
At course completion, the soldiers donned protective masks and were questioned on reporting and calls for fire while they navigated through the course.
The fastest time received the most points.
Scott added that of the eight soldier teams that competed from across the state, the soldiers from the Stratton Air Base placed First, Second and Third in the competition.
"I am very proud of the teams that represented Stratton, it's a tribute to their discipline and dedication to the uniform in which we serve," said Scott.
Page 12
Crushing Rock 204th Engineers, Community Benefit Equally from Stone Quarry By Spc. Jacob Kinne Photos by Maj. Richard Goldenberg 138th MPAD
WINDSOR ncompassed by the stadium-like walls of the Windsor stone quarry, a rusted gravel screening conveyor stands beside a red, tarnished stone crusher that has seen better days.
Defenseless and tattered, the old equipment seems willing to welcome any help and since April, soldiers from Headquarters Company, 204th Engineering Battalion of Binghamton have been doing just that- helping! The 204th installed a new, more heavily equipped rock crusher known as a Crushing/Screening and Washing Plant (CSWP) at the quarry.
The CSWP is a required piece of equipment and is the only National Guard rock crushing system in the northeast.
The CSWP is not intended to replace the town's aforementioned equipment, but rather to assist with overall production of crushed aggregate.
E
use.
It doesn't cost the town anything, but they get a lot back.
We will be able to produce in a weekend what they produced in a month."
By operating the equipment and producing a product, the quarry section will learn to do the intended mission, which is to provide crushed stone and sand to maintain runways, helipads, and main supply routes in a wartime situation.
This quality training was sporadic for the quarry section of the 204th since their 35-ton-per-hour stone crusher became obsolete eight years ago.
"This is the first time that I have been able to operate the quarry equipment since I received training on it," said Spc. Eric Beavers a heavy equipment operator for the 204th Engineer Battalion.
"I will be filling the crusher and driving the water trucks."
The 204th's quarry section and support staff spent a great deal of extra time training on the equipment and preparing the site; sometimes working three weekends a month.
"I think it's great," said Spc. James Burkee, a fuel handler for the 204th Engineer Battalion, peering down at the completed crusher and recalling the exhausting preparations he assisted in.
"This gives me the opportunity to cross-train and satisfaction knowing I am helping the community."
Although the crusher itself is incredible for it's capabilities and it's size, without the support from the community the project would not be possible.
"It's a community function.
It's not one sided- it's a group effort," said Corpin.
The CSWP was purchased from Cedarapids Inc. by TACOM (Tank Automotive 
Mr. David Schwartz, Assistant Program Manager at TACOM, provided invaluable logistical support.
Mr. Norb Sedlak and Mr. Ron Hamilton of Cedarapids Inc. provided the technical expertise and conducted all the training in the setup and operation of the crusher.
Chief Warrant Officer Two Russell Corbin, officer in charge of the quarry site, displays the variety of stone sizes the rock crusher produces.
"This equipment will provide for everything from road and drainage work to concrete and sand production," Corbin said.
The view the stone per hour.
the Town
from the top: the 204th Engineers newest equipment, crusher, can produce nearly 150 tons of crushed rock The unit fielded the stone crusher at a quarry site in of Windsor, New York near the unit's armory.
Within the expansive 20-acre quarry, the $2.5 million stone crusher, together with the loading ramp, measures 390 feet long.
Aiming towards the sky, multiple conveyor belts stem from the main parts of the crusher like spider's legs, sending the finished products to specific stations.
The unit's use of the quarry was made possible through a lease agreement between the Division of Military and Naval Affairs (DMNA) and the Town of Windsor, which was completed in March.
According to Michael Friess, the acting director of Facilities Management and Engineering at DMNA, the duration of the lease is for five years with the possibility of more five-year renewals.
While the agreement did not include any monetary transactions, it stated - with no particular amounts - that the town of Windsor gets use of the engineer's aggregate production.
"It's a trade off," said Staff Sgt.
Marc Robinson, the Quarry Foreman for the 204th Engineer Battalion.
"We are allowed to set up our equipment and train our soldiers and, in return, whatever we produce goes toward the town's
Currently, the town's crusher and washing system only has the ability to produce 40-tons of crushed stone per hour, whereas the 204th's new CSWP system can generate up to 150-tons in the same amount of time.
Twenty-three soldiers of the 204th's quarry section will work at the site on drill weekends and annual training.
Their production will save the town approximately $20,000 in sand and $30,000 in stone, according to Richard Kohlbach, Windsor's Highway Superintendent.
"I think it's going to be a real asset to the town," said Cheryl Peet, the town's highway department clerk.
"It will be a big savings for the tax payers."
As the town will benefit financially from the Guard's presence, the hands-on training soldiers receive will sharpen their military occupational skills (MOS).
Soldiers from the 204th Engineers make adjustments to the unit's Crushing/ Screening and Washing Plant (CSWP) at the Windsor Town Quarry.
New York National Guard Families...Enduring for America's Freedom
Binghamton Region FAC Betty Richmond NYS Armory, 85 West End Ave.
Binghamton, NY 13905-3899 Serving Broome, Chemung, Chenango, Cortland, Delaware, Otsego, Schuyler, Tioga and Tompkins Counties.
Contact Information Office: (607) 729-7735/8191 x19 Fax: (607) 729-8671 SFPO Toll Free 1-877-715-7817
THE S
TATE
FAMILY PROGRAM OFFICE SSISTANCE
ANNOUNCES THE OPENING OF NEW
MILITARY FAMILY A CENTERS
Buffalo Region FAC Roxanne Kryszak NYS Armory, 27 Masten Ave.
Buffalo, NY 14204-1097 Serving Allegany, Cattaraugus, Chautauqua, Erie, Genesee, Niagara, Orleans and Wyoming Counties.
Contact Information Office: (716) 888-5687 Fax: (716) 888-5666 SFPO Toll Free 1-877-715-7817
Rochester Region FAC New York City Region FAC Vacant NYS Armory, 2366 5th Ave.
New York, NY 10037-1097 Serving Nassau, Suffolk, Bronx, Brooklyn, Queens, Manhattan and Staten Island SFPO Toll Free 1-877-715-7817 Jeanna Clark NYS Armory, 250 Weidner Road Rochester, NY 14624-5136 Serving Livingston, Monroe, Ontario, Seneca, Steuben, Wayne and Yates Counties.
Contact Information Office: (585) 783-5310 Fax: (585) 783-5308 SFPO Toll Free 1-877-715-7817
Latham Region FAC Family Program Office NYS Armory, 330 Old Niskayuna Road Latham, NY 12110-2224 Serving Albany, Clinton, Essex, Franklin, Fulton, Hamilton, Montgomery, Rensselaer Saratoga, Schenectady, Schoharie, Warren and Washington Counties.
Contact Information SFPO Office: (518) 786-4774/4656/4614 SFPO Fax: (518) 786-6075 SFPO Toll Free 1-877-715-7817 Charles.Steele@ny.ngb.army.mil Patricia.Jensen@ny.ngb.army.mil Marie.Claus@ny.ngb.army.mil
Orangeburg Region FAC Diane Weeks NYS Armory, 84 Old Orangeburg Road Orangeburg, NY 10962-1198 Serving Columbia, Dutchess, Greene, Orange, Putnam, Rockland, Sullivan, Ulster and Westchester Counties.
Contact Information Office: (845) 359-0626 x11 Fax: (845) 359-6522 SFPO Toll Free 1-877-715-7817 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 7 7 7 7 7 7 7 7 7 7 7 7 7 7 7 7 7 7 7 7 7 7 7 7 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 9 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 8 7 7 7 7 7 7 7 7 7 7 7 7 7 7 7 7 7 7 7 7 7 7 7 7 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 6 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 5 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2 2
Syracuse Region FAC Tammy Hart NYS Armory, 6900 Thompson Road Syracuse, NY 13211-1300 Serving Cayuga, Herkimer, Jefferson, Lewis, Madison, Oneida, Onondaga, Oswego and Saint Lawrence Counties.
Contact Information Office: (315) 438-3058 Fax: (315) 438-3015 SFPO Toll Free 1-877-715-7817
Does your FRG have a website? Send the address to the Family Readiness Office and we'll publish it in this newsletter.
**102nd Maintenance Company in Brooklyn -www.102nd.com 105th MP www.105thmpfamilyreadiness.com 1-156 FA ­ Kingston www.156fa.com 29th PSD ­ Buffalo www.29psdfsg.freeservers.com Co C 2-108IN ­ Gloversville www.geocities.com/frg2108/index HHC 2-108IN ­ Utica, NY www.familyreadiness.net ** new listing
Got a Website to Share?
Please remember that if you do have or are planning to start a website to be aware of the information that you are putting on it.
Do not provide any information about deployments, troop strengths, base and armory security, etc.
If you are approached for this type of information by anyone, notify your unit immediately.
Any questions pertaining to what is permissible should be addressed to your unit representative.
43 10987654321098765432109876543243 43 1 10987654321098765432109876543243 1 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 4 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3 3
1 21098765432109876543210987654321 1 1 21098765432109876543210987654321 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1 1
Starting a Website? Need guidance?
Bringing Brad Home How Family Readiness Steps up for Families in Need Story and photo by Sgt.
Ray Drumsta 138th MPAD
FREDONIA hile Spc. Brad Mcniff was guarding his country, his 6-month old daughter Angelina became a casualty.
Twice.
And each time, the unit's Family Readiness Program responded to a soldier and family's needs.
Family Readiness, working with the Red Cross and his unit, got Brad home in 9 hours twice.
McNiff was deployed from his hometown of Fredonia, New York to the U.S. Military Academy at West Point with A Company, 1st Battalion, 127th Armor Regiment.
The battalion had mobilized one year ago for duty supporting Operation Noble Eagle II, with soldiers performing security missions across the Northeastern United States.
Earlier this year, Angelina's lungs collapsed from a combination of a viral infection and asthma.
The combination was a life-threatening condition which put her in the hospital in western New York.
Dawn Mcniff, Angelina's mother, contacted the company Family Readiness Group to bring McNiff home to assist with his daughter's medical care.
"If she didn't make it, I felt he should be there," Dawn said emotionally.
Sgt. 1st Class James Lemanski, the company Family Readiness Group Coordinator, contacted the Red Cross, who then contacted Brad through his chain of command at West Point.
W
"You had a woman who was distraught and didn't know what to do," said Lemanski.
"That's where Family Readiness comes in."
Dawn said she was "very happy" when Brad walked in to the hospital just hours from her call to the Family Readiness Group.
"I just smiled," she said.
Just 10 days after the first emergency, Angelina suffered a heart attack from an allergic reaction to her medication, and was airlifted to the hospital in a Mercy Flight Helicopter.
Again, Family Readiness Together again: Spc. Brad McNiff and his family pose outside the 1st Battalion, 127th Armor Regiment's A Company Armory in Dunkirk, following his recent homecoming.
From left got the word quickly to McNiff, to right: Dawn Mcniff's grandfather and Army Air Corps veteran Martin Kline, Dawn Mcniff, who came home again.
Spc. Brad Mcniff, Angelina Mcniff, Quinton Mcniff, and Brad's mother Tricia Mcniff.
"I thought it was quite amazing that he could come home a second "The biggest part for family readiness groups with family time," Dawn said.
"I was quite happy because of the emergencies is to assist those families in contacting the situation."
Red Cross, and to maintain contact with the families to make "I was worried," McNiff said.
"I wanted to get home as sure everything that can be done is being done," said soon as possible.
I felt better when I found out she was Steele.
okay."
Dawn said Angelina is fine now.
"She still suffers from Sgt.
Major Charles Steele, State Family Program coordiasthma, but her heart is undamaged," Dawn said.
nator, defined the role of the family readiness group in "She's getting her first teeth and moving on." family emergencies.
Employers Urged To Support Reservists By Paul Purpura Courtesy of the New Orleans Times-Picayune With more than 207,900 part-time troops involved in the war on terrorism, two national military organizations have urged the U.S. Chamber of Commerce to lead the way toward changing how employers treat workers who are in the Reserves and National Guard.
ESGR (Employer Support of the Guard and Reserve Committee) and Reserve Officers Association representatives said they hope that combining forces will give them a louder voice to push national issues, such as encouraging the U.S. Chamber to help make the lives of reservists and National Guard members easier when called to active duty.
That includes having companies make up the difference between military employees' civilian income and that provided by the military.
The ESGR helps employers understand federal labor laws that affect reservists and National Guard members when they are called to active duty.
Bob Hollingsworth, the ESGR's national executive director, said employers' main concern during mobilizations is that they get enough advance notice of when their military employees will be called away.
The Home Depot, a multi-billion corporation headquartered in Cobb County, is doing more than its share to support America's National Guardsmen and Reservists who have left their jobs to answer their country's call to arms.
Home Depot President and CEO Bob Nardelli signed a Statement of Support for the Guard and Reserve, allowing all Home Depot employees either mobilized or on active duty to continue receiving their full salary, health insurance and retirement benefits for six months.
Home Depot Public Relations Manager Goldie Taylor said the employees still receive a paycheck from the National Guard, but if the check falls short of what they would have received from Home Depot, the multi-billion dollar corporation will make up the difference.
Nardelli said Home Depot is not required by federal law to offer this compensation.
"We feel it is our civic duty," he said.
"We owe our Reservists and Guardsmen a debt of gratitude, and we want to send them a message that their job is secure at Home Depot while they are serving abroad."
Medical care for your baby is paid as part of your maternity care for the first 3 days.
After 3 days, the baby could begin separate cost-sharing as an individual at the normal rate.
Under maternity care, well-baby and well-child care are extended benefits for children from birth up to age 6, when services are provided by the attending pediatrician, certified nurse practitioner, or certified physician assistant.
Some of the extended benefits include routine newborn care, health supervision examinations, routine immunizations, periodic health screening, and developmental assessment in accordance with American Academy of Pediatrics guidelines.
For more information, please visit Chapter 10 "What's Covered - Maternity Care" in the TRICARE Handbook: http://www.tricare.osd.mil/tricarehandbook
Some TRICARE Facts...
·Dependent parents and parents-in-law are not eligible for TRICARE benefits.
However, they are eligible for care in a military treatment facility on a space-available basis (and if available, under TRICARE Plus), and may be eligible for TRICARE Senior Pharmacy benefits.
·Beneficiaries must appear in the Defense Enrollment Eligibility Reporting System (DEERS) database as eligible for TRICARE benefits, or TRICARE Standard will deny those claims.
·To use TRICARE benefits, beneficiaries must have a valid identification (ID) card issued by the uniformed services and be in the DEERS database.
The back of the ID card indicates eligibility for medical care from military or civilian sources in the "Medical" block.
Normally, children under 10 years of age can use either parent or guardian's
ID card, but must be enrolled in DEERS.
The child's sponsor should obtain an ID card for the child after age 10.
TRICARE Little Known Facts: Maternity Care If you become pregnant, TRICARE helps pay for the maternity care you will need.
This covers pregnancy, delivery, and up to 6 weeks of newborn care.
If an active duty member is discharged while his wife is pregnant, TRICARE does not cover any maternity care after the day of discharge from the military unless the family qualifies for the Transitional Assistance Management Program or has enrolled in the Continued Health Care Benefit Program (CHCBP), which extends eligibility for health care benefits similar to TRICARE Standard for a certain period after TRICARE eligibility ends.
National Guard Bureau Family Conference and Youth Symposium In their "off time" our New The National Guard Bureau held their annual Family York delegates were able to Readiness Conference and Youth Symposium at the network with other volunend of July.
This year the conference was held in San teers from all over the counDiego, CA. try in a social atmosphere.
Topics covered at this conference ranged from how This part of the day proved to start a Family Readiness Group to how to revive an to be as valuable as the sesalready existing one....what a FRG is and is not. sions themselves as many The delegates from New York included representatips, techniques and plans tives from type of military organization or geographic were shared and encouraged.
corner of the state.
Those attending the Family ReadiWe all came back with reness Conference included: newed enthusiasm having Amy Cilento - Headquarters, 42nd Infantry Division made some wonderful new - Family Program Officer friendships.
Carol Farrand - B Company, 1st Battalion, 127th Armor Regiment Youth Symposium Tobi Hefferon - 107th Aerial Refueling Wing Beverly Keating - 109th Airlift Wing - Family Program We were so pleased to have Coordinator Sarah Ann Pearson as New Kathy Laramee - 105th Airlift Wing - Family Program York's youth representative.
Coordinator Sarah had a wonderful expeJim Linnen - 106th Air Rescue Wing - Family Program rience meeting other teens Coordinator from our country and conNew York's participants in the National Guard Bureau Family Readiness Conference and Maggie McDonough - 56th Personnel Services Batsidered it an honor to be able Youth Symposium.
Front row: (l to r) Anne Pearson, Tobi Hefferon, Shirley Savage, Kathy talion to go.
Laramee, Amy Cilento, Christine Muszynski, Beverly Keating, Margene Rivera,Sgt.
Maj. Christine Muszynski - 174th Fighter Wing - Family Working in teams, the NaCharles Steele.
Back Row: Maggie McDonough, Carol Farrand, Tina Sutherland, Christine Program Coordinator tional Guard Family Youth Protsko, Debbie Maguire.
Missing from this picture are Jim Linnen and Sarah Anne Pearson.
Sarah Anne Pearson - Youth Delegate generated ideas, recomAnne Pearson - C Company, 342nd Forward Support mended solutions, and deBattalion veloped an Action Plan for the National Guard Family During the general sessions delegates were able to hear Margene Rivera ­ 105th Airlift Wing Family Program Youth Program that will interface with the Guard Family inspirational words from Lt. Gen. H. Steven Blum, Chief of Christine Protsko - D Company, 1st Battalion, 101st Action Plan.
the National Guard Bureau; Lt. Gen. Daniel James III, Cavalry Deployment of parents and family members of the NaDirector of the Air National Guard and Lt. Gen. Roger C. Shirley Savage - 204th Engineer Battalion tional Guard is a major part of these young peoples' lives Shultz, Director of the Army National Guard.
Tina Sutherland - B Company, 342nd Forward Support especially since September 11, 2001.
Perhaps one of the The Honorable Thomas F. Hall, Assistant Secretary of Battalion greatest successes of the Symposium was the Youth Defense for Reserve Affairs also attended the conference Also attending the conference was Sgt. Maj. Charles discovering that they were not alone; that there are other and spoke at the general session.
Steele, the New York State Family Program Coordinator and National Guard Family Youth with very similar life experiBreakouts included information on family, deployment Debbie Maguire representing the Adutant General, Maj. ences; and they were able to build strong bonds with each and reunion issues.
Discussions were held on how to work Gen. Thomas P. Maguire, Jr. other in this short period of time.
with the changes, challenges and stresses of our families.
The New York Family Readiness Newsletter would love to spotlight your FRG.
Let us know how you started, and what you're doing.
Send your submissions to the Family Readiness Office.
3210987654321098765432121098765432109876543210987654321 3210987654321098765432121098765432109876543210987654321 3210987654321098765432121098765432109876543210987654321 3210987654321098765432121098765432109876543210987654321 3210987654321098765432121098765432109876543210987654321 3210987654321098765432121098765432109876543210987654321 3210987654321098765432121098765432109876543210987654321 3210987654321098765432121098765432109876543210987654321 3210987654321098765432121098765432109876543210987654321 3210987654321098765432121098765432109876543210987654321 3210987654321098765432121098765432109876543210987654321 3210987654321098765432121098765432109876543210987654321 32109876543210987654 3210987654321098765432121098765432109876543210987654321 3210987654321098765432121098765432109876543210987654321 3210987654321098765432121098765432109876543210987654321 3210987654321098765432121098765432109876543210987654321 3210987654321098765432121098765432109876543210987654321 3210987654321098765432121098765432109876543210987654321 3210987654321098765432121098765432109876543210987654321 3210987654321098765432121098765432109876543210987654321 3210987654321098765432121098765432109876543210987654321 3210987654321098765432121098765432109876543210987654321 3210987654321098765432121098765432109876543210987654321 3210987654321098765432121098765432109876543210987654321 3210987654321098765432121098765432109876543210987654321 3210987654321098765432121098765432109876543210987654321 3210987654321098765432121098765432109876543210987654321 3210987654321098765432121098765432109876543210987654321 3210987654321098765432121098765432109876543210987654321 3210987654321098765432121098765432109876543210987654321 3210987654321098765432121098765432109876543210987654321 3210987654321098765432121098765432109876543210987654321 3210987654321098765432121098765432109876543210987654321 3210987654321098765432121098765432109876543210987654321 3210987654321098765432121098765432109876543210987654321 3210987654321098765432121098765432109876543210987654321 3210987654321098765432121098765432109876543210987654321 3210987654321098765432121098765432109876543210987654321 3210987654321098765432121098765432109876543210987654321 3210987654321098765432121098765432109876543210987654321 3210987654321098765432121098765432109876543210987654321 3210987654321098765432121098765432109876543210987654321 3210987654321098765432121098765432109876543210987654321 3210987654321098765432121098765432109876543210987654321 3210987654321098765432121098765432109876543210987654321 3210987654321098765432121098765432109876543210987654321 3210987654321098765432121098765432109876543210987654321 3210987654321098765432121098765432109876543210987654321 3210987654321098765432121098765432109876543210987654321 3210987654321098765432121098765432109876543210987654321 3210987654321098765432121098765432109876543210987654321 3210987654321098765432121098765432109876543210987654321 3210987654321098765432121098765432109876543210987654321 3210987654321098765432121098765432109876543210987654321 21098765432109876543212109876543210987654321098765432 3210987654321098765432121098765432109876543210987654321 3210987654321098765432121098765432109876543210987654321 1 3 32121098765432109876543210987654321
Tax Info for Soldiers, Airmen, Families Working with the Department of Defense, the Internal Revenue Service identifies taxpayers who are serving in a combat zone so that we may suspend compliance actions, such as audits or enforced collections, until 180 days after the taxpayer has left the zone.
Taxpayers qualifying for such combat zone relief may also notify the IRS directly of their status through a special e-mail address: combatzone@irs.gov They should provide name, stateside address, date of birth and date of deployment to the combat zone.
They should not include any social security numbers in an e-mail.
This notification may be made by the taxpayer, spouse, or authorized agent or representative.
The IRS cannot provide tax account information by e-mail.
Therefore, we will send responses to any questions about the taxpayer's account by regular mail to the address we have on record for the person, within two business days.
We may provide general answers to questions regarding the status of individual combat zone updates via e-mail.
Please submit general tax law questions to our Tax Law QuestionsInternet Help Page at www.irs.gov.
The IRS Publication, "Armed Forces' Tax Guide," also has information on various tax issues affecting members of the U.S. Armed Forces, including reservists, decendents, and persons missing in action.
Tips for Mailing Packages and Letters Overseas
Letters, Small Packages Get to Troops Quicker
Mail to Iraq or Afghanistan spends "a couple of days" in the U.S. Postal Service system before it reaches either San Francisco or New York City, said Military Postal Service Agency official, Navy Lt. Cmdr. Brian Lomax.
Then it travels another 16 to 19 hours by plane before landing in Kuwait or Bahrain, where it's delivered by motor vehicle.
Once in theater, a letter takes 7 to 14 days to reach the service member, while a package usually takes 14 to 24 days.
"The size of the package plays an important role," Lomax said.
"Large packages take up a lot more room.
If there's a choice between taking one large box or a lot of smaller boxes and letters, the large box will stay (at the mail facility).
The ideal size is a shoebox.
It's also important to correctly address the package."
National Guard Key To the Army Its Role Is Increasing As Soldiers Are Deployed More Frequently When you hear of National Guardsmen, do you know who they are? Yes, they are soldiers, but how do they fit into the overall U.S. military structure? It may be easiest to think of the National Guard as part-time soldiers.
In peacetime, they train one weekend a month and two weeks a year.
When they are activated, they train and serve full time.
The modern National Guard is part of a massive reserve system that augments the full-time active armed forces.
Forty percent of today's armed forces are in the National Guard, and the Guard and its predecessors have participated in every war since the Pequot War in Massachusetts in 1637.
Particularly in recent times, the Guard has been essential to the nation's defense as the number of soldiers in the regular armed forces decreased.
The Guard's soldiers are deployed more frequently and serve longer tours.
The Guard is unique among the seven divisions of the reserve system because it is under the command of the state and federal government.
In times of peace, governors have command over their respective state's Guard, and they have authority to call them into service during natural disasters, such as blizzards, tornadoes or floods, and for help during civil unrest.
Healthy Habits for Kids Children, who spend more total time watching television, including those who eat meals in front of the tube, are more likely to be overweight as reported by the Journal of Developmental and Behavioral Pediatrics.
Americans watch on average four hours of television a day.
Watching TV is our most popular pastime, and it seems that we spend about as much time talking about it as we do watching.
As an abundance of evidence makes clear, our television habit has serious, negative consequences.
Find out how to substitute TV time with family time or simply create more time for yourself by reading below.
A Guiding Light Half-Hour: Start your day with a refreshing walk.
Invite a friend or walk with your dog.
Pets need exercise too, you know.
Home Improvement Hour: Redecorate a room or rearrange furniture.
Painting or wall papering will definitely provide a great cardio workout.
2-Hour Extreme Makeover: Take a relaxing bath with soothing music, bath oils or bath salts.
Don't forget the new book you've been meaning to read also.
Be Bold Be Beautiful Everyday: Try a new class, cooking, dance or something exciting like kickboxing.
TV Free Week: Now that you've saved more than 24 hours in personal time, do something fun for yourself or with your family like relaxing in the sun.
Pick up a new book, take a class or visit a relative or friend.
You can learn more about this campaign to encourage people to turn off the TV by going to: www.tvturnoff.org/.
A Salute to Our Military Families Commentary from Duane B. Fish Chief Warrant Officer (retired) Korea 
200,000 Parents Receive Air Force Pins By Master Sgt.
Scott Elliott Air Force Print News
WASHINGTON, DC our Guardians of Freedom, the Air Force's grassroots outreach information and recognition pro gram, has touched the lives of more than 200,000 parents of airmen, Pentagon officials announced August 8th.
The program began in 2002 as a way for Air Force leaders to recognize employers of reservists and guardsmen who were called to active duty.
Employers nominated by airmen employees received lapel pins emblazoned with the Air Force logo and the letter "E," and a personal letter signed by the Air Force's senior leaders.
The recognition program expanded in May to include parents.
Nominated parents received a letter and lapel pin with the letter "P."
All active-duty, Air National Guard and Reserve airmen may participate in the program.
About 110,000 of the nearly 590,000 uniformed airmen have nominated their parents for recognition, according to Brig. Gen. Ed Tonini, program director.
"That's a huge number," he said.
"We've gotten an exceptional reaction to the program from the individual airmen and incredibly emotional responses from their parents when they've received their letters and pins."
Even though I am now long since home from an overseas deployment, I still cry when I see military families reunited on the news.
I remember how I felt each time.
For those of you going through deployments right now, keep the faith and know that you will get through this.
We are a different breed apart, aren't we? Thank God for our soldiers and their family members and loved ones that support them.
We really do live in the greatest nation on Earth.
Y
The pins are about three-fourths of an inch square and feature a silver letter "P" cradled within the Air Force symbol.
Airmen may request up to two parent pins and letters to be sent to either their parents or people they view as parental figures, Tonini said.
"Everyone has someone they want to recognize," he said.
A personalized letter to the parents from Secretary of the Air Force Dr. James G. Roche and Air Force Chief of Staff Gen. John P. Jumper will accompany the pins.
"We could not protect America's freedom without the incredible people who are willing to carry on the Air Force tradition," the letter reads.
"As the proud parents of one of those airmen, your support continues to be critical to our ongoing efforts and makes a real difference to our country."
To participate, visit www.yourguardiansoffreedom.com.
The Guard and the Reserves The National Guard has a dual role as a state and federal force.
It consists of the Army National Guard and the Air National Guard.
New York State also includes the Naval Militia and New York Guard, volunteer forces that serve the state during times of emergency.
National Guard Units are in every state and the U.S. territories.
The seven components of the armed forces' reserve system are as follows: Army National Guard, Air National Guard, Army Reserve, Naval Reserve, Marine Corps Reserve, Air Forces Reserve and the Coast Guard Reserve
Contact Information: State Family Program Coordinator ­ Sgt.
Major Charles Steele 518-786-4656 State Family Program Assistant ­ Mrs. Patti Jensen 518-786-4774 State Family Program Office ­ Toll Free 877-715-7817
Page 13
GuardHELP 2003: Engineers Tour State with Community Projects Guard Times Staff
BINGHAMTON
M
embers of the 204th Engineer Battalion, with headquarters here in New York's Southern Tier, conducted statewide missions of community support this summer as part of the New York National Guard's GuardHELP initiative.
In the central New York town of Minekill, engineers from the A Company Horizontal Platoon leveled a large expanse of the state park to grade for a soccer field.
Soldiers brought dozers, scrapers and excavators to the site to perform the project.
In the City of Cohoes, troops cleared away debris from the Erie Canal's Locks Nine and Fifteen.
The two sites, long since abandoned and in disrepair, will be restored as historical sites thanks to the members of the 204th Engineers.
"Years of neglect and exposure to the elements have degraded the lock sites to a condition not suitable for such an American Treasure.
With the help of our National Guard Engineers, the locks will be returned to a state that preserves the greatest engineering marvel of the 19th Century," said Cohoes Mayor John T. McDonald.
In Central New York's Madison County, Guard troops deployed to upgrade a stretch of public trails between Lincoln and Cazenovia.
More than 20 guardsmen and women and a fleet of graders, backhoes, dump trucks and other machines arrived Aug. 16 to restored culverts, installed new French drains and graded certain parts of what used to be a washed-out path.
"The community is the beneficiary," said local North Country
Above, Pvt. Marcos Vargas from C Company removes debris from a wall that has been buried for years as part of a GuardHELP restoration project of an Erie Canal lock in Cohoes.
At left, members of B Company and Headquarters Company clean and level an abandoned railroad track in Madison County for the community .
Photos by Sgt.
Peter Towse.
Trail Association President Al Larmann.
"When they (the Guard) put this team together, it took only a few days to meld into a perfect work force."
The Madison County Link Trail connects to the 390-mile Finger Lakes Trail.
The North Country Trail Association is building a 4,200-mile trail from the New York-Vermont border to North Dakota, and is approaching 50 percent of that goal.
Much of the trail conversion is based on existing, but abandoned rail lines.
"This is a perfect example of rails to trails," said Edward Heinrich, regional director of the state Office of Parks, Recreation and Historic Preservation.
At left, Spc. Davis from C Company clears debris from an abandoned Erie Canal Lock in Cohoes as part of the battalion's GuardHELP restoration work.
At right, Spc. Wayne Moody from A Company's Horizontal Platoon uses his dozer to clear ground for a new soccer field at Minekill State Park.
Photos by Maj. Richard Goldenberg.
After clearing away debris, the 204th Engineers' C Company remove the dirt via dump truck.
Both vertical and horizontal platoon members worked on the GuardHELP project.
Photo by Sgt.
Peter Towse.
Page 14
New York Guard / Naval Militia
July-August 2003
New York Guard 'Soldier of the Year' By Sgt. Dave Konig HQ, 56th Brigade, NY Guard attendance.
He consistently demonstrates a willingness to go above and beyond the normal drill schedule."
Fineman's commanding officer, Col. Robert MacDermant, hortly after the terrorist attacks on September 11, cites a commitment to training: "He's a highly motivated 2001, Mark Fineman, a 41-year-old toy salesman from soldier who has learned quickly and wishes to learn more."
New Rochelle, walked into a Marine Corps recruiting Since enlisting, Fineman has taken advantage of all the station in White Plains, N.Y.
He had no prior military training opportunities the New York Guard has to offer; experience, no unique high-demand skills.
All he had was taking courses in internal security, search and rescue, and the certainty that everything had changed and that he had land navigation in addition to his regular to find a way to serve.
monthly drills.
All of that training assures "The recruiter must have thought I was Fineman that he made the right decision nuts," remembers Fineman.
"He told me I the day he took the oath to serve.
"For was too old, that there was nothing he someone who would give his right arm to could do for me.
I said, `No problem, I'll be able to join the military and fight overcome back tomorrow.'
And I did, I went seas," he says, "this is the next best, and back every day for a week.
I was driving the most realistic, option.
This gives me a way poor guy crazy.
Finally, on the eighth day, to give back to my country by supporting he handed me a slip of paper with a number the men and women overseas."
on it -- `Call these guys, maybe they can One way of "giving back" is taking part use you.'
" in the many community support missions It was a contact number for the all volunthe New York Guard participates in.
"My teer New York Guard.
"I was very happy he favorite was the Boy Scouts Thunderbird found something for me, and I think he was Games at Ward Pound Ridge (Westchester very happy to get rid of me."
County).
This was a huge gathering of Over a year and a half later, these very Pfc. Mark Fineman.
Photo by Capt. Barry Pinchefsky. scouts and their families, thousands of same qualities of patriotism, volunteerism, kids and dads, and the 56th provided and dogged determination to serve have security and traffic control for the event.
We got the resulted in Pfc. Mark Fineman of B Company, 102 IS opportunity to help the kids, and the parents were very [Internal Security] Regiment, 56th Brigade, being awarded appreciative.
It was very satisfying," Fineman said.
the title, "New York Guard Soldier of the Year."
Training and experience result in confidence, and Every year, each of the five New York Guard brigades from Fineman's confidence in himself and his fellow Guardsmen around the state submit the name of a soldier, chosen by is apparent.
"The personnel I serve with are exceptional their Command Sergeant Major, for the honor.
Each canand talented.
When we meet up with soldiers from the New didate appears before a review board to discuss their York Army National Guard the response we get is very service to the state, and finally an awardee is chosen.
favorable -- they're amazed at how squared away we are.
What makes a "soldier of the year?" According to 1st Sgt.
Most of us joined the New York Guard to help the military Richard Romano, the acting Cmd. Sgt.
Major of the 56th in any way that was needed, and I hope we get that Brigade, showing up is half the battle: "Pfc. Fineman was opportunity.
As for myself, I'm in for life."
chosen, in part, because of his dedication and outstanding
NY Guard Commander Receives Second Star By Sgt. Dave Konig HQ, 56th BDE, NY Guard
WHITE PLAINS
S
NEW YORK CITY n a day in which Governor Pataki called on all New Yorkers to honor the spirit of the citizen-soldier, New York's Adjutant General, Maj. Gen. Thomas P. Maguire, promoted the commander of the all-volunteer New York Guard, Thomas Cleland, to the rank of Major General.
Maguire called the July 3rd promotion "an appropriate, sincere acknowledgement of the leadership he's provided the New York Guard since he took over."
The ceremony too place at the Lexington Ave Armory in New York City just prior to the Governor's signing of the Patriot Plan into law.
The ceremony gave Maj. Gen. Cleland an opportunity to reflect on how the New York Guard has changed, and where it is headed.
O
Maj. Gen. Thomas Maguire, The Adjutant General, pins a second star on Maj. Gen. Thomas Cleland, commander of the NY Guard while Cleland's spouse Janice looks on.
Photo by Staff Sgt. Steven Petibone.
Sailor Supports Living History Guard Times Staff
BOSTON
hile many Americans celebrated the Fourth of July holiday at home with families, Naval Militia member Petty Officer 2nd Class Joseph Palumbo was working to help preserve history.
Palumbo, from Massapequa Long Island served on board the USS Constitution in Boston's Charlestown Navy Yard.
The Constitution is an historical Navy vessel and is the nation's oldest commissioned warship still afloat.
Palumbo served on the Constitution during the ship's annual sailing in Boston Harbor where the ship fires a 21-gun salute to the nation before returning to port.
The activation for the security mission was a rare and unique chance for a Naval Reserve sailor to serve on the historic vessel.
"This is a once in a lifetime opportunity to be here in this historic site right next to the Petty Officer Joseph Palumbo on duty at the USS Constitution.
Courtesy photo.
W
Constitution," Palumbo said during his tour of duty.
"Never in my life would I have imagined that some day I would be attached to such an historic ship," he said.
Cleland began his military career over forty years ago, as a fresh faced Marine Corps boot recruit.
He has served in the New York Guard since 1988, and was named commander in June of 2002.
Since taking over the command of the New York Guard, Cleland embarked on an aggressive program of change: raising standards and inspiring professionalism throughout the ranks.
"Thomas Cleland has brought about within the New York Guard a revitalization," Maguire said.
"I want to thank General Maguire for his support for the program we initiated just about a year ago," Cleland said.
"Things (in the NYG) are changing in a very major way."
Looking ahead, Cleland cited the importance of enlisted personnel to the New York Guard's future.
"It takes a special person to be in the New York Guard.
You have to have a desire to serve.
I expect to see the New York Guard in the next three years grow substantially from where we are now," he said.
"That can't happen without talented, committed enlisted personnel.
I am a former Marine, I'm very proud of that.
But, I have to tell you, I am just as proud to be able to work with the men and women volunteers of the New York Guard.
They are just very special, exceptional individuals."
July-August 2003
Naval Militia
Page 15
2/25 Marines Mission Complete Naval Militia Marines Redeploy from Iraq By Sgt.
Rob Henderson USMC News Service
AN NASIRIYAH, IRAQ
I
n late July, the 900 Marines of the 2nd Battalion of the 25th Marine Regiment (2/25) handed over control of military operations in their area here to a 3,000-soldier Italian brigade under British command.
The ceremony marked the end of the Marine Reservists mission in Iraq.
"With support from the (15th) Marine Expeditionary Unit, 2/25 as a battalion has been able to effectively complete several missions," said Maj. Tom P. Adissi, the battalion logistics officer prior to departing from staging areas in Kuwait.
"The Marines are glad to participate in Operation Iraqi Freedom and are really proud to help the war-torn city of An Nasiriyah get back to being a stable community."
F Company, 2nd Battalion, 25th Marines form up outside their Reserve Center in Albany, N.Y. during the unit's redeployment ceremony August 2nd.
The Marine Reservists returned from duties in Iraq this summer.
Photo courtesy of 1st Sgt. Harlow Peck II.
own people, they just don't have the supplies.
We helped in that wherever we could."
The battalion also guarded the bridges that lead into the city.
As long as the battalion controled the routes leading into An Nasiriyah, they kept any opposing forces from interrupting the rebuilding efforts inside the city.
"Our line companies guarded the bridges," said Gunnery Sgt. Joseph F. Yuditsky, battalion logistics chief.
"We tried
to keep any potentially hostile individuals from coming into the city where we were trying to help the Iraqis."
The unit scheduled homecoming ceremonies across the Reserve Centers in New York State in early August.
The remaining 100 Marines of the battalion redeployed later that month.
Editor's note: The headquarters staff of the New York Naval Militia contributed to this article.
Marines Continue Tradition at U.S. Open 2/25 Marine Reservists on duty near An Nasiriyah, Iraq.
The Marines redeployed from Operation Iraqi Freedom to their Reserve Centers in New York State in August for demobilization.
Courtesy photo.
Story and photo by Gunnery Sgt. Tim McGough New York Public Affairs Office
One of the keys to helping the city of An Nasiriyah back to its feet was establishing a provincial police force.
Since the Ba'ath Party had been effectively eliminated from the city and the surrounding areas following the combat operations in the spring, there had been no formal government and no police force left.
That was no problem for the Marine Reservists from 2/25.
With numerous members employed by the New York City Police Department and New York State Police, the battalion was well equipped to handle the mission.
"Basically, we took 32 police officers from their jobs in the battalion to help set up a police force," said Maj. Joe Nelson, Battalion Adjutant.
"We were trying to bring democratic principles to An Nasiriyah that weren't there before."
Starting at the top and working down, the Marines from New York helped to build a strong infrastructure for An Nasiriyah's police force.
"The first level of this operation was to train police commanders," said Nelson.
"Next, we helped train the lower levels of the force before we hand the entire operation over to the Iraqis."
2/25 also participated in several humanitarian aid operations including providing health care on a limited basis and handing out food to the citizens of An Nasiriyah, according to Nelson.
"Some of our medical personnel visited with various medical facilities to see what kind of assistance they needed," said Nelson.
" What they found was the Iraqi medical personnel have the knowledge to take care of their
T
"Marines do color guards everyday, but this has to be the crown jewel of color guards," said Staff Sgt. Alex Kitsakos, he Williams sisters may not have attended the U.S. in charge of the event.
Open and Pete Sampras may have retired this year, The statistics don't lie; The Marine Corps has kicked off but the Marine Corps has made it clear that they are every opening night of the tournament since 1999 with no here to stay at the U.S. Tennis less than 45 Marines in attendance.
Association's yearly event in New There are also 18 color guards in a York City.
14-day period, including three Marines from the 6th Communicagroups of a 45-Marine flag detail tion Battalion in Brooklyn, N.Y., kicked three times during the tournament.
off the fourth consecutive year of Marines are seen on CBS, ESPN Marine Corps participation in the U.S. and the USA Network.
Open Tennis Tournament by unfurlEven the organizers of all the ening a giant American flag in front of tertainment and ceremonies at the 60,000 spectators August 25th.
Open agree that the Marine Corps "The tournament is great exposure has been doing such a great job that for the Corps," said Staff Sgt.
Edward they have become a large part of the Graham, Staff Noncommissioned Oftournament. ficer In Charge for the flag detail.
"It "Marines unfurling the giant flag shows the public that not only can on center court have in effect beMarines win wars, but we can also come a symbol here," said Bruce contribute to the community."
Patron, director of production at One of the Marines in the flag detail, Overland Entertainment.
and a native of Astoria, N.Y., could Patron has been so happy with not have been happier to be a part of the performance of the Corps that the event.
"It was so cool," said Lance he believes the Marines will always Cpl. Richard Salazar.
"We got such a have a place at U.S.T.A.
National great response from the crowd that I Training Center in Flushing MeadStaff Sgt. Pahlo Correa of the 6th got chills when we opened the flag." ows, N.Y.
Communication Battalion, Brooklyn, N.Y., The Marine Corps and the U.S.T.A.
"As long as there is a tennis tourleads the giant flag detail of center court at have continued a tradition that started nament, the Marine Corps will be the U.S.T.A.
National Tennis Center, back in 1999.
Flushing Meadows, N.Y. here," said Patron.
NEW YORK CITY
Page 16 NEW YORK ARMY NATIONAL GUARD PROMOTIONS BRIGADIER GENERAL STEPHEN R. SEITER HQ 53D TRP CMD COLONEL FERGAL I. FOLEY HHC 107TH SUPPORT GROUP LIEUTENANT COLONEL WILLIAM H. BODT HQ 53D TRP CMD MARK FRISZOLOWSKI HHC 107TH SUPPORT GROUP KEVIN S. MCKIERNAN HQ 531ST TRP CMD JAMES S. ZUCARELLI HHD ENGINEER BDE 42 ID MAJOR RICHARD COLUCCIELLO HHD STARC (-) NYARNG MICHAEL P. HANNON MEDICAL COMMAND ROBERT J. WILLIAMS HHC (-) 27TH IN BDE CAPTAIN SEAN M. FLYNN HHC(-) 1-69 INF (M) MICHAEL FULLAM 1ST BN 106TH REG (GS) MICHAEL TAGLIAFIERRO HHC 42 IN DIV(-) FREDERICK TERIBURY MEDICAL COMMAND FIRST LIEUTENANT MICHAEL J. ALFANO HQ STARC-NY FWD 6 JOSEPH P. BRADY HHD 369TH CORPS SPT BN WALTER E. COLUMNA HHC(-) 1-69 INF (M) DEVON S. EDWARDS 1569TH TRANS CO PAUL M. ENGEL JR CO A, 3-142D AVIATION KENNETH P. ENSER II 1-108 IN BN A CO FWD COREY J. GLEESON CO C 152D ENGINEER BN BRIAN W. HESLIN 56TH PERSONNEL SER BN JEFFREY S. KIGGINS CO A (-) 2 BN 108 INF RAFAEL A. MUNOZ HHC(-) 1-69 INF (M) ALVIN D. PHILLIPS HHC (-) 27TH IN BDE ADYLL M. RAMJOHN 1569TH TRANS CO ELIZABETH A. RAMSEY HHC 107TH SUPPORT GROUP ADAM D. RICHARDSON CO B(-) 427TH SPT BN MARK J. WALSH CO B 1-101ST CAVALRY JAMES J. WILKES 105TH MP CO CHIEF WARRANT OFFICER 5 GEORGE SCHOLL HHD STARC (-) NYARNG CHIEF WARRANT OFFICER 2 STEPHEN M. BLOVAT 249TH MED CO AIR AMB (-) WILLIAM J. SOLMO DET 1 HHC 1-69TH INF (M) SERGEANT MAJOR NORMAND PROVOST HHD ENGINEER BDE 42 ID MASTER SERGEANT RAUL COLON CO A 342D FWD SPT BN DENNIS F. LOMBARDI HHD 369TH CORPS SPT BN JOE E. MOODY CO B 230TH SIGNAL BN SERGEANT FIRST CLASS TIMOTHY W. BARBER CO A(-) 427TH SPT BN MICHAEL E. BRADY 1ST BN 142D AVIATION JOSEPH J. CAVANAUGH CO A 1-127TH ARMOR JOHN D. CRAFT 2ND CIVIL SPT TEAM (WMD) PATRICIA FARRINGTON HQ 53D TRP CMD EDWIN L. GARRIS 127 AR BN 01 HHC REAR NY STEVEN W. GOULD HHD 342D FWD SPT BN BILLY J. GREENE CO B 342D FWD SPT BN VINCENT R. MIEREK CO D 2-108 IN ALBERT E. PETERSON HHC 1-105TH INF MANUEL B. ROMAN HHC(-) 1-69 INF (M) MARCO A. SALCEDO CO B 1-105 INF GEORGE Z. SCHNEIDER HHC AVN BDE 42 IN DIV SCOTT M. THOMPSON CO A(-) 204 ENGR BN ROY D. WILSON 1ST BN 142D AVIATION ERNEST A. WRIGHT HHC 107TH SUPPORT GROUP STAFF SERGEANT CARLOS CLAVELL HHB 1-258TH FA JEFFREY A. COLLING MEDICAL COMMAND CHRISTOPHER ERRINGTON CO A 1-108 IN BN LAWRENCE FITZGIBBONS DET 2 CO C 1-108TH INF JODY D. HACKEMER RECRUITING COMMAND APRIL C. HALL MEDICAL COMMAND RYAN HOWELL HQ 531ST TRP CMD MICHAEL A. KIBLER HHC 42 IN DIV(-) DWUAN E. MARTIN CO B 230TH SIGNAL BN RICHARD V. MARTIN HHC (-) 1-108TH INF STEVEN C. MELLOTT DET 1 CO A 427TH SPT BN JAMES J. MURPHY HHC 1-101ST CAVALRY CHARLES H. PEUSER RECRUITING COMMAND RICHARD J. PRANDONI HHS (-) 1-156 FA
Army Promotions DAVID E. PUMPUTIS CO B(-) 427TH SPT BN MICHAEL RIVERA CO B 230TH SIGNAL BN KYLE H. SLOCUM 108 IN BN 01 HHC FWD JASON A. WILLIAMSON 2ND CIVIL SPT TEAM (WMD) SERGEANT ASMAT ALLIE 37TH FINANCE DET TROY D. ANTAL HHC 42 IN DIV(-) CHERYL E. CRISPIN HSC (-) 642D SUPPORT BN CHAD B. DEROCK DET 1 CO G 137TH AVIATION FRANCIS G. DEVENECIA CO C 1-105 INF JOSEPH C. DUSZA JR CO B 152D ENGINEER BN CARL J. JEREMIE JR HQS 106TH REGIMENT (RTI) LEOPOLD LACROIX CO B 342D FWD SPT BN DENNIS S. LOMBARDI HHC 107TH SUPPORT GROUP THEODORE MCDOUGALL III RECRUITING COMMAND AARON A. OWENS BTRY A 1 BN 156 FA JASON M. PETERSON DET 1 CO G 137TH AVIATION SHEILA P. ROBINSON 442D MILITARY POLICE CO MARIECHA G. ROWE 719 TRANS CO (MDM TRK CGO) WILLIAM M. SALVI 4TH PERSONNEL SVC DET GERALD STECKMEISTER HQ 531ST TRP CMD MARK R. STETZKO CO B 1-108TH INF VALDO K. VAHER 442D MILITARY POLICE CO VINCENT D. VARGAS CO A 1-101ST CAVALRY DANIEL E. ZLOTEK CO B 152D ENGINEER BN SPECIALIST JARROD P. ADAMS CO B 152D ENGINEER BN KELLY L. ALEXANDER HHS (-) 1-156 FA JOHN R. ALLNATT CO A 1-127TH ARMOR BOBBY R. ANFANG HHC 1-101ST CAVALRY JESSE APONTE CO B(-) 427TH SPT BN SETH A. BARLOG 249TH MED CO AIR AMB (-) JAVIER E. BASILIO 145TH MAINTENANCE CO LARRY L. BENNETT CO D 1-101ST CAVALRY MATTHEW BISHARA CO B 1-108TH INF RAHIM A. BOKHARI DET 1 CO G 137TH AVIATION JUSTICE W. BRACERO 133D MAINTENANCE CO FERNANDO H. BRAGA HHD 369TH CORPS SPT BN WILLIAM F. BROCHARD DET 2 CO B 638 SPT BN ANTHONY BUCHANAN CO D 1-105 INF SHAUN A. BURRELL DET 1 CO C 204TH EN BN TAINA A. BUTLER CO A 342D FWD SPT BN ZAIDA L. CABRERA 1ST BN 106TH REG (GS) WILLIAM CAMACHO DET 1 HHC 1-69TH INF (M) KAILYN N. CAMELO 107TH MP CO (RD) DOMENICO CARBONE CO D 1-69TH INFANTRY (M) MICHAEL CARPENTER CO D 1-69TH INFANTRY (M) SAMUEL L. CHADWICK CO D 1-69TH INFANTRY (M) THOMAS J. CONWAY 719 TRANS CO (MDM TRK CGO) CRISTINE CORCILLA 102D MAINTENANCE CO NICHOL L. COTTRELL CO B 342D FWD SPT BN STEPHEN M. DALY JR CO D 1-101ST CAVALRY PETER M. DANCY HHC(-) 1-69 INF (M) JOHN DANDREA CO B 152D ENGINEER BN ADAM R. DENNIS CO B 204 ENGR BN RICHARD V. DIEHL JR CO B 1-108TH INF DAVID DRUMHELLER II CO D 1-108 IN BN FWD MATTHEW R. DUFFY DET 1 CO A 204 ENGR BN MINGHAO FENG CO A 1-101ST CAVALRY STEPHEN FINKEL DET 1 50TH MAIN SPT BN TIMOTHY J. FOX CO B 342D FWD SPT BN KARL FRANCISCO CO D 1-101ST CAVALRY ANDREW M. GILBERT HHD STARC (-) NYARNG FERNANDO GONZALEZ 107TH MILITARY POLICE CO DAVIS M. GROVER 249TH MED CO AIR AMB (-) RICHARD M. HALL III CO B(-) 427TH SPT BN MUHIDUL I. HAQUE HSC (-) 642D SUPPORT BN SHANNON M. HAYES CO C 427TH SUPPORT BN PETER M. HULL DET 1 CO C 2 BN 108 INF OLDEN T. INGRAM III 127 AR BN 01 HHC REAR NY JAMES R. JENKINS CO C (-) 2 BN 108 INF DARRYL J. JOHNSON CO B 204 ENGR BN MARK A. JOHNSON 258THBFA BN HHB FWD KEVIN JOHNSONSINCLAIR HHD 369TH CORPS SPT BN CLAUDE W. JORDY II TROOP E 101ST CAVALRY KAYLA I. KING 105TH MP CO JUSTIN B. KOVACS 1-108 IN BN REAR TERRENCE M. KRAUS CO C 1-69TH INF (M) ANDREW KWIATKOWSKI DET 2 HHC 27TH IN BDE NANCY LABORDE 56TH PERSONNEL SER BN
July-August 2003 JESSE W. LEE CO C 427TH SUPPORT BN JAMES W. LOY HHC 2 BN 108 INF THOMAS A. MARTIN CO B(-) 427TH SPT BN JAMES M. MARTINEZ CO C (-) 204TH ENGR BN TIMOTHY I. MCABEE 1-108 IN BN REAR JASON M. MCGHIE HHC 1-101ST CAVALRY KYLE MCGUIGAN 145TH MAINTENANCE CO BRIAN A. MCILROY CO B 204 ENGR BN RAFAEL MEDINA HSC (-) 642D SUPPORT BN THOMAS D. MITCHELL CO D 1-108 IN BN FWD JEREMY S. MORGAN CO A(-) 204 ENGR BN JAMES M. OBRIEN CO D 1-105 INF RYAN C. PADILLA HHC 1-101ST CAVALRY PAULINE PANTALEONE CO C 427TH SUPPORT BN RICARDO PARCHMENT CO A 342D FWD SPT BN LESLIE R. PATTERSON 249TH MED CO AIR AMB (-) BERNADETTE G. PEREZ HSC (-) 642D SUPPORT BN GILBERT PEREZ 719 TRANS CO (MDM TRK CGO) MARK A. PRESHER CO C (-) 2 BN 108 INF JOHN W. PUFFER CO B(-) 427TH SPT BN GREGORY J. REIMANN 105TH MP CO GORDON D. REYNOLDS CO B 204 ENGR BN OSCAR G. RODRIGUEZ CO C(-) 638 SPT BN SERGIO A. RODRIGUEZ 145TH MAINTENANCE CO JENNIFER Z. RUIZ HHD 342D FWD SPT BN MICHAEL J. SALISBURY 249TH MED CO AIR AMB (-) WAYNE H. SAPP 133D MAINTENANCE CO GREGORY SCHLOTTER DET 1 CO C 2-108 INF JEFFREY W. SCHREIBER CO B 1-108TH INF SCOTT SCOGNAMILLO HHC 1-101ST CAVALRY STEPHEN P. SEEGER CO D 1-105 INF RICHARD L. SENIOR CO B 152D ENGINEER BN JENNIFER SHERINGHAM HHD 342D FWD SPT BN MICHELLE Y.
SIPOS 719 TRANS CO (MDM TRK CGO) ROBERT D. SPOONTS CO D 2-108 IN RONALD J. STROH JR CO D 1-101ST CAVALRY JEAN D. SURIN CO A 342D FWD SPT BN ERIC J. SWARTZENBERG DET 1 CO G 137TH AVIATION ORIN L. THOMPSON CO C (-) 2 BN 108 INF TODD A. TOLAND 249TH MED CO AIR AMB (-) MELISSA A. TRAVIS 127 AR BN 01 CO B REAR NY ALLAN A. TUFFOUR HHD 369TH CORPS SPT BN FRANKLIN R. UCETA HHC 107TH SUPPORT GROUP ARTHUR W. VANNESS CO C 427TH SUPPORT BN GILBERTO VAZQUEZ 145TH MAINTENANCE CO AMY P. WEISER 105TH MP CO HEATH E. WEITZEL CO B 204 ENGR BN TIMOTHY M. WILDE CO B 1-108TH INF PRIVATE FIRST CLASS DAVID G. ADAMS CO D 1-105 INF MICHAEL A. ANDERSON CO C (-) 342D FWD SPT BN SALVATORE J. AUTERI CO A 1-69TH INFANTRY (M) VINCENZO A. BENENATI DET 1 CO C 204TH EN BN RYAN H. BHOORASINGH HHC(-) 1-69 INF (M) LOUIS A. BRAVO HHC 2 BN 108 INF SHARAYFAH Y.
BROWN 102D MAINTENANCE CO MATTHEW BURRAFATO HHC(-) 3-142D AVIATION JIN W. CHEN CO C 1-105 INF MIGUEL CHRISTOPHER 719 TRANS CO (MDM TRK CGO) BETHANY L. CHUGG 249TH MED CO AIR AMB (-) DIANA M. CONSTABLE CO A(-) 204 ENGR BN CHARLES COONRIBBLE DET 1 HHC 1-108TH INF OSMAN R. CORTES HHC(-) 1-69 INF (M) DAVID CUNNINGHAM CO A 342D FWD SPT BN EDUARDO EUSEBIO 133D MAINTENANCE CO KIMBERLY EVERETT DET 1 50TH MAIN SPT BN BISHOP D. FARGO CO B(-) 427TH SPT BN THOMAS R. FROST CO B 204 ENGR BN SANDRA E. GARTH CO A 342D FWD SPT BN HARRY GOMEZ DET 1 HHC 1-69TH INF (M) TAMARA GONZALEZ HSC (-) 642D SUPPORT BN KEVIN P. GRADY 1-108 IN REAR THOMAS GRISWOLD III CO D 1-105 INF CLARA F. HARRIS 127 AR BN 01 CO C REAR NY JHONATAN HERNANDEZ HHC(-) 1-69 INF (M) IVAN S. JIMENEZ HSC (-) 642D SUPPORT BN LOOBANS JOLICOEUR HHD 369TH CORPS SPT BN JASON K. JONES 127 AR BN 01 CO B REAR NY KEITH W. KELLY CO A(-) 204 ENGR BN TERRELL J. KELLY HHC(-) 1-69 INF (M)
July-August 2003 MOANA M. KROMAH PATRICK B. LAHR JORGE P. LEDESMA TONY LEW SHAUNDA LEWIS YAN LI TIFFANY LIVINGSTON OFER MAIMRAN FRANCISCO MANTILLA ORTIZ R. MARTINEZ RAMSES MARTINEZ WILLIAM MCPHILLIPS RANDY K. MILLER ANTUAN E. MINOTT RAFAEL M. MOLINA MELISSA S. MONAHAN ROBERTO NELSON KENNETH C. NYDAM LUVIMINDO E. OLAN ZHONGWEN PAN MASSIEL I. PIMENTEL MICHAEL J. PORTER PAMELA M. PRIMOUS ERIC S. PSZYK NICHOLE A. RANGLIN SHANE A. REBB LUIS N. REYES CAMDEN V. RIPLEY KRISTIE A. ROBERTS MEDINA V. ROSARIO JONATHAN ROTHWELL HHC(-) 1-69 INF (M) H 
Army Promotions RICARDO M. RUIZ HSC (-) 642D SUPPORT BN YADIRA SABLE 145TH MAINTENANCE CO OWEN K. SCOTT BTRY A 1 BN 156 FA STEPHANIE SETRANAH HSC (-) 642D SUPPORT BN JEFFREY J. SMITH CO C 427TH SUPPORT BN MATTHEW M. SMITH HHC 3RD BDE 42ND ID (M) GREGORY D. STEWART HHC 1-105TH INF RICHARD V. STROJIL CO B 204 ENGR BN LANISHA T. TANKSLEY CO B(-) 427TH SPT BN SCOTT A. TAYLOR CO D 2-108 IN ALETA M. TRIPPE CO C (-) 342D FWD SPT BN TIMOTHY E. TURANE CO C 1-105 INF NICHOLAS P. VACANTI HHC 3RD BDE 42ND ID (M) JOSHUA V. VALLO 133D MAINTENANCE CO WAGENEN D. VAN 1ST BN 106TH REG (GS) JONATHAN D. VIOLA 1ST BN 142D AVIATION JUSTIN F. WANAT HHD STARC (-) NYARNG TIFFANY K. WELLS CO A 342D FWD SPT BN AMANDA L. WHEELER 1ST BN 106TH REG (GS) HYACINTH I. WHITE 145TH MAINTENANCE CO CRYSTAL J. WILSON HHC(-) 3-142D AVIATION TIFFANI C. YANCEY CO C (-) 342D FWD SPT BN XUE Y.
ZHU CO C 1-105 INF JAMES F. ZINKOVITCH 107TH MILITARY POLICE CO PRIVATE CODY E. ALLEN 1ST BN 106TH REG (GS) ROY C. ARNDT CO B 342D FWD SPT BN RICHARD L. BACHER 1-108 IN REAR DONALD L. BAJOHR JR HHC 2 BN 108 INF JOEL BARRETO HHS (-) 1-156 FA ROCCO J. BAVERO HHC(-) 1-69 INF (M)
Page 17 RANDY S. BEARDSLEE CO A(-) 204 ENGR BN ELWYN L. BELL III CO B 342D FWD SPT BN ERIC M. BENNETT CO A(-) 204 ENGR BN TRISHA L. BIMBER 127 AR BN 01 CO B REAR NY TIMOTHY J. BISHOP 1-108 IN ANTIARMOR REAR LORENA M. BRAVO HHC 107TH SUPPORT GROUP RONDELL BREEDLOVE CO B(-) 427TH SPT BN MATTHEW S. BROWN CO C 152D ENGINEER BN JEAN W. CAMILLE HHD 369TH CORPS SPT BN TOMMY L. CARLEY H 
Civil Support Team Hosts Visitors Guard Times Staff
Soldiers and Airmen from New York's 2nd Civil Support Team (CST) for Weapons of Mass Destruction took time this summer to host visitors to their Glenville, N.Y. headquarters.
Above, members of the Puerto Rico National Guard's Civil Support Team (Light) review decontamination procedures under the guidance of CST members.
Photo by Maj. Richard Goldenberg.
At right, a delegation of military official from Slovakia receive information briefings about the CST's capabilities during a visit to New York in late August.
Photo by Sgt.
Peter Towse.
Page 18 NEW YORK AIR NATIONAL GUARD PROMOTIONS COLONEL STOPA, GARY 105 OPERATIONS GP GINAVAN, PATRICK D 107 MAINT GP HOWARD, DALE M 107 MISSION SUPPORT GP LOVE, KAREN E 109 MISSION SUPPORT GP BRADLEY, KEVIN W 174 FIGHTER WG LIEUTENANT COLONEL VOLPE, LEONARD A JR 213 ENG INSTL SQDN BICKELMANN, PAUL A 136 AIR REFUELING SQDN MILLER, RAYMOND G 107 MEDICAL SQDNDN CLOUTHIER, SHAWN A 109 OPERATIONS SPT FLT MAJOR GUAY, TODD M 136 AIR REFUELING SQDN DUBOIS, GLENN R 139 AIRLIFLT SQDN NILES, CHRISTOPHER J 139 AIRLIFLT SQDN WILSON, ALVINZO T 139 AIRLIFLT SQDN RUFENER, DONALD W 138 FIGHTER SQDN CAPTAIN BOONE, PETER M 139 AIRLIFLT SQDN MORGAN, JOHN T 139 AIRLIFLT SQDN FIRST LIEUTENANT ALBRECHT, THOMAS F 105 ACFT MAINT SQDN WOOD, ALTA R 105 AIRLIFLT WG MARTINO, MARIA T 107 AIR REFUELING WG SECOND LIEUTENANT RUBIN, JUSTIN A 106 STUDENT FLT DALPORTO, ECTORE B 107 AIR REFUELING WG FORREST, KELLY A 107 MEDICAL SQDNDN FORREST, RYAN P 107 CIVIL ENGINEER SQDN SMITH, KEVIN M 107 SECURITY FORCES SQDN GERNAND, SHANE A 109 MISSION SUPPORT FLT HEFLTY, PETER J 174 STUDENT FLT CHIEF MASTER SERGEANT BALLETTA, MARGARET 105 MEDICAL SQDN BEGIN, RODNEY A 109 OPERATIONS SPT FLT MILLER, DONALD J JR 106 RESCUE WG SENIOR MASTER SERGEANT CLARK, DONALD M 137 AIRLIFT SQDN GALLUCCI, JOSEPH S 109 OPERATIONS SPT FLT GREEN, LELAND L 174 CIVIL ENGINEER SQDN KING, SCOTT A 109 MAINTENANCE SQDN LLOYD, RAYMOND L JR 107 COMMUNICATIONS FLT SEELBACH, LYLE W II NORTHEAST AIR DEF SQDN SELBERT, TRACY L 107 AIR REFUELING WG TYRPAK, STANLEY C 107 ACFT GENERAT SQDN WYLUCKI, WILLIAM A 107 ACFT GENERAT SQDN MASTER SERGEANT ALLEN, DOUGLAS C 174 CIVIL ENGINEER SQDN ALLYN, JUDITH F 107 SECURITY FORCES SQDN BISHOP, CAROLINE A 106 MISSION SPT FLT BRUMBELOW, ORA K 105 MAINTENANCE SQDN BRUNT, MICHELLE L 139 AIRLIFT SQDN BURDEWICK, RONNY W 105 MAINTENANCE SQDN CANNET, JEFFREY D 102 RESCUE SQDN CAVALIER, MICHAEL A NORTHEAST AIR DEF SQDN DOCKWILLER, PHILIP H 174 CIVIL ENGINEER SQDN ELLIOTT, BARBARA R 107 AIR REFUELING WG FELTON, RICHARD D 139 AIRLIFT SQDN FLEMMING, DWIGHT R 137 AIRLIFT SQDN FURMANSKI, WILLIAM II NEAD SCTY FORC FLT GARDNER, ADAM 139 AIRLIFT SQDN GIACOMETTI, RICHARD 107 AIR REFUELING WG HAFF, JUDITH L 105 LOGISTICS RDNS SQDN HARMAN, ANDREW S 213 ENG INSTL SQDN HOLBERT, BENJAMIN F 105 MAINTENANCE SQDN HOPKINS, JOHN J 102 RESCUE SQDN HUGHES, WILLIAM B 107 MAINTENANCE SQDN JESMAIN, HEATHER R NEW YORK ANG HQ KASPER, JEFFREY J 107 ACFT GENERAT SQDN KEENO, LAWRENCE A JR 105 MAINTENANCE SQDN MACNER, LAWRENCE E 174 MAINTENANCE GP MAXIMO, DARRELL K 109 AIRLIFT WG MCAFEE, MARK C 174 SECURITY FORCES SQDN MORRISON, DAVID W 109 MEDICAL SQDN NEADOM, RANDY S 174 CIVIL ENGINEER SQDN PELTIER, MARK E 174 MAINTENANCE SQDN PETRICCIONE, CLAUDIO 105 SERVICES FLT PROIETTI, DEODATO A NEW YORK ANG HQ
Air Guard Promotions RIZZO, JOSEPH R 107 ACFT GENERAT SQDN SPENARD, JOSEPH E NORTHEAST AIR DEF SQDN VILLAGOMEZ, DIANA G 107 MAINTENANCE GP VONKNOBLAUCH, KARL 174 SECURITY FORCES SQDN TECH SERGEANT CHRISTOFFERSEN, PETER106 AIRCRAFT MAINT SQDN CONNOLLY, MICHAEL J 105 CIVIL ENGINEER SQDN DINARDI, DAVID P 109 LOGISTICS RDNS SQDN DORN, DONALD D 109 LOGISTICS RDNS SQDN DORSCH, WAYNE E 106 LOGISTICS RDNS SQDN DUCHSCHERER, BRIAN 107 MAINTENANCE SQDN ERICKSON, ALISON J 139 AEROMED EVAC SQDN FOLCKEMER, RAYMOND 107 COMMUNICATIONS FLT FOX, GEORGE L 107 MAINTENANCE SQDN GALVIN, ROBERT L 105 SERVICES FLT GARRISON, JOSEPH M 174 MAINTENANCE SQDN GIORDANO, CARLO T 106 LOGISTICS RDNS SQDN HALSEY, LYNN M 106 MAINTENANCE SQDN HARRIS, DORNN E 105 SERVICES FLT HERDMAN, MARK E 139 AIRLIFT SQDN JACKSON, TANYA M 105 AIRCRAFT MAINT SQDN KEIPER, PHILIP A 106 LOGISTICS RDNS SQDN KOENIG, NEIL R 105 AIRCRAFT MAINT SQDN LAKE, JONATHON M NORTHEAST AIR DEF SQDN LARRABEE, SHAWN J 107 SECURITY FORCES SQDN LEHTINEN, ERIKE A 109 COMMUNICATIONS FLT LEWIS, JAMES T 174 MAINTENANCE SQDN LOMBARDO, VINCENT J 105 SERVICES FLT LOPEZ, RUBEN 105 AERIAL PORT SQDN MEADE, SCOTT D 174 SECURITY FORCES SQDN MIRANDA, DANIEL 105 MISSION SUPPORT FLT OSTERHOUT, DAVID E 174 CIVIL ENGINEER SQDN PARKER, KELLY 137 AIRLIFT SQDN PRICE, DAVID S 174 MAINTENANCE SQDN PUCKETT, JASON A 105 SERVICES FLT REEVES, DARRYL R 137 AIRLIFT SQDN RIVERA, LUIS A 106 LOGISTICS RDNS SQDN SALZANO, FRANK M 106 LOGISTICS RDNS SQDN SANDELL, KRAIG R 105 AIRCRAFT MAINT SQDN SPAHN, ROBERT H 107 MAINTENANCE SQDN STEINBAUGH, NEIL E 107 MISSION SUPPORT FLT STOQUERT, FREDERICK III 174 LOGISTICS RDNS SQDN TURNER, JOHN R 102 RESCUE SQDN VARNEY, GRACE A 109 OPERATIONS SPT FLT VENDITTI, JOHN A 107 MAINTENANCE SQDN WELCH, JAMES E 139 AEROMED EVAC SQDN WRIGHT, DAVID J 105 SERVICES FLT STAFF SERGEANT ALEXANDER, DANIEL R 107 CIVIL ENGINEER SQDN ASEFA, TEGEST 105 MEDICAL SQDN BARANOWSKI, STEVEN 174 LOGISTICS RDNS SQDN BASCOM, GREGORY R 105 AERIAL PORT SQDN BATHRICK, SETH D 109 AERIAL PORT FLT BECKETT, STEVEN J 107 ACFT GENERAT SQDN BIMBER, JAMES C 105 MAINTENANCE SQDN BLUM, AMY M NORTHEAST AIR DEF SQDN BUNCH, ANDRE S 105 MAINTENANCE SQDN CONKLIN, AMBER R 105 AERIAL PORT SQDN COSGROVE, ERIN P 105 MAINTENANCE SQDN COVINGTON, MELANEY 107 MAINTENANCE SQDN DELLAROCCO, NICOLE 109 SERVICES FLT FLANIGAN, DANNIELLE 109 MEDICAL SQDN FOSTER, SHANE C 105 MAINTENANCE SQDN GASIEWICZ, ARTHUR A 107 MAINTENANCE SQDN GASSEN, CHARLES J 105 AIRCRAFT MAINT SQDN GRIFFITH, JOSEPH F 174 SERVICES FLT HARRINGTON, BRYAN JR 107 LOGISTICS RDNS SQDN HOTALING, CHAD E 109 LOGISTICS RDNS SQDN HOWINGTON, LARRY JR 109 AIRCRAFT MAINT SQDN HULL, ROBERT A II 107 CIVIL ENGINEER SQDN JOHNSON, MICHAEL 106 AIRCRAFT MAINT SQDN JOHNSON, PAUL A 105 AERIAL PORT SQDN JONIETZ, KLAUS DA II 105 MAINTENANCE SQDN KINDER, JEFFREY A JR 109 MAINTENANCE SQDN KWIATKOWSKI, ANDREW 107 COMMUNICATIONS FLT LEINEN, SCOTT V 137 AIRLIFT SQDN LENT, ERIC J 174 MAINTENANCE SQDN LENT, ROBERT A 174 CIVIL ENGINEER SQDN LONG, MARK J 105 SECURITY FORCES SQDN LUNDIN, CANDACE L 109 MEDICAL SQDN
July-August 2003 MARA, ANTHONY J 107 COMMUNICATIONS FLT MARTIN, MICHELE A 136 AIR REFUELING SQDN MCGRATH, LANCE M 105 MAINTENANCE SQDN MCILWAINE, JOHN P 174 OPERATIONS SPT FLT MERCENDETTI, ANDRE 174 OPERATIONS SPT FLT MORALES, SABRINA 106 MISSION SUPPORT FLT MORAN, BARTHOLOMEW 105 MAINT OPS FLT MOYNIHAN, JAMES D NEAD SCTY FORC FLT MULLEN, SHANE E 109 STUDENT FLT MUSCATO, JOSHUA C 109 LOGISTICS RDNS SQDN NILSEN, RACHEL B 105 SECURITY FORCES SQDN RAYMOND, CARL F 106 AIRCRAFT MAINT SQDN SANDERSON, BURDETTE JR 174 LOGISTICS RDNS SQDN SCHELL, BRIAN S 107 MISSION SUPPORT FLT SHULSKY, JAMES A 174 SECURITY FORCES SQDN SNYDER, ALLISON J 109 SERVICES FLT URBAND, DANIEL W 109 STUDENT FLT WALSH, BRYAN J 106 STUDENT FLT WEISSBERG, ILICIA M 105 AERIAL PORT SQDN ZIELINSKI, DAVID L 109 AERIAL PORT FLT SENIOR AIRMAN ABBOUD, NOEL T 174 LOGISTICS RDNS SQDN BARAN, KERRY A 105 AIRCRAFT MAINT SQDN BORDIERI, DAVID A 107 LOGISTICS RDNS SQDN BOVENZI, LYDIA E 107 MAINTENANCE OPS FLT BYRNS, KEVIN M 109 STUDENT FLT CAMPBELL, PAUL W 105 STUDENT FLT CAMBRIDGE, CHERAN 106 MEDICAL GP CHAMBERLAIN, REBECCA 107 LOGISTICS RDNS SQDN CRISPELL, RAYMOND E 105 MAINTENANCE SQDN DIXON, WILLIAM A 107 CIVIL ENGINEER SQDN DZIAMBA, NICHOLAS J 109 SECURITY FORCES SQDN FARYNA, SHAWN PATRICK 174 SECURITY FORCES SQDN FRENCH, TREVOR M 105 MAINTENANCE SQDN GIARDINO, JOSEPH W 109 AERIAL PORT FLT GIFFORD, CRAIG H 109 AERIAL PORT FLT GRAZIANO, JOSEPH N 102 RESCUE SQDN GROFF, JAMIE L 107 CIVIL ENGINEER SQDN HAYNES, JEFFREY A 107 MAINTENANCE SQDN HERNANDEZ, OMAR 105 MAINTENANCE SQDN HOLNESS, MICHAEL L 105 MAINTENANCE SQDN ISSRI, KHEMRAJ 213 ENG INSTL SQDN JOHNSON, JASON T 105 MAINTENANCE SQDN KEICHER, JORDAN M 107 CIVIL ENGINEER SQDN LARGE, WILLIAM S 109 STUDENT FLT MASON, SKOI T 105 LOGISTICS RDNS SQDN MEDINA, ANGELINA M 107 LOGISTICS RDNS SQDN MILLER, DEJA K 138 FIGHTER SQDN MUNCH, JASON D 106 LOGISTICS RDNS SQDN NEWTON, JORDYN M 274 AIR SUPT OPNS SQDN PALMER, CRAIG M 109 SECURITY FORCES SQDN PHEBUS, DOUGLAS K 105 MAINTENANCE SQDN RENNE, JENNIFER L 152 AIR OPERATIONS GP RIOPELLE, MARSHALL III 174 SECURITY FORCES SQDN ROSETTEJENSEN, SCOTT 109 MAINTENANCE SQDN ROUIN, BEAU P 107 CIVIL ENGINEER SQDN RUSSITANO, MARK A 106 MAINTENANCE SQDN SMITH, STEVEN H JR 106 MAINTENANCE SQDN STEGNER, KRYSTALORE 107 LOGISTICS RDNS SQDN VANDERBILT, CHARLES 105 STUDENT FLT VENDITTI, KYMBERLY 107 MAINTENANCE SQDN WILLIAMS, DAVID S 106 STUDENT FLT
LIFLT SQDN NT T MAINT SQDN IFLT WG
July-August 2003
Guard Times
Page 19
Commentary: 9-11 Widow Supports Troops By Christy Ferer Courtesy of the Army News Service When I told friends about my pilgrimage to Iraq to thank the troops, their reactions were underwhelming at best.
Some were blunt.
"Why are you going there?" They could not understand why it was important for me, a widow of the Sept. 11 terrorist attacks, to express my support for the men and women stationed in the Gulf today.
But the reason seemed clear to me.
Two hundred thousand troops have been sent halfway around the world to stabilize a culture that breeds terrorists like those who I believe began World War III on Sept. 11, 2001.
Reaction at home was so politely negative I began to doubt my role on the first USO Tribeca Institute tour into newly occupied Iraq where, on average, a soldier a day is killed.
Besides, with Robert De Niro, Kid Rock, Rebecca and John Stamos, Wayne Newton, Gary Senise and Lee Ann Womack, who needed me? AIRMAN FIRST CLASS ARSIC, NICOLE J 174 STUDENT BAUER, MICHAEL J 107 STUDENT BORNT, PATRICK R 109 STUDENT BREWER, DREW J 109 STUDENT CALKINS, LAUREN P 105 STUDENT CARR, DAVID J 107 STUDENT CASSICK, JESSICA F 107 STUDENT CROMBIE, DAVID J III 106 STUDENT DANGELO, ELI T 174 STUDENT DEVILLE, THOMAS J JR 107 STUDENT DUNN, ANDREW J 109 STUDENT EAGER, GREGORY B 109 STUDENT EVANS, MATTHEW T 174 STUDENT FOX, RACHEL C 174 STUDENT FRANKLIN, JEFFREY C 105 STUDENT GOSLEY, TYSON J 105 STUDENT GRAY, COREY J 109 STUDENT HARVEY, ETHAN S 107 STUDENT HORNBROOK, STEVEN C 174 STUDENT JOBSON, NATHANIEL E 174 STUDENT JOHNSON, NATHANIEL 109 STUDENT JUSTICE, AMBER S 107 STUDENT KING, NICHOLAS T 107 STUDENT LETCHER, JACOB N 107 STUDENT LIMBAL, YVAN S 107 STUDENT MARTIN, JENNIFER L 107 STUDENT MCPHERSON, STEPHEN 107 STUDENT MESSINA, ANDREA NP 107 STUDENT NEVELDINE, JEFFREY B 174 STUDENT PAWLIK, JOSHUA J 109 STUDENT PESANTE, JOSEPH A 105 STUDENT PETTERSEN, WILLIAM J 109 STUDENT ROBINSON, STEVEN C 107 STUDENT RULISON, SHAWN R 109 STUDENT SITKO, JAIME M 105 STUDENT SMITH, MALENE A 107 STUDENT SPOTTISWOOD, MARK 106 STUDENT STELLUTO, ANTHONY C 107 STUDENT TORRE, MICHAEL A 106 STUDENT TUTHILL, THOMAS J 109 STUDENT VANWINKLE, JOHN J 174 STUDENT VERNON, TONICA T 105 SECURITY VILLA, ELIZABETH 105 STUDENT WILCOX, TRAVIS W 174 STUDENT ZILLIOX, KRISTIN L 107 STUDENT AIRMAN SMITH, ERICA M 106 STUDENT
FLT FLT FLT FLT FLT FLT FLT FLT FLT FLT FLT FLT FLT FLT FLT FLT FLT FLT FLT FLT FLT FLT FLT FLT FLT FLT FLT FLT FLT FLT FLT FLT FLT FLT FLT FLT FLT FLT FLT FLT FLT FORCES SQDN FLT FLT FLT FLT
NEW YORK NAVAL MILITIA PROMOTIONS SCHMIDT, FRANCIS COMFAIRMED, GLENS FALLS TO GMCS CHASE, TERRY COMFAIRMED, GLENS FALLS TO MACS
They lunged at the opportunity to touch the steel symbolDid they really want to hear about my husband, Neil izing what so many of them felt as the purpose of their Levin, who went to work as director of New York Port mission.
Authority on Sept.11 and never came home? How would Looking into that sea of khaki gave me chills even in the they relate to the two other widows traveling with me? blistering heat.
To me, those troops were there to avenge Ginny Bauer, a New Jersey homemaker and the mother of the murder of my husband and 3,000 others.
When I got to three who lost her husband, David, and former marine Jon the microphone I told them we had not made this journey Vigiano, who lost his only sons -- Jon, a firefighter, and for condolences, but to thank them and to tell them the Joe, a policeman.
families think of them every day.
They lift our hearts.
The As we flew over deserts that looked like bleached bread crowd interrupted me with chants of " USA! USA! USA!" crumbs, I wondered if I'd feel like a street hawker, passing Many wept.
out Port Authority pins and baseball caps as I said "thank What happened next left no doubt the troops drew you" to the troops.
Would a hug from me mean anything inspiration from our tragedies.
When I was first asked to at all in the presence of the Dallas Cowboy cheerleaders and a Victoria Secret model? We arrived at the first "meet and greet."
It made me weep.
Armed with M16s and saddlebags of water in 120-degree heat, the soldiers swarmed over the stars for photos and autographs.
When they heard a trio of Sept. 11 family members was also in the tent, it was as if a psychic cork on emotional dam was popped.
Soldiers from every corner of New York, Long Island and Queens rushed toward us to express their condolences.
Some wanted to touch us, as if they needed a physical connection to our sorrow and for some living proof for why they were there.
One mother of two from Montana told me she signed up because of the terrorist attacks.
Dozens of others told us the same thing.
One young soldier showed me his metal bracelet engraved with the name of a victim he never knew and that awful date none of us will ever forget.
In fact, at every encounter with the troops came a surge of Guardsmen and reservists -- firefighters and cops, including many who had worked the rubble of Ground Zero -- just to exchange a hometown hug.
Their glassy eyes still do not allow anyone to penetrate too far inside to the place where their trauma is lodged; the trauma of devastation far greater than anyone who hadn't been there could even imagine.
It's there in me, too.
I had forced my way downtown on that awful morning, convinced I could find Neil beneath the rubble.
What I was not prepared for was to have soldiers show us the World Trade Center memorabilia they'd carried with them into the streets of Sgt. Keith Stenmark, from the 115th Military Police Company, a National Baghdad.
Others had clearly been holding in Guard unit from Cranston, Rhode Island, attached to the 3rd Infantry stories of personal Sept. 11 tragedies.
Division (Mechanized), descends a stairwell while clearing a house outside of Falluja, Iraq.
Thousands of service members serving in Iraq USO handlers moved us from one corner to the are members of the Guard and Reserve, including more than 500 soldiers next so everyone could meet us.
One fire brigade from the New York Army National Guard.
Photo Spc. Derek Gaines.
plucked the group from the crowd, transporting us to their firehouse to call on those who had to stand speak to thousands of troops in Quatar, after Iraq, I wonguard during the Baghdad concert.
It was all about touchdered if it would feel like a "grief for sale" spectacle.
ing us and feeling the reason they were in this hell.
Back at But this time I was quaking because I was to present the Saddam Hussein airport, Kid Rock turned a "meet and recovered World Trade Center steel to General Tommy greet" into an impromptu concert in a steamy airport hangar Franks.
I quivered as I handed him the icy gray block of before 5,000 troops.
steel.
His great craggy eyes welled up with tears.
The sea A captain from the Bronx tapped me on the back.
He joined of khaki fell silent.
Then the proud four-star general was the Army after some of his wife's best friends were lost at unable to hold back the tears which streamed down his face the World Trade Center.
When he glimpsed the piece of on center stage before 4,000 troops.
As this mighty man recovered metal from the towers that I had been showing turned from the spotlight to regain his composure I comto a group of soldiers he grasped for it as if it were the Holy forted him with a hug.
Grail.
Then he handed it to Kid Rock who passed the Now, when do I return? precious metal through the 5,000 troops in the audience.
Page 20 NEW YORK ARMY NATIONAL GUARD REENLISTMENTS HHD STARC (-) NYARNG SPC TINA M. COOK SSG DANIEL G. DONOHUE III SSG JOSEPH P. GILHEANY SFC EDWARD W. GUILBAULT SSG CHARLES T. MOORE SSG GLENN A. SOMELOFSKE MEDICAL COMMAND SPC JASON M. FARRELL CAMP SMITH TRAINING SITE SSG RICHARD AUSTIN SGT DAVID C. SOTOMAYOR SPC JUAN E. TACURI HQS 106TH REGIMENT (RTI) SFC FRANK J. HAGEN SSG THOMAS IANNUCCILLI 1ST BN 106TH REG (GS) SFC TALBERT R. GARDNER SGT FULBIA M. GIBBS SFC ROGER L. HATCH SFC GEORGE F. LAMBOY SGT DAVID D. STEED RECRUITING AND RETENTION CMD SFC CHARLES C. BERGEMAN SFC RUSSELL C. BLEDSOE SSG CHRISTOPHER CRAWFORD SGT KEVIN J. DAVIS SFC ROBERT A. DICKERSON SFC DEBORAH M. DUTTON SFC STEVEN R. HUCK SFC JESSICA X. HUFF SSG JOHN F. KLIMES SGT DUNCAN J. MACKAY SFC JOSEPH J. MITCHELL SSG ISHMOILE MOHAMMED SGT LENNOX A. ROBERTS JR SGT DAVID SILVA HHC 42 IN DIV(-) SPC JOI K. COLLIER SPC SAMUEL E. HOWELL SPC BRIAN K. MCGRAW SPC JAMES E. MONTESANO SPC MARCO A. SOLER 42D INFANTRY DIV BAND (-) SPC JOHN T. LASTELLA 1SG WARREN C. MCDOWELL SPC KEVIN J. OCONNOR JR 642D MI BN SGT BORIS PLOTNITSKIY SSG DAVID T. STACK HHC(-) 1-69 INF (M) SPC CHARLES E. BAILEY SPC JUAN ESPAILLAT SGT JORGE A. JARAPIONCE SPC RICHARD D. JOHNSON SPC PEDRO H. MOJICA SGT JUDE J. REIMBEAU SFC MANUEL B. ROMAN CO D 1-69TH INFANTRY (M) SSG DANIEL BOVE SSG JOHN J. FESTGER CO E 1-69TH INFANTRY (M) 1SG ELOY ORTIZ DET 1 HHC 1-69TH INF (M) SPC GARY C. BECK SPC ALEX R. CEVALLOSGOMEZ SPC ANDREW N. FIRESTONE SGT BRYAN M. KERSHAW SPC ALBERTO LAFONTAINE SPC FABIAN B. MCRAVIN SPC PAUL MELENDEZ SPC JERIEME A. MURRELL SPC THOMAS D. STEVENSON CO A 342D FWD SPT BN SPC SHELDON BALTHAZAR SPC TOSIMA M. WILLIAMS CO B 342D FWD SPT BN SFC WILFRID R. ASHLAW SGT JOHN W. BURKS SGT FREDERICK A. ROYCE SGT RONALD L. TIBBLES HHC 1-101ST CAVALRY SPC LARRY ARZUAGA SPC DAVID A. BAILEY SGT STEVEN M. BAUER SSG JOSEPH CUMBERBATCH SPC JOSEPH P. ELLISON JR SGT MICHAEL FANTROY SGT MICHAEL J. GRANA SPC MICHAEL R. LENT SGT REYNALDO NARVAEZ CPL MIGUEL A. RAMOS III SPC DEMITRIOS ROIDIS SSG JODY C. SCHELLENBERG CO A 1-101ST CAVALRY SGT VICTOR M. ORTIZ SFC JOSE A. SANTOS CO B 1-101ST CAVALRY CPL GERALD F. HABER SFC ALAN F. HUTCHINS SPC MATTHEW E. MOSKOV CO C 1-101ST CAVALRY SGT ERIC W. MILEWSKI CO D 1-101ST CAVALRY SGT FREDERICK C. AYCOTT SGT FRANK FERNANDEZ SPC JOSE N. JACINTO SGT EDDIE ROSADO CPL MATTHEW WINTENBURG HHC 3RD BDE 42ND ID (M) SGT JEFFREY A. GOODRUM DET 1 50TH MAIN SPT BN SPC RICHARD C. JONES DET 1 HHC 1-127TH ARMOR SPC DAVID M. DUNN PFC ROBERT J. MOKHIBER SPC ROBERT E. TRZASKA 127 AR BN 01 HHC REAR NY SPC JEFFREY J. WIEDER 127 AR BN 01 CO A REAR NY SPC CORINNA A. BUCCILLI SPC CARMEN M. NIEVES 1ST BATTALION 142D AVIATION SSG EMANUEL P. ZERILLO 249TH MED CO AIR AMB (-) 1SG DAVID L. BIMBER DET 1 CO G 137TH AVIATION SPC DAVID E. MIENS SFC ROBERT B. SMALLEY SFC ROGER S. SNYDER SPC BRIAN J. WHITBECK HSC (-) 642D SUPPORT BN SGT NICHOLAS E. DEDIOS SGT DAVID DOTTIN SSG JOHN J. GREENE JR SSG JOHN W. HILL SPC TROYE A. PRYOR SPC JOSEPH K. RUIZ SPC OMAR N. TAPPER DET 2 CO B 638 SPT BN SPC FREDDY J. CHALEN CO C(-) 638 SPT BN SPC JAMES C. BROGLIE SSG GERARD J. MEES SGT JOHN L. RUTHERFORD SPC JOHN T. VOGT SPC BRIAN M. WORTHINGTON HHB 1-258TH FIELD ARTILLERY SGT ELIZABETH HERNANDEZ SSG EDUARDO MARTINEZ BATTERY A 1-258TH FA CPL AUBREY A. BUDHU CPL GUSTAVO W. MARQUEZ CPL WILLIAM TORRES
Army Reenlistments SGT JOSE A. VELEZ BATTERY B 1-258TH FA SGT RUBEN MARTINEZ SERVICE BTRY 1-258TH FA SPC LUCIUS L. ANDERSON III SPC ORLANDO CAHOLO SPC JESUS M. RODRIGUEZ SPC JEFREY A. SOTO 258THBFA BN HHB FWD SPC FRANKLIN E. JACKSON HHC AVN BDE 42 IN DIV 1SG JOHN ADAMS SGT DIANE M. BOYCE SPC BRYAN W. RACE HHC(-) 3-142D AVIATION SPC GEORGE M. OST JR SPC STEPHEN WARRINGTON CO A, 3-142D AVIATION SSG JAMES L. GRIMMER SGT LANCE P. MITCHELL CO B 3-142D AVIATION SGT JOSEPH A. BAGLEY SGT MICHAEL G. CAMPBELL SGT WALTER N. MESHENBERG CO C 3-142D AVIATION SSG DOUGLAS J. JONES SGT DEAN A. ROSMARINO HHD ENGINEER BDE 42 ID SPC DEBBIE A. ELIASON MSG GLEN T. SARNOWSKI 199TH ARMY BAND (-) SPC HADRIAN R. HERNANDEZ SGT JEFFREY A. SECKINGER HHC 107TH SUPPORT GROUP SPC FRANKLIN R. UCETA SFC ERNEST A. WRIGHT CO B 230TH SIGNAL BN SPC MARISOL ALBA SPC CLARENCE A. HEWINS MSG JOE E. MOODY SPC ABBE L. PABON SGT CATHERINE A. RAMOS SPC ERIC E. WATSON CO C 230TH SIGNAL BN SGT WENDELL M. CHASE 1SG CARL S. DORNBUSH SPC WASIM A. KHALIL SPC KEVIN MARTIN SSG HOWARD MCKENZIE SPC BOK S. PARK SFC DAVID L. PEELER SSG JOHN A. RODENAS SPC RAFAEL TORRES SPC ANDRES F. VALENCIA SGT VICTOR S. ZUCCARELLI HHD 369TH CORPS SPT BN SPC LUIS A. CARDONASERNA SSG RAFAEL CASTILLO SGT TOMAS F. CORDONES SPC HUGGINS S. HERBERT 1569TH TRANS CO SPC ANTONIO LUGO SGT MERVYN R. MCBURNIE SFC ALLEN SIMMONS 102D MAINTENANCE CO SPC STEPHEN H. BOWEN SPC JOAN COLEMAN SPC CARLOS O. CRUZ SGT O ENCARNACIONRIVERA SSG GEORGE ENRIQUE SPC RAYMOND ESQUILIN SPC FILIPP KHOSH SGT VEDASTO F. MASANA SPC MICHAEL SMITH 133D MAINTENANCE CO PFC EDUARDO EUSEBIO SPC KEITH W. FIEDLER MSG LOUIS GRASSO SPC DOUGLAS M. HAYDAK SGT JULIO R. LEONBENITEZ 145TH MAINTENANCE CO SGT KEITH L. CHAPMAN SGT DIEGO M. GONZALES SSG ISMAEL GONZALEZ SPC OLIVERIO HERNANDEZ SPC MERY JIMENEZ SPC CARLOS ROBLES SGT MARCONI C. STHILL 107TH MP CO (RD) SPC SHANNON M. DIXON SPC NICHOLAS L. GARCEA HHD 27TH FINANCE BN SPC KIMBERLY J. HALL 4TH FINANCE DET SPC VALERIE MORRIS 14TH FINANCE DET SPC RICHARD CUMBERBATCH SPC NICOLE MCQUEEN SPC FRANCIA J. PERALTA 56TH PERSONNEL SVC BN SGT LESLIE M. BUTLER 4TH PERSONNEL SVC DET SFC NICHOLAS J. GUY 29TH PERSONNEL SVC DET SGT GEORGE G. BOOTH SFC PETER R. SCANIO HHC 152D ENGINEER BN SPC DAVID D. SCHNEIDER SGT RORY S. WOODWORTH DET 1 CO A 152D EN BN SPC RAYMOND J. HIRST CO B 152D ENGINEER BN SFC DANIEL E. FRONTERA CO C 152D ENGINEER BN SPC PAUL R. BALDWIN JR H 
July-August 2003 CO A(-) 427TH SPT BN SGT CHARLES T. DAVIS CO B(-) 427TH SPT BN SGT EDWARD R. DOWD SGT LANCE C. DUNBAR SPC STEPHEN L. HIRSCHMAN SPC JASON T. MULCAHY SGT BRUCE L. NEWPHER DET 1 CO B 427TH SPT BN SGT PATRICK H. SMITH III CO C 427TH SUPPORT BN SGT THOMAS G. FAY SSG MARTIN L. KENYON SGT SYLVESTER YEFKO TROOP E 101ST CAVALRY SPC SCOTT C. BAILEY 1SG JEFFREY A. LEBLANC SPC ROBERT D. RAGIN SPC THOMAS D. WATERMAN 227TH MI CO 1SG JOHN F. LARA SGT SCOTT P. RICH HHC 1-105TH INF SSG MAURICE G. CATEL III CO A (-) 1 BN 105 INF SGT RICARDO G. GRIMBALL SGT FRANKIE HERNANDEZ SGT KENNETH C. KIERNAN SPC FRANCISCO LINERO CPL JOSEPH A. MACHULSKI SFC MICHAEL D. OBRIEN SPC GIUSEPPE REALE DET 1 CO A 1 BN 105 INF SGT PATRICK G. ANDREWS JR SPC CRAIG S. BURLEIGH SPC PAUL R. HOOVLER JR CPL KYLE M. WARNER CO B 1-105 INF SGT ALVIN AMEZQUITA SGT CLINTON W. ANGUS SPC JOHN R. BYRNES III SPC JOHN CRUCETT PFC NEIL J. LEISSLE SPC PAUL H. NOCH SSG JESSE J. TEJADA CO C 1-105 INF SSG TREVOR M. BOYCE CO D 1-105 INF SGT GERARD J. DECKER HHC (-) 1-108TH INF SGT STEVEN G. FRALICK DET 1 HHC 1-108TH INF SPC JAMES O. DUNBAR CO B 1-108TH INF CPL JAMES C. PARKS SPC RAMON L. SANTIAGO JR SPC ANTHONY VASQUEZ CO C (-) 1-108TH INF SPC TOBY L. HEATH SPC MIGUEL A. RAMOS DET 2 CO C 1-108TH INF SFC ROBERT N. NOLAN HHC 2 BN 108 INF SGT MICHAEL R. COSTANTINE SPC CHARLES R. DENHAESE SPC GREGORY FRANKLIN MSG JOSEPH H. HUBBARD SSG ERIK A. NICHOLS SPC DERREK A. SPENCER CSM WILLIAM F. WICKS CO A (-) 2 BN 108 INF SPC BRIAN J. GILLIS SSG FRANK M. WILDER CO B (-) 2 BN 108 INF SGT CHRISTOPHER M. PAISER SGT ROBERT A. RULE SPC MARCUS D. SLICK DET 1 CO B 2 BN 108 INF SPC HEATHER M. KELLOGG CO C (-) 2 BN 108 INF
July-August 2003
Army National Guard
Page 21
Island Thunder Continues to Roll Deployment to Bosnia a First Step in Transformation for LI Aircrews Story by Sgt. Brenda Grogan Photos by 1st Sgt. Charles Macrelli HQ, 53rd Troop Command and full-time military technician.
"We knew this urrent world situations have caused New York was going to be a great Army National Guardsmen to face an increase in opportunity for the (tramission demand.
But despite the increased strain, ditional Guard) soldiers to rd nd the soldiers of Bravo Company, 3 Battalion, 142 Aviapick up a lot of experition Regiment faced every challenge with courage and ence.
We focused on resilience.
In the past two years alone, they have deployed training them as much as in back to back missions at opposite ends of the world.
possible, rather than just First there was a six-month humanitarian operation in letting the more experiNicaragua.
The welcome home hugs and kisses were enced guys do all the bittersweet, as they were soon replaced with tearful work."
This leadership goodbyes.
These soldiers then traveled to Bosnia for a paid off well, resulting in nine-month activation in support of peacekeeping opera100 percent of their crew tions in the Balkans. chiefs being progressed Long-term deployments, like Bosnia, can prove very Chief Warrant Officer Marques Martins during the B Company SFOR mission to Bosnia.
The to Readiness Level (RL) company redeployed this past spring only to convert its mission to that of air assault this summer.
challenging, especially to those who face their first mobi1, the highest level of lization.
This is when the veteran soldiers of Bravo Comreadiness for an Army pany stepped up to the plate.
aviator.
"For the NCO's and trainers in the company, this mander, Capt. Kerry McCauley is impressed with their "We had a strong mentorship program," said Staff Sgt. was the best part- being able to see those guys get to where desire to be unsurpassed in their field.
Christopher Klimek, a senior UH-60 Black Hawk crew chief they could go on a task by themselves and come out on "These soldiers are able to maintain combat readiness top," Klimek added.
through tough, realistic training," he said.
We will successBravo company soldiers made the most of fully execute all operations as required."
their mobilization.
They worked long and Their drive to be the best, coupled with the unfailing hard, and took advantage of all the remote willingness to answer the call to duty has made Bravo regions had to offer.
Company, 3rd Battalion, 142nd Aviation Regiment a true "Over there you're involved more, said Sgt. testament to their unit motto, "Island Thunder"- which Michael Campbell," also a UH-60 Black Hawk continue to roll. crew chief.
"As far as training goes, it's more "We knew this was going to be a great intensive and you are able to learn much more."
He noted that one such example is opportunity for the (traditional Guard) soldiers Night Vision Goggle (NVG) training.
"When to pick up a lot of experience.
We focused on you fly NVG's in Bosnia, you get significantly training them as much as possible" darker skies than anyplace back home, so the training environment is better," he added.
Chief Warrant Officer John Grosskopf, a Blackhawk Maintenance Test Pilot, agrees.
"The flying was spectacular as far as terrain goes," Grosskopf said.
"You had flatlands, various mountainsA UH-60 Blackhawk prepares for takeoff during a unit training mission in a really wide variation of elevations."
Bosnia-Herzegovenia.
Soldiers from the 3rd Battalion, 142nd Aviation Regiment recently returned from the Stabilization Force (SFOR) mission in He said this gave the flight crew some the Balkans only to transform their aviation companies from combat service of the most demanding modes of flight support to air assault combat emphasis.
available anywhere.
All these experiences down range, along with their strengthened camaraArmy National Guard Reenlistments Continued... derie, help to prepare them for a major change within their unit.
It turns out that the increased optempo was just the SSG HAROLD VANALSTYNE JR SPC ANDRE T. PERRY DET 1 CO C 2 BN 108 INF SPC TONI TOMASINO beginning, as Bravo Company was siSPC JOHN G. BONN BTRY A 1 BN 156 FA multaneously in the process of underSPC RICHARD J. HOLLIDAY SPC ALEX DIBENEDETTO going a major transformation from a SGT BILLY J. JENKINS BTRY B 1 BN 156 FA combat support aviation unit to a comMembers of Island Thunder, the 3rd Battalion, 142nd Aviation Regiment's CPL BRIAN M. MARCHESE SPC CHRISTOS C. DEFTEREOS bat ready air assault unit.
The deployed B Company from Ronkonkoma (left to right): Sgt. Joe Cardella, Staff HHS (-) 1-156 FA CO D 2-108 IN Sgt. Chris Klimeck, Sgt.
Mike Campbell, Chief Warrant Officer John members returned home ready for the SGT MICHAEL J. DEGROTE SPC GEORGE C. BAKER III Grosskopf, Sgt. Kwan Mok and Sgt.
Sam Carreras.
The company task at hand, and on June 1st they were SPC THOMAS J. FLANAGAN PFC TIMOTHY S. DAVIS supported deployments to Nicaragua in the spring of 2002 and the re-designated an air assault aviation SGT GARY E. LEWIS SPC JEAN M. LEIMKUHLER Bosnia Stabilization Force rotation in 2002-2003.
This summer the company.
Their new company comSPC JOEL T. NOSKER SPC JOSHUA M. PERUSSE company converted as part of an assault helicopter battalion.
RONKONKOMA
C
Page 22
Around the State
July-August 2003
Soldier Wounded in Iraq Donates Combat Boots to Military Museum Guard Times Staff
FORT HAMILTON overnor George E. Pataki honored US Army Sgt. Curtis Campbell of Brooklyn with the presentation of the New York State Conspicuous Service Cross on July 31st for his actions on the battlefields of Iraq.
Sergeant Campbell was wounded in a convoy ambush that claimed the lives of eleven US soldiers and saw seven others, including Pfc. Jessica Lynch, taken prisoner.
Campbell -- a member of the 507th Maintenance Company out of Ft. Bliss, Texas - had requested an opportunity to meet the Governor upon his return home to New York.
"Sergeant Curtis Campbell is not only a native New Yorker, he's also a bone fide American Hero," Governor Pataki said.
"Sergeant Campbell risked his life to defend freedom, and all New Yorkers can be extremely proud of his tremendous courage and sacrifice."
After Governor Pataki presented Sergeant Campbell with the Conspicuous Service Cross, the Sergeant presented the Governor with the boots that he wore while on active duty overseas.
The pair of combat boots will become the first Operation Iraqi Freedom-related object in the collection of the New York State Military Museum and Veterans Research Center, established in Saratoga Springs by Governor Pataki in October of 2002.
G
"As a native of Brooklyn, New York, this recognition carries a very special meaning for me," Campbell said.
"I am also grateful to have the opportunity to present Governor Pataki with the pair of boots I wore while on duty overseas in Iraq for the State's Military Museum and Veterans Research Center.
"I hope they serve as a reminder for future visitors of the bravery and the sacrifices all of our nation's servicemen and women have made to defend freedom," he said.
Sgt. Curtis Campbell presents his desert boots from Iraq to Governor Pataki at Fort Hamilton.
Photo by Lester Millman.
Binghamton Hospital Receives Patriot Award
Need Extra Money? Support Vet's Families! Guard Times Staff ach month the families of more than 400 deceased veterans receive honors from the New York Army National Guard.
That is our way to say thank you for their honorable service.
Our two-soldier teams fold and present the U.S. flag to a veteran's next of kin.
If you are a soldier who takes pride in the military, your appearance, has a Class A uniform, can be available some weekdays and Saturdays, you are right for this program.
Members are eligible to earn some extra military pay for their duties.
E
Photo above, ESGR presents the State Chair's Award for to Binghamton Hospital.
From right to left: Peter McGinn, PhD, President and CEO of United Health Services (UHS); Michael Puglisi, Chair of the Southern Tier ESGR Committee; Matthew Salenger, UHS Hospitals President 
Photo by Frank O'Connor.
Guard Times Staff
BINGHAMTON inghamton General Hospital was recognized this summer for its support of employees who also serve in the Guard and Reserve.
The hospital was awarded the National Committee for Employer Support of the Guard and Reserve's (ESGR) Committee State Chair's Award for supporting Guard and Reserve members during recent federal mobilizations supporting the global war on terror in Operations Enduring Freedom and Iraqi Freedom.
The award was made at the recommendation by 1st Lt. Frank R. Rodriguez.
He is a nurse in the intensive care unit at Binghamton General Hospital.
He recently served on active duty in southwest Asia.
Peter V. McGinn, PhD, President and CEO of United Health Services accepted the award at the hospital on July 14.
Binghamton General Hospital is part of the United Health Services which provides health services in Broome, Delaware and Chenango Counties.
The presentation was made by Michael Puglisi of the New York State Department of Labor and recently appointed
B
A training class will be scheduled this fall for Military Forces Honor Guards in the Capital District.
For soldiers interested in this or other local honor guard duties, call the Military Funeral Honors Coordinator, Mr. Don Roy, at (518) 7864906 for more information.
Chair of the Southern Tier ESGR Committee and Capt. Arthur Zegers of the New York Army National Guard's 204th Engineer Battalion headquartered at the West End Armory in Binghamton.
Also present was Frank O'Connor, Director of Marketing for the State's ESGR Committee and vice president of Messenger Associates, Inc.
The National ESGR Committee sponsors an awards program designed to recognize employers for employment policies and practices that are supportive of their employees' participation in the National Guard and Reserve.
Puglisi said, "This award is but a token of thanks to the staff and administration at United Health Services.
This level of support is critical to the morale of those who are activated and who are leaving their families and communities.
Knowing that their job will be there when they return can provide some comfort to the activated troops."
"When troops are activated, they leave their family, their homes and jobs.
And to have the support from their employers is important to them.
United Health Services serves as an example for other employers when their employees are activated," O'Connor concluded.
July-August 2003
Around the State
Page 23
Commissary Web Site is Customer Link to Savings By Bonnie Powell Courtesy of the Family Readiness Program hen is the next case lot sale? What time does my commissary open? Where can I get more cou pons? The answers to those questions, and more, are at www.commissaries.com.
Commissary customers will find their one-stop cyber information center is open 24 hours a day, 365 days a year - and there is always something new.
"The Web site is there to help them save money," said Rick Brink, Web content editor for the Defense Commissary Agency.
"One thing we're often asked is why there aren't Internet coupons on our site.
But there are.
We may not be able to offer them ourselves, but customers can find links to commercial sites that offer commissary sales information, newsletters and downloadable coupons through the links page at www.commissaries.com."
The number of coupons redeemed online or downloaded and used at "brick and mortar stores" has increased dramatically over the last three years, with grocery coupons among the most popular.
For example, a link to CoolSavings, one of the largest providers of coupons on the Internet, is brand new on the links page available at the web site.
"If a business sells groceries in commissaries or has coupons of interest to our customers, all they need to do is provide a gateway page for commissary customers and we'll provide a text link to their Web site," says Brink.
"We want to do anything we can to encourage savings above and beyond the 30 percent savings we typically provide commissary shoppers."
"Store pages are the most visited areas of our Web site by far," said Brink.
"Customers can find commissary locations, hours, news about store events and other useful information about their commissary.
They can even e-mail the store.
It's all right there at their fingertips - all they have to do is click."
Customers can also access the shopping pages before they plan their commissary trips to find out what's on sale.
Another recent addition is a link to the "Commissary Gift Certificates" page, which allows anyone to purchase the certificates as a "gift of groceries" for military families and friends or to donate to charities that support the military.
The gift certificates page has become the top-ranked specialty page with over $1 million commissary gift certificates purchased or donated since October 2002.
The Guard at the Glen
W
Members of the New York Army National Guard hosted the Army Guard NASCAR race car August 10th at the annual races at Watkins Glen.
Driver Todd Bodine and the Ford Taurus car number 54 arrived in back in central New York, where Bodine began his racing career.
Prior to the race, Bodine appeared with the Guard car to meet with visiting fans.
"I love Watkins Glen.
"I love road racing and Watkins Glen is an awesome place to race.
To come here and have all family and friends, hometown, it's just awesome," Bodine said.
Unfortunately, the Guard car experienced difficulties, forcing Bodine off the track with 25 laps remaining and into 35th place in the race.
Photo by Sgt. 1st Class Michael Steger.
Air Guard Rings NYSE Bell Honors part of National 'Tribute to Freedom' Maj. Gen. Robert Gruber of the New York Air National Guard cheers after ringing the bell to open the American Stock Exchange on June 13.
One enlisted member from all the services also attended to represent the enlisted soldiers, airmen, Marines, sailors and Coast Guardsmen involved in Operations Iraqi Freedom and Enduring Freedom.
Operation Tribute to Freedom is a Department of Defense initiative to promote military members and their service during the Global War on Terror in Operations Noble Eagle, Enduring Freedom and Iraqi Freedom.
Photo by Alan Rosenberg.
VA Reduces SGLI Premiums for Military and Family Coverage Sgt. 1st Class Doug Sample American Forces Press Service
WASHINGTON, DC
T
he Department of Veterans Affairs has announced that premiums for the Service members Group Life Insurance will be reduced, handing military members a few extra dollars in their pockets each month.
Beginning in July, the cost for a $250,000 policy -- the maximum coverage -- dropped from $20 to $16.25 monthly, a $3.75 savings.
Rates for Veterans Group Life Insurance will not change.
Tom Tower, DoD's assistant director for military compensation, welcomed the reduced premiums, adding that anytime you put "more money in the pockets of military members, it's always a good result."
Premiums will also be reduced for SGLI family coverage, with rates varying among age groups.
The largest saving will go to spouses between 35 and 39 years old, whose premiums will be nearly cut in half.
Service members currently pay $13.00 for a $100,000 family policy.
That policy will cost $7.50 beginning in July ­ a $5.50 savings.
The reduced rates means a military family will save an average of $100 a year.
The VA estimates that service members collectively will save about $96 million annually in premiums, and $42 million in family coverage premiums each year.
Tower said the reduced premiums are a result of an ongoing process to keep costs down for military members.
"The VA regularly checks to see how much is paid out versus how much is collected in premiums, and whenever it seems like they have built up premium reserves, they like to reduce premiums to keep the cost to a minimum for the
member," Tower said.
"Its part of the objective of the program: to provide the lowest cost possible."
SGLI began in 1965 to meet the insurance needs of Vietnam- era service members.
Before SGLI, the military provided $10,000 policies to service members, and policies were available to active-duty military only.
Today the SGLI program provides coverage of $250,000 to active duty service members and most Reservists.
Coverage of $100,000 has also been provided for spouses of participating members with free coverage of $10,000 for dependent children.
Reduced levels of coverage may also be elected.
Information about the change in SGLI premiums can be found at www.insurance.va.gov, or call the Office of Servicemembers Group Life Insurance toll-free at 1-800419- 1473.
Page 24
Guard Times
July-August 2003 About Guard Times The Guard Times is authorized under provisions of Army Regulation 360-1 and Air Force Regulation 190-1 and is a publication of the New York State Division of Military and Naval Affairs, and the New York Army and Air National Guard.
Views which appear in this newspaper are not necessarily those of the Department of Defense.
The Guard Times has a circulation of 25,000 and is distributed free to members of the New York State Militia Force and employees of the Division of Military and Naval Affairs.
Articles, photos and letters are welcome.
Please provide article submissions on a computer disk with a hard print out and a name and telephone number for a point of contact.
We prefer stories saved in Microsoft Word or ASCII text.
Submission deadlines are February 15, April 15, June 15, August 15, October 15 and December 15.
Send your submissions to: Guard Times DMNA-MNPA 330 Old Niskayuna Road Latham, New York 12110-2224 (518) 786-4581 FAX (518) 786-4649 or Richard.Goldenberg@ny.ngb.army.mil Gov. George E. Pataki Commander in Chief Maj. Gen. Thomas P. Maguire, Jr.
The Adjutant General P. C. "Pete" Kutschera Dir. of Public Affairs Lt. Col. Paul A. Fanning, NYARNG Editor Maj. Richard L.Goldenberg, NYARNG Editor
Forging New Partnerships Adjutant General Travels to South Africa By Maj. Richard J. Sloma HQ, New York Army National Guard
PRETORIA, SOUTH AFRICA
n August 22, 2003, The Adjutant General, Maj. Gen. Thomas P. Maguire, Jr., and Lt. Gen. Godfrey N. Ngwenya, South African National Defence Forces Chief of Joint Operations, exchanged flags and handshakes to initiate a relationship under the State Partnership Program (SPP).
The formal announcement ceremony was held at the Ministry of Defence in Pretoria, South Africa.
The National Guard Bureau program currently has 37 states and territories in 40 partnerships across the globe.
The partnership between New York and South Africa is the first such relationship on the African continent.
After exchanging flags, Maguire presented Lt. Gen. Ngwenya with a letter from Governor George E. Pataki to South African Minister of Defence, Mr. Mosiuoa G. P. Lakota, a plaque, and an Adjutant General military coin.
Also present were Gen. Charles F. Wald, Deputy Commander for United States European Command (USEUCOM) and Dr. Jendayi E. Frazer, Special Assistant to the President and Senior Director for African Affairs.
The Republic of South Photo above: Lt. Gen. Godfrey N. Ngwenya, South African National Defence Forces Chief of Joint Operations (left) receives a letter from New York State Governor Africa is a nation within USEUCOM's George E. Pataki from Maj. Gen. Thomas P. Maguire, Jr., The Adjutant General of geographic area of responsibility.
New York.
Below, Maguire and Gen. Charles F. Wald, European Command Deputy Maguire was accompanied by Lt. Col. Commander display the national colors of South Africa to symbolize the new Timothy G. Vaughn, Executive Support partnership.
The ceremeny marks the first steps in the State Partnership Program between New York and South Africa.
Photos by Lt. Col. James M. Gaudio.
Staff Officer, Headquarters New York Air National Guard, Lt. Col. James M. Gaudio, New York Army National Guard Chief of Staff, and manders and US Government (USG) objectives.
The broad Lt. Col. David Martinez, the New York SPP Coordinator. range of activities possible within a partnership reflects the Maguire had the opportunity to meet with United States unique flexibility of the National Guard to respond to Ambassador Cameron R. Hume, Defense and Air Attaché partner nation requirements.
Colonel Clarence D. Smith, Jr., and Office of Defense Cooperation (ODC) Chief Lt. Col. Samuel K. Millett.
During the ceremony, Gen. Wald spoke of the characteristics of New York State and the Republic of South Africa that make the partnership a good match.
Maj. Gen. Maguire emphasized the strengths that members of the National Guard bring to the partnership.
"Soldiers and airmen from the New York National Guard bring with them unique skills that they carry over to their military positions from their civilian jobs," Maguire said.
The National Guard SPP began in 1992 in the Baltic Nations as a joint engagement effort between USEUCOM and the National Guard Bureau (NGB) with the intent to assist former Warsaw Pact nations in their transition from Partner states typically expand to eventually include communist governments to democratic governments.
civilians and civilian agency participation in partnership The SPP links a State National Guard with a partner nation activities where appropriate so as to help develop relationto support mutual security cooperation objectives.
The ships between partners beyond just military relationships program highlights the role of the National Guard as an allto all levels of society.
volunteer, professional military with dual missions to supA long-term goal is for partnerships to mature as security port the nation and the state.
The unique civil-military cooperation activities assist the host nations in becoming nature of the National Guard enables it to interact with both full members in the community of nations.
The SPP is also active and reserve forces of the foreign nation, as well as an important security cooperation activity, particularly in civilian governmental agencies of that nation.
the Global War on Terrorism.
O
SPP activities range from bilateral military to military events to military to civilian events and even civilian to civilian events.
The range of activities conducted is developed by the State National Guard and their host nation counterpart and are focused on Combatant Com-
Guard Times Address Changes Changed your address recently? Is the Guard Times still coming to an old address? If so, it may be time to check with your unit administrator.
Chances are, the old address is still listed at the unit.
Computerized shipping lables are produced for Guard Times at state headquarters from the electronic data base.
This information is updated through periodic submissions from the field.
The unit, SIDPERS, the Personnel Services Branch and military pay all need to have a document supplied by the soldier to change the home address.
Before writing us at the Guard Times about your address change, start with your unit.
It takes about two months before the change hits the system, but, guess what! The Guard Times comes out every two months.
So if you have verified the unit has the correct information and the Guard Times still came to the old address, be patient.
The next issue should come to the new address.
Reminder.
It is the soldier's responsibility to submit address changes in a prompt manner.
Complimentary or Back Issues Complimentary or back issues of the Guard Times are available.
Contact us at the address above.
