Your E-Clipz Copyright 2002, GeoTel Corporation.
No claim to pre- existing original works.
All rights reserved.
Copying and/or electronic transmission is a violation of the copyright law
9430
Morning Telegraph Tyler, TX Circ 45635
Telesurgerv Takes Off At Hospital Surgeons At Mother Frances Make East Texas History With Surgery Through TV By MARVIN ELLIS Staff Writer Surgeons at a national convention in Chicago watched two Tyler physicians operate on a 54year-old Mount Pleasant woman via real-time telesurgery - usually reserved for teaching universities.
Dr. Charles V. Beall, assisted by Dr. Robert A. McKinney Jr., performed a three-hour dual laparoscopic surgery on the 300-pound woman, first with the potentially dangerous gastric bypass procedure, followed by removal of a diseased gall bladder.
Also makin$ history with this surgery was world-renowned Dr. James "Butch" Rosser director of minimally invasive surgery at Beth Israel in New York City who himself underwent bariatric surgery in August 2001 and has since lost 150 pounds - who was moderating the event in Chicago before several hundred doctors.
Rosser discussed 
He asked numerous questions of the Tyler doctors, who answered during the surgery.
Several times during the surgery he was impressed with techniques used by Beall and McKinney, citing numerous times the quality of surgical stitching plus minimal bleeding.
The surgery was performed in the Ornelas Tower Monday morning using the Endosuite operating room package manufactured by Stryker, which sponsored the event in Chicago at the American College of Surgeons national convention.
Stephen F. Knoll, vice president of surgical services at Mother Frances, said this system allows physicians from around the world to see procedures in Tyler, using high-speed digital networking with flat screen monitors.
"The quality is HDTV and the laparoscopic cameras now offers 3.5 to 10 magnification with 1080 lines of solution.
The quality of the images is six times better than in 1992 when we started laparoscopic surgery.''
Beall and McKinney, at a press conference for the surgery, explained more than five million Americans suffer from clinically severe or morbid obesity.
Morbid obesity is a chronic disease associated with diabetes, high blood pressure, breathing problems and/or arthritis that can lead to fur-
NATIONAL TELESURGERY: Dr. Charles V. Beall, (left) assisted by Dr. Robert A. McKinney Jr. (right) perform a dual surgery Monday at Mother Frances Hospital transmitted in real time telesurgery to Chicago's American College of Surgeon's national convention.
ther complications and death if not properly managed.
McKinney said the operation restricts intake of food by surgically making the stomach smaller and re-routing food through the small intestines.
The gastric bypass surgery affects the amount of food absorption, and changes the way the body uses energy.
He said long-term studies show the majority of patients undergoing gastric bypass surgery may attain extensive weight loss, typically between 50 to 75 percent of their excess weight over a period of 12 to 18 months.
Complications of obesity, such See HOSPITAL, Page 2B
..
... .
-.
..-
---,
as diabetes, high blood pressure, , sleep apnea, 
The weight regained after five years is only five percent of that lost.
Beall and McKinney performed the surgery via a minimally invasive procedure known as laparoscopy, where five small surgical incisions are made instead of one long incision, as in conventional open surgery.
The result is significantly less post-operative pain, risk of infection and recovery time.
Recovery time, which can be months long when operated on through open procedures, can be reduced to weeks.
During the laparoscopic sur-
gery a small video camera called a laparoscope, which sends images to an external video screen, is inserted into the body through one of the incisions.
Hollow tubes or ports are inserted into the other small incisions.
Tools used in laparoscopic surgery are designed like traditional surgical instruments but on a much smaller scale.
These instruments are passed through the ports and into the body.
Tools function like joysticks so surgeons can maneuver each to perform surgery while they watch what is going on the external video screen.
MAKING DESTINY Midland ReporterTelegram Midland, TX Circ 20281
OCT 2 1 2003
CARE CENTER The new Texas Surgical Center near the Scharbauer sports Complex should begin holding surgeries by the end of the month.
New ambulatory care center for low-risk procedures ready to go By Cory Chandler Staff Writer
A series of discussions by orthopedic surgeons in the area has led to a new ambulatory surgery center in Midland.
The Texas Surgical Center has celebrated its grand opening, and should be ready to begin hosting surgeries by the end of the month, said center director Elodia Flores.
The 11 surgeons, most of them orthopedic, who created the center have joined a joined a national movement to develop physician-owned ambulato-
ry surgery facilities for performing common lowrisk outpatient surgical procedures.
"I think there has been a move across the country for physicians to make their own destiny," said orthopedic surgeon Donald Floyd.
These centers are efficient and patient friendly, Floyd said.
Outpatient surgical procedures can be done more efficiently at a small facility than large hospitals, Floyd noted.
The TSC has two operating rooms and one treatment room.
Floyd said the idea for the center was developed through conversations between the physicians.
"We wanted a small, state-of-the art facility that
will be a nice place to work," he said.
But Floyd said the center has not been created as a rival for Midland Memorial Hospital.
He said he hopes the two entities can work together to provide healthcare services for the area.
MMH CEO Russell Meyers said the center will provide services already provided by the hospital, but said the group of physicians were very open during the planning stages of the center.
Meyers said the doctors even invited MMH to become an investor in the new facility.
Please see CARE CENTEW7B
CARE CENTER I
(FromlA) ``We very seriouslv considered the offer, but after lot of discussion, we decided to decline," Meyers said.
But Floyd said the two entities plan to continue this relationship.
Floyd pointed out the physicians will continue to use the hospital facilities for inpatient surgeries beyond the scope of the center.
"This group intends to work closely with MMH to better the care for patients," he said.
Meyers said he hopes to "build on the relationship," keeping more business in the area rather _I_-___
than losing it to outside providers.
The Texas Surgical Center celebrated its grand opening last week, and Floyd said the center is waiting for the Texas Department of Health to give its final inspection later this week.
It will then be ready to host its first surgery.
\
I
9124
'lainview Daily Herald Plainview, TX Circ 6/62
-40
j Hospital marks 190 years By DANNY ANDREWS , Herald Editor
I
I County Hospital Authority, noted Sat-
Kevin Igo, president of the Hale
`
1
urday at a recognition of the hospital's 90th anmversary that ``quality healthcare here is a result of leaders with vision, great personnel, a dedicated staff and a community that will support US:'
A group of citizens gathered in the lobby of Covenant Hospital Plainview to hear remarks from Igo, Mayor John Danny Andrews/Plainview Daily Herald C. Anderson, County Commissioner Mario Martinez and Administrator Joe HISTORIC PHOTOS: Berwyn Tllson (left), who had an appendectomy at the Langford.
old Pialnview Hos ital In 1920 at the age of eight, visits with Covenant Hospi"The haspita1 has stayed true to the tal Administrator oe Langford In front of one of the displa s of historic photos that will be on permanent display at the hospltal, which s marking its 99th annlversary.
See HOSPITAL, Page 2A
s
Y
HOSPITAL Dumose of its founders to mo;id; quality health care to itscitizens," Igo remarked, noting that this year the authority has put $650,000 into equipment, $300,000 for improved parking and $120,000 in scholarships for persons pursuing a health care career.
"That Plainview has had a hospital for 90 years is a great accomplishment.That it has done so without a local hospital taxing district is almost a miracle," said Anderson, a former president of the hospital authority.
He gave a brief history of the hospital, noting that the authority was created by state legislationin the 1960s and was instrumental in building the present hospital that opened in 1970.
It serves as the lessor of the hospital.
Anderson recalled that a changing government reimbursement system made it almost impossible for an independent hospital to operate.
That decision ultimately led to leasing the hospital to various entities starting in 1983 before Methodist (now Covenant) was chosen to operate the hospital in 1992.
Noting the need to persevere despite many challenges current and anticipated, Anderson said "without a hospital we would not have the quality of physicians we have; economic development would be seriously curtailed; .we would lose retail sales from persons who come to Plainview because they have relatives or friends in the hospital; and the perception of the entire state would be that Plainview would no longer be a bright point of light i; the Panhandle and South Plains."
He challenged Covenant,which has a lease on the hospital untilthe year 2020, the medical community and the hospital authority to work together "to assure we have a hospital today and for the foreseeable future.
I challenge the private citizen and the corporate citizen to do their very best to support Covenant Hospital Plainview and the Hale County Hospital Authority so that we will be successfulin a manner pleasing and beneficial to all of us."
Speaking on behalf of County Judge Bill Hollars, Martinez praised the impact the hospital has had on Hale and surrounding counties and "Lord willing, the impact it will make in the future."
"We can learn a lot from our history, both mistakes and successes, and set a plan and goals for the future," said Langford, hailing Covenant - for the size of the community - as the best of six hospitals with which he has been associated.
He said the hospital staff includes 15 specialists and 15 primary care physicians.
"Covenant is proud to be a player and a partner with the hospital authority" and said that despite the recent closing of the clinic on West Fifth and loss of five veteran physicians, "we are recruiting hard to replace them fairly soon.
Please be patient with us."
Langford, noting that "it's more complex now to operate a health care facility," pointed out
From Page Ip that indigent care runs about $2 million ,year, an expense that is covered by funds in communities that have a taxing district.
He added that "we will try to work a lot smarter and work together a lot better" in the future.
"I want to give a special thanks to the employees, physicians, auxiliary and board members for making this hospital what it is today."
Igo said a health f
Mineral Wells Index Mineral Wells, TX Circ 2539
oer
2 i 20
additional grant money is need- realizes the hospital may nqt ed for this to occur.
receive more.
From page 1 Dorris said the majority of Harris Brooks, assistant grant money went to urban hos- administrator, said PPGH the number of federally quali- pita1 districts and although she administrators will know their fied heath centers in Texas, we tries to remain optimistic for plans by the first or send week increase access to health care additional grant money, she of December.
throughout the state."
Pat Qorris, PPGH chief executive officer, said the grant money will provide funds to research the possibility of becoming a FQHC.
"We will continue to assess and develop our processes to determine whether this is a feasible possibility," Dorris said.
If the hospital decides to move forward with operations to become a FQHC, patient might see an expansion of serv+es.
However, Dorris said
GRANT
receives Monies intended to help identify and provide medical care to lowincome and uninsured Texans BY LAUREN GRIM incubator gant for Palo Pinto General Hospital as part of an effort to expand health care services to low-income and uninsured Texans.
Texas Department of Health awarded the h d s to various hospitals across the state as part of Senate Bill 610, a component to Perry's health care plan.
The incubator grants help a community assess its needs, develop a health care delivery model, assist in the federal grant application process or in acquiring additional equipDorris ment necessary to establish a federally qualified health center.
A FQHC provides health care to areas of a large group low-income or uninsured people.
Currently, 181 FQHCs exist in Texas and 59 percent of those using the centers hold no insurance.
"By making this important state investment, Texas is in position to attract additional federal funds for centers that will provide high-quality, cost-effective and comprehensive primary and preventive care," Peny said in a press release.
"By increasing See GRANT, page 3
Port Arthur News Port Arthur, TX Circ 18792
OCT 17 2003 7
Trust awards LIT $25,000 for X-ray eaubment A
I
hagen Trust has awarded Lamar Institute of Technology a $25,000 grant to help it purchase state-of-the-art digital X-ray equipment for its Radiologic Technology Propram.
The Trust Department at Hibernia Bank is responsible for managing the Steinhagen Trust, which is providmg the grant award.
Jean Moncla, vice president and trust
BE"VI0N'I' -The B.A and E.W. Stein-
A
check.
Krienke said the fundswill be used to purchase digital X-ray equipment.
The equipment will be installed in the new $7.5 million Multi-Purpose Center, currently under conction at LIT. e will be moving all Allied Health pros from the Mamie McFaddin Ward Building to the new location,"said Krienke. "rhese b d s will help us take a giant leap forward in the quality of equipment we place in our labs in the new building."
LIT also expects to gain more than 50,000 squarefeet of laboratory and classroom space yvhen the move is completed.
SeTEX Construction of Beaumont is contractor for the projed, which is going up at the site of the former Gentry Hall.
LIT plans a groundbreaking on Thursday, Nov. 6,at 2 p.m. David Short, chair of the Allied Health Department and Program Diredor of Radiologic Technology, said the Digital (computerized)X-ray equipmentwill give students a chance to experience fmt hand equipment that is not available in many X-ray departments, but will be in the hture.
"This is state-of-the-art equipment and within the next five to 10 years almost all Xray equipment will be digital," said Short.
``The Veterans Administration adopted this concept three years ago and is currently changing all of its clinics and hospitals to digital equipment.
Digital equipment allows the operator to view the image much quicker than with conventional X-ray equipment.
The image can be manipulated if it is too light or too dark without repeated exposure of the patient to X-rays.
The image can be sent to other stations within the hospital and 
I
Chronicle-Journal Floresville, TX Circ 2414 I
I Medical Readiness Evaluated `At Wilson Memorial Hospital
!
I
\
Wilson Memorial Hospital was one of twentytook part in a mass casualty exercise on Thursday, The exercise rates the hospitals on their ability to handle patients contaminated with radiation.
Floresville had twnety students from the local high school acting as victims that took part in the step by step exercise dealing with decontamination materials.
EDITORIALS
Overhauling Medicare I
Private plans, preventive care are key to costs resident Bush rightly took to the airwaves yesterday to push Congress to resolve i
Legislators istill areworking on a $400 billion prescription drug benefit for seniors.
A presidential push make that several presidential pushes - could help.
Mr. Bush particularly needs to keep remindinglegislatorsthey can't add an expensive benefit without dealing with Medicare's predicted insolvency.
There are two good ways to fight costs.
And reformers like GOP Rep. BilI Thomas of California must keep working to include them in Congress' Medicare bill, which needs to reach the president'sdesk by Thanksgiving.
First, legislators must make sure private plans compete for Medicare patients.
The president emphasized that yesterday, pointing out how competition among plans could give seniors more choices and save money.
Competition could knock about 1 percent off Medicare's annual costs.
Republicans favor that approach, but many Democrats don't.
Cheaper private plans could cause seniors who remain in traditional feefor-service Medicare to pay higher premiums, the Democrats say.
True, but maybe not much more.
In some cases, the premiums may rise only a few dollars, say experts like Jeff Lemieux of the Progressive Policy Institute.
And even if they do increase, the country desperately needs to control Medicare's costs.
It's reasonable to ask seniors to pay more if they also are gaining a drug benefit.
Second, the Medicare bill needs to emphasize better early treatment of seniors with chronic, costly illnesses like heart disease.
Health and Human Services SecretaryTommy Thompson keeps promoting that idea.
So do reform-minded groups like the Democratic Leadership Council.
The find bill should follow their lead.
The legislation needs pilot programs that stress regular monitoring of a senior's problem, such as congestive heart disease.
Instead of waiting for the condition to reach a critical - and big-dollar - point, health professionals could work with patients to inform them of the best way to stave off a flare-up.
We urge Mr. Bush and reformers like Mr. Thomas to press for those changes.
Seniors deserve a drug benefit, but somebody needs to worry about Medicare's finances.
We can't let the program sink under its own weight.
'
`P %
L '
I 1
--.--
-
u 9416 Y Wellington, TX Wellington Leader Circ. 2060
1-800-474-1111
Hospital accounts payable was at $78*720.99* DRG' The or diagnostic related grouping reThere were 29 home health port shows bad debts at visits and 485 patients seen in the $17,035.52.
clinic.
Hospital board members went Monthly financial reports into closed session to discuss imweTe given as the hospital district Pending litigation against the hasiost $93,156.45 overall.
This in- pitale Former employee* Joe cludes all hospital entities.
Jeff Meegan, filed a lawsuit with the Barnhart, interim administrator 100th Judicial District Court on 8 gat@ that September is histori- September
Hosphl board, continuedfrom page 1
OCT 23 2883
pry
a
SlO+
COIL Hospital board dicusses full agenda ' Collingsworth Hospital District held a regular board meeting, Tuesday, October 21 to discuss various agenda items.
The medical staff report was given by Dr. Thomas.
Thomas $statedthat the entire medical staff iincluding nurses, Dr. Thomas and f Gloria Gonzales, PA, completed an advanced life support class.
Thomas also reported that he had recently traveled to Seattle,Washington where he participated in an zdvanced airway class.
Thomas
i
reported that he enjoyed working with Gloria and she was easy to get along with and eager to assume more responsiblity.
The monthly statistical report for the month of September was given as, 26 admits with a maximum of 6 patients one day and an minimum of 1 patient on one day.
There were 98 inpatient days, 669 outpatient visitors and 89 ER admits.
820 patient meals were served and 1,270cafeteria meals.
6 months 43% medicare, 7% medicaid, and Dana Bell, b a fixedinterest rate Of5%.This ~du 23% self pay and 27%insurance.
Meegan claims he was fired after ~ ~ ~ ~ ~ mmdygrants ; W- the sQWW~~C$ board h m the cd SUE Fomhloss of$9232.20.
Payer arding another physician.
tion for each month ;Jf serYice 58%medicare, 7%medicaid, Meegan is licensed by the State of for hehospital dis22% insurance and 13% self Texas as both a registered nurs pay.
Clinic lost $4,753.44; home health lost $368.88 and the assisted living center lost $10,887.50.The ASLis not at full bccpancy at this time.
The pharmacy showed a profit of $15,415,57.
They filled 1,328 perscriptions with 780 being new and 548 refills. ,
'ifiirth. miffor all entities was
taxincreasewillgotopay onthisnote.
The following is a list of the debt.
&
note of $42,000 will need n out on completion of the th Gloria Gonzalesto pay The note
-
w,m,
Awnclingthemeeting werebc
AlsoattendingwereJeffBamharl, Wanda Breedlove, Dr. Thomas, Richard Sims, Lynn Tate, attorney; and Suzyne Maxwell representing the ,,leader.
'
\
i
t
h
L
and a physician's assistant.
A recommendation by the Citizen's Advisory Board was sented by Richard Sims.
Sim stated that the hospital needed to set up a note of $542,252.
Sims stated that this is money the hospital alreildy owes it is being consolidated into one,note.
Additional raised
she is responsible for repaybalance owed to the district
hq scinded BI
absent, a g e r and Rohm voted ag-4 and Mcpherson,Wright and ~votedfor.Thevote rewas due to a conflict with
i
Continued on page ,2
In the adminstrator's report Barnhart stated that the C2P group
Snyder Daily News Snyder, TX Circ 3512
9330
OCT 19 2003
`Hospitaldistrict focus of meeting c-
Commisgioners court in Monhy... call the election," said Judge Waller.
`The signatures on the petitions have been certjfied so well just follow the proper steps.
We just want to give citizens an opportunity to express their feelings."
Following public comments, the court will act on ordering the election that is required by law to
Scurry County conimissioners' court will hold a public hearing Monday on certified petitions calling for an election to establish a hospital district.
County Judge Rod Waller said comments from citizens would be limited to around three minutes each.
"It`s cut and dried that we will
fall within a window of 45 to 60 days from Monday.
It is expected the election will be held the first week in December.
Cash flow problems at Cogdell Memorial Hospital prompted a petition drive to create a hospital district.
Short of cash, the hospital administration met with the com-
t
missioners' court Aug. 21 and asked for $300,000 immediately to meet its current financial obligations.
Including the $300,000, the hospital Friday afternoon had $718,650 in cash.
An additional $375,000 was also granted for 2004 to make the coun s subsidy next fiscal year over 700,000, including tobacco lawsuit money.
Physicians associated with Covenant HeBlthcare Center and Cogdell's ER have signed a resolution favoring a hospital district.
On the forthcoming ballot, all current board members and one former board member will be listed as temporary hospital district directors.
The names of'CarI Williams, Bo Robinson, Charles Church, Terry Williams, Bill Voss and Dink Foree are on the petitions, as well as former member J.B. Tate.
If approved, the district would be governed by a permanent board of seven directors to be elected from both at-large and from the four commissioner precincts.
The terms of those elected would be one or two years.
A rmrlidate elected from an
r
odd-numbered precinct at the initial election will serve a term of two years, while a candidate from an even-numbered precinct serves a term of one year.
The two at-large candidates with the most votes will serve two years, while the other will serve a one-year term.
The petitions are calling for a maximum tax rate of 50 cents per $100 valuation, but the elected board will set the actual rate on a yearly basis.
In other action Monday, the court will seek bids on two 2004 vehicles for the sheriffs department, consider a resolution nominating a person to serve on the Scurry County Appraisal District board, and consider a request from the Scurry County Pilofs Association to restore and use the office space in the north hangar at Winston Field.
The court also will proclaim Oct 23-31 as Red Ribbon Week, consider the purchase of new computers for the JP office using funds from the Justice Court Technology Fund, and discuss taking bids for county scrap iron and metal.
The meeting is at 10a.m.
in the county courtroom on the third floor of the courthouse.
*r
7 OCT 19 2083 Special to The Sun Bayside Community Hospital and Clinic in Anahuac is the recipient of a $5,000 grant from the Texas Department of Health.
The award is part of more than $3.6 million in state "incubator" grants announced by Gov. `L
Bajtown Sun Baytown, TX Circ 9520
Anahuac hospital receives $5,000 state grant Rick Perry Thursday.
The funds are part of Senate Bill 610, a component of Perry's health care plan for the state.
The legislation established an incubator program in an effort to draw additional federal funds to increase the number of federally qualified health centers in the
,
state.
"By making this important state investment, Texas is in ' position to attract additional fed- 6 era1 funds for centers that will f` provide highquality, cost effective and comprehensive Primary and Preventive care," Perry said in a written statement.
"BY increasingthe number of feder- `t ally qualified health centers in Texas, we increase access to 11 health care throughout the state.
" The Texas Department of Health was responsiblefor reviewing grant applications and determining award amounts.
The incubator grants will help a community assess its needs, develop a health care delivery model, assist in the federal rand application process or in fcquiring additional equipment:
`
c
I
Baytown Sun Baytown, TX Circ 9520
OCT 2 12003 -1
Hospital district set to unveil plans ByYEwcoo1( The Baytown Sun
I
BAYTOWN The Harris County Hospital District has big plans for the next decade and wants the public to offer input.
John Guest, president and CEO of the hospital district, will present the district's 2015 Strategic Plan during four public meetings scheduled throughout the week all across Harris county.
Qne qf
"We want as many people as possible to come and hear our plan so that we can get feedback," said Tina Foster, a spokeswoman for the Harris County Hospital District.
The 2015 Strategic Plan has been in development since October 2002, when the 12member strategic planning committee began meeting to discuss community health needs.
According to the hospital district, the committee found that access to public health care is limited by "inefficient, overcrowded, poorly configured and undersized facilities."The committee also found problems with staff shortages, long wait times and poor customer service.
Also accordingto the hospital district, the situation is expected to worsen.
The uninsured population is growing and future government funding levels are uncertain.The district continues to have problems filling positions.
The $544 million plan is expected to address these issues and allow for the district to See HOSPITAL on Page 2A
-
ters.
Fosters said some details of serving more than 500'000 how the district will provide patients in 2015*The district these facilities will be revealed SeNes aPPrOmatelY during Thursday's meeting.
"We don't have the answers to all of that yet," she said.
"Hopefully, that will be some accommodate its projections of
DonCarlos said the district planned to review public input before meeting with county commissioners.
"After sharing the plan with the public, we hope to have their support before we meet with the Harris County Commissioners
The meeting will be held from to p.m. Thursday at the Baytown Health Center, 1602
For more information, Call Maggie Herren at 713-5664371.
'
Plainview Daily Herald Plainview.
TX Circ 6162
Health faE,-ceremony will mark -local hospital's 90th anniversary Several events are scheduled on Saturday in conjunction with the 90th anniversary celebration of the Plainview hospital.
From 9 a.m. to 2 p.m., a health fair will be held in the Max Gabriel Conference Room of the John C. Anderson Medical Building on the west side of the hospital.
Refreshments will be served in the hospital lobby.
At 1 p.m., Mayor John C. Anderson and Hale County Judge Bill Hollars will offer congratulations to the hospital on its milestone anniversary and the Hale County Hospital Authority, which leases the hospital, will dedicate a picture gallery of historic photos.
Refreshments also will be served at that event.
Also, the Museum of the Llano Estacado will have several items of medical memorabilia on display.
The public is encouraged to attend both the health fair and the special ceremony.
/
Plainview Daily Herald Plainview, TX Circ 6162
OCT 19 2003
Happy 90th birthday to Plainview hospital One of our area's greatest resources is celebrating its 90th birthday.
Covenant Hospital Plainview, which traces its roots to the Guyton-Nichols Sanitarium founded in 1912 by Drs. J.V. Guyton'and Dr. E.O. Nichols Sr., had an open house and health fair Saturday with several hundred people attending.
Hale County Judge Bill Hollars and Mayor John C. Andlrson made special presentations to the Hale County Hospital Authority, which has overseen the operation of the hospital since the late 1960s.
As noted in a special edition on the history of the hospital that was inserted in last Sunday's Herald (extra copies are available at the paper in case you overlooked it or need more), the hospital has been through good times and bad and has, obviously, seen many changes.
Through it all, it has been a pioneer in health care in this region, introducing many new services, procedures and upto-date equipment, sometimes before anyone else had them.
The hospital - later known as Plainview Sanitarium, Plainview Hospital and Clinic, Central Plains General Hospital (when it opened in its present location in 1970), Central Plains Regional Hospital, Methodist Hospital and, since 1998, Covenant Hospital Plainview - has been blessed to have some of the most outstanding physicians in the country.
In the 1950s, the old hospital on Eighth Street was known far and wide for its treatment of polio patients.
The hospital has been ``fKst in the country" in various surgical procedures.
MaBy of the men and women who have served the hospital have done so over several decades, building a loyal following of patients of two or more generations.
Every step of the way - through two World Wars, Vietnam, the Depression and every cultural change imaginable - the hospital also has been blessed to have caring, compassionate and committed nurses, medical staff and general employees who have attended the needs of patients and their families.
For almost 40 years, the hospital auxiliary has been a wonderful source of support, each year providing extra medical equipment via its fundraising efforts.
TQday, the pressures of a changiag health care payment system, the constant problem of recruiting and retaining physicians and other medical personnel, and general economic conditions make for often frustrating challenges for all hospitals.
Through its history, our hospital has never had to resort to a taxing district and we hope it never will.
At the same time, we encourage continued community support of our hospital.
It has served us well.
It is important to the stability and potential growth of our city.
We need it.
As we wish it a happy 98th birthday and many more to come.
