ELIGIBLE CONTENT OUTLINE VERSION Grade 5 History Understand how individuals changed or significantly influenced the course of U.S. history
EXTENDED VERSION Grade 5 History Understand how individuals changed or significantly influenced the course of U.S. history, including:
Explorers: Christopher Columbus, Hernan Cortes, Lewis and Clark Explorers: Christopher Columbus, Hernan Cortes, Lewis and Clark Inventors: Benjamin Franklin, Thomas Edison, Alexander Graham Bell, Henry Ford, Orville and W ilbur W right, Dr. Charles Drew Leaders: Abraham Lincoln, Frederick Douglass, Susan B. Anthony, Sitting Bull, Jane Addams, Helen Keller, Martin Luther King, Jr., Cesar Chavez Inventors: Benjamin Franklin, Thomas Edison, Alexander Graham Bell, Henry Ford, Orville and W ilbur W right, Dr. Charles Drew Leaders: Abraham Lincoln, Frederick Douglass, Susan B. Anthony, Sitting Bull, Jane Addams, Helen Keller, Martin Luther King, Jr., Cesar Chavez
Students will understand:
Students will understand:
q What each individual did that significantly changed ideas, ways of life, the course of events, or the stream of history.
q What each individual did that significantly changed
ideas, ways of life, the course of events, or the stream of history.
Explorers Christopher Columbus: In an attempt to find a western route to the Orient, Columbus stumbled upon North and South America.
Ideas, goods, diseases, European Draft Document ­ February 1999 (Replaces W orking Document January 1999)
1
colonization and African slaves followed his four voyages, creating new global connections.
(H5-1) Hernan Cortes: Cortes and his conquistadors destroyed the capital of the Aztec Indians in present-day Mexico and seized vast amounts of gold.
He began a process of European domination in North and South America that would continue to grow in the next three centuries.
(H5-2) Lewis and Clark: Charged to "learn all you can" by President Jefferson, Lewis and Clark explored and mapped their way across the Louisiana Territory, greatly adding to the knowledge of that region.
Their expedition contributed to subsequent American settlement in the Oregon Territory and helped establish the United States claim to that region.
(H5-3)
Inventors Benjamin Franklin: In addition to being one of the writers of the Declaration of Independence, Franklin's theory of electricity advanced understanding and had practical applications.
He demonstrated that lightning was electrical in his famous kite experiments, and invented the lightning rod based on that understanding.
Franklin also invented bifocals and the Franklin stove, as well as helping to organize the postal system, first fire department and first lending library.
(H5-4) Thomas Edison: Invented a long-lasting, inexpensive light bulb and a system that made it workable on a large scale.
His invention revolutionized the way people lived and worked.
His lab also invented motion pictures and Draft Document ­ February 1999 (Replaces W orking Document January 1999)
2
the phonograph.
(H5-5) Alexander Graham Bell: The invention of the telephone in the late 1800's represented a tremendous leap in efficiency for businesses, governments and ordinary people who were now able to receive instantaneous replies to their queries.
(H5-6) Henry Ford: Developed the assembly line method of production which made the cost of automobiles affordable to millions of Americans.
Cars quickly came to be considered a necessity of life, which spurred the development of highways and related businesses.
(H57) Orville and Wilbur Wright: Succeeded in flying the first powered airplane in the early 1900s.
The airplane greatly impacted the nature of warfare and the speed with which humans and products could move from one place to another.
(H5-8) Charles Drew: Physician who developed a way to preserve and store blood for use in transfusions.
The discovery helped save the lives of thousands of soldiers in World War II, and millions beyond that.
(H5-9)
Leaders Abraham Lincoln: As the President of the United States during the Civil War, his refusal to accept the secession of the southern states ultimately preserved the Union.
His Emancipation Proclamation, which declared all slaves living in the rebellious states (Confederacy) to be free was the first step toward freeing all slaves in the Draft Document ­ February 1999 (Replaces W orking Document January 1999)
3
United States.
(H5-10) Frederick Douglass: Born a slave, Douglass escaped to the North where he became the publisher of an abolitionist newspaper.
By sharing his own experience of enslavement, Douglass became the most powerful African American voice for the abolition of slavery.
(H5-11) Susan B. Anthony: Often insulted and ridiculed for her efforts, Susan B. Anthony became one of the foremost leaders in the movement to gain women the right to vote.
(H5-12)
Sitting Bull: A Sioux chief and victor at the Battle of the Little Bighorn.
His death and the subsequent massacre of Sioux at Wounded Knee marked the end of the wars between Indians and whites, and the beginning of federal Indian policy aimed at "Americanizing" reservation Indians.
(H5-13)
Jane Addams: Often considered the mother of social work, Jane Addams began the first settlement house in North America (Chicago) in the late 1800's as a place where immigrants could get help and services.
(e.g., food, classes, daycare, gym and playground).
(H5-14) Helen Keller: Rendered deaf, blind and mute by a childhood illness, Helen Keller graduated from college with honors and went on to become an author and advocate for the rights of women, workers and the blind and deaf.
Her incredible accomplishments significantly changed the way people with disabilities are viewed and Draft Document ­ February 1999 (Replaces W orking Document January 1999)
4
treated.
(H5-15) Martin Luther King, Jr.: Employing the same methods of non-violent resistance used by Gandhi, King aroused the entire nation to issues of inequality and discrimination against African Americans and became a leader of the civil rights movement in the 1950's and 60's.
His inspirational words and delivery inspired a nation, and continue to inspire today.
(H5-16) Cesar Chavez: Mexican-American labor leader who organized a nationwide boycott of table grapes in the late 1960's to support farm laborers who were striking for higher wages.
His success led to La Causa, a broadbased movement to achieve equal rights for Mexican Americans.
(H5-17)
Understand the causes, course, and impact of the American Revolution, including the roles of George Washington, Samuel Adams and Thomas Jefferson Students will understand:
Understand the causes, course, and impact of the American Revolution, including the roles of George Washington, Samuel Adams and Thomas Jefferson Students will understand:
q Issues and events that led to the Declaration of Independence.
q Issues and events that led to the Declaration of
q How the American Revolution was fought and won. q The impact of the American Revolution.
q Roles of Washington, Adams and Jefferson in the Revolution.
Independence.
(Attempts by the British to recoup costs of the Seven Years War, issue of "no taxation without representation," British prohibition of American settlement west of the Appalachians, Boston Massacre, Boston Tea Party, boycotts).
(H5-18) (Colonial efforts to raise and maintain an army, role of the French, lack of unity among the colonies [Tories vs. 5
q How the American Revolution was fought and won.
Draft Document ­ February 1999 (Replaces W orking Document January 1999)
Patriots, lack of central government], style of fighting by colonial forces and British army, British blockade, offensive [British]
(H5-19)
q The impact of the American Revolution.
(Birth of the
United States, principles of the Declaration of Independence on American government, colonial experience influenced provisions of the Constitution).
(H5-20) Revolution.
(Washington: leader of the Continental Army; Jefferson: author of the Declaration of Independence, Samuel Adams: organizer of the Sons of Liberty who were strong proponents of independence).
(H5-21)
q Roles of Washington, Adams and Jefferson in the
Interpret data and chronological relationships presented in timelines and narratives The student will:
Interpret data and chronological relationships presented in timelines and narratives The student will:
q Order events found in historical narratives.
q Order events found in historical narratives.
q Know how to calculate time and infer information from timelines.
(Autobiographies, biographies, diaries, journals, historical and fiction).
(H5-22) timelines.
(H5-23)
q Know how to calculate time and infer information from
*Understand how individuals significantly influenced the course of world history Draft Document ­ February 1999 (Replaces W orking Document January 1999)
*Understand how individuals significantly influenced the course of world history, including 6
Explorers: Marco Polo, Vasco Da Gama, Ferdinand Magellan, Jacques Cousteau Scientists and Inventors: Leonardo Da Vinci, Johann Gutenberg, Galileo, Louis Pasteur, Marie Curie Leaders: Kublai Khan, Mohandas Gandhi, Simon Bolivar, Nelson Mandela
Explorers: Marco Polo, Vasco Da Gama, Ferdinand Magellan, Jacques Cousteau Scientists and Inventors: Leonardo Da Vinci, Johann Gutenberg, Galileo, Louis Pasteur, Marie Curie Leaders: Kublai Khan, Mohandas Gandhi, Simon Bolivar, Nelson Mandela
Students will understand:
q What each individual did that significantly changed
Students will understand:
ideas, ways of life, the course of events, or the stream of human history.
q What each individual did that significantly changed
ideas, ways of life, the course of events, or the stream of human history.
Explorers Marco Polo: wrote of his travels and 20-year experiences in Kublai Khan's China.
Some say his writings are more fiction than fact, but they, nevertheless, inspired Europeans, including Columbus, to seek out the Orient.
(H5-24) Vasco da Gama: In the late 15th century Da Gama became the first European to round the Cape of Good Hope, opening up an all-water trade route between Europe and Asia.
(H5-25) Ferdinand Magellan: In the early 16th century, Magellan's expedition became the first to sail around the world.
This expedition prompted more world exploration.
(H5-26) Jacques Cousteau: Popularized exploration of the Draft Document ­ February 1999 (Replaces W orking Document January 1999)
7
world's oceans by using television to bring people close to long-lost shipwrecks and fascinating ocean life.
His work generated support for clean oceans and marine conservation.
(H5-27) Scientists/Inventors Leonardo Da Vinci: Artist, engineer, scientist and inventor who did many things well, and whose ideas were very much ahead of his time (late 1400s).
He is best known for his painting of the Mona Lisa, his drawings and models of flying machines, and his detailed observations and drawings of plants and animals.
(H5-28) Johann Gutenberg: Although Gutenberg was not the first to use either printing or movable type (the Chinese were), his development of a printing press using movable type in western Europe in the mid-1400's sparked an information revolution.
Ordinary people no longer had to rely on a small, elite group of individuals to provide and interpret information.
(H5-29) Galileo Galilei: Using a telescope he developed, Galileo proved in the early 1600's what earlier scientists had been reluctant to publicize -- that the sun was the center of the universe and the planets moved around it.
He also discovered several laws of motion, opening the door of modern physics.
(H5-30) Louis Pasteur: French chemist who argued for the Germ Theory of disease and sought ways to kill "germs" (mostly bacteria) that ruined food and caused illness.
He developed a process ("pasteurization") in the 1800's that Draft Document ­ February 1999 (Replaces W orking Document January 1999)
8
partially sterilized foods and beverages making them safe for human consumption.
Later research on the Germ Theory (how to kill germs without killing people) completely revolutionized medicine and allowed doctors to combat diseases that had been deadly for all of the past of human experience.
(H5-31) Marie Curie: Polish scientist who isolated the element radium, experimented with radioactivity, and opened a whole new area of scientific inquiry: nuclear research.
By-products of her work were nuclear power, nuclear weapons, and nuclear medicine (radiation therapy).
(H5-32).
Leaders Kublai Khan: Known as the "Great Khan," this Mongol leader completed the conquest of China begun by his grandfather (Ghengis Khan) in the late 1200's.
The splendors of his court were described in The Travels of Marco Polo, which spurred western interest in the riches of the East and world exploration.
(H5-33) Mohandas Gandhi: Gandhi's philosophy of non-violent boycotts and civil disobedience drove the British out of India in the 1940's after almost 200 years of domination.
His strategy of non-violent resistance has been adopted by protest movements all over the world.
(H5-34) Simon Bolivar: Known as El Liberator in South America, Bolivar devoted his life to the liberation of northern South America from Spanish domination.
He is credited with achieving independence for Columbia, Venezuela, Draft Document ­ February 1999 (Replaces W orking Document January 1999)
9
Bolivia, Ecuador and Peru.
(H5-35) Nelson Mandela: Has devoted most of his life, including 28 years in prison, to the struggle to end segregation and discrimination against people of color in South Africa.
Mandela's courage and commitment to his beliefs have earned him a Nobel Peace prize and the admiration of the world.
(H5-36) * It has been recommended that this world history benchmark be removed from Grade 5 to decrease the eligible content in the social sciences at that grade level.
Please comment on this proposed change as part of your feedback on the eligible content.
Draft Document ­ February 1999 (Replaces W orking Document January 1999)
10
