Inside This Issue...
Check out these rules for safe, ....
Page 2 responsible firearm handling.
Learning how to properly handle firearms is the most important skill a hunter needs.
Tree stands can provide ...............
Page 4 hunters with an advantage if used safely.
Check out these tips from the National Rifle Association.
TRAINING Risk Management Issues TDCJ Risk Managements Volume 2, Issue 6 circular Of the leading causes of accidental death, falls rank 2nd, drowning ranks 3rd, and firearms rank 7th.
Overexertion causes fatigue, which in turn exposes the hunter to all sorts of additional and unnecessary hazards.
Hunters not acclimated to the rigor of the Never hunt alone and wear orange when hunting.
Read more of these outdoor survival rules on Page 3.
September 2000 According to the National Safety Council, accidents are the leading cause of death in this country for people between the ages of 1 and 44.
Accidents remain one of the leading causes thereaf ter.
O f the leading causes of accidental death, falls rank 2nd, drowning ranks 3rd, and firearms rank 7th.
The hunter must consider these hazards, and others, carefully before, during and after the hunt.
Although guns play a major role in hunting accidents, there are other hunting hazards.
More deer hunters die from heart attacks than from gunshot wounds.
Overexertion falls, drowning, exposure all take their toll.
Before hunting, learn how to be safe --More hunters die from heart attacks than from gun shot wounds-- sport should spend time getting into physical condition prior to the hunt.
Falls, mostly from trees, ledges, slopes and rocks, account for many hunting accidents.
Many firearm accidents are related to falls.
Hunters should remember that even simple injuries and sprains could lead to serious consequences when professional medical care is far away.
The best p rotection from falls is avoidance.
Hunters should avoid climbing trees, chasing does, jumping streams and taking shortcuts.
Water is a silent and constant menace to all hunters, not just to hunters in boats.
(Continued on Page 2) TALKING TURKEY...
Hunting Safety doesn't just happen.
You ha v e to pr actice it.
Following ar e some tips that will make your turkey hunting safer and more enjoyable.
Make it a point to practice and teach good hunting safety.
Don' t become a statistic.
1.
Never stalk a tur ke y.
The chances of getting close enough for a shot are slim, but the chances of becoming involved in an accident are increased.
2.
Eliminate the colors red, white, and blue from your turkey-hunting outfit.
Red is the color most hunters count on to diff e r e n tia t e a gobbler 's head fr om the hen's blue-colored head.
3.
Never move, wave, or make turkey sounds to alert another hunter to your presence.
A quick movement may draw fire.
Yell in a loud v oic e and r emain hidden.
4.
Never attempt to approach closer than 100 y a rds t o a ro osting tur k e y. T he wild turk e y 's e y esigh t and hearing are much too sharp to let you get any closer.
5.
Be particularly careful when using a gobbler call.
The sound and motion may attract other hunters.
6.
When selecting your calling position, don't try to hide so well that you cannot see what is happening around you.
(Continued on Page 2) 2 TDCJ Risk Managements Training Circular hunter the location of other hunters and the whereabouts of livestock.
When leaving the property, the hunter should notify and thank the landowner.
Safety awareness is especially important during the hunt.
In open field or bush, hunters should walk abreast, making sure no one gets out in front.
A left-handed marksman should walk at the right end of the group because of the tendency to swing right.
While walking, hunters should cradle their guns in their arms, the muzzles pointing down in case of a fall.
The gun muzzle should be checked frequently to make certain it hasnt been accidentally plugged with mud, earth or weeds.
A p lugged barrel could explode or split when fired, with disastrous results.
Hunters should be careful to never look directly into the muzzle of a l oaded weapon.
A hunter September 2000 Hunters who suddenly and unexpectContinued from Page 1 edly find themselves in water should not panic.
They should relax and let the air in their clothing bring them to the surface.
From this floating position, the hunter can move toward safety in a modified breaststroke or backstroke.
Prolonged exposure to the cold can result in a condition known as hypothermia (reduced body temperature), which can be fatal.
Lost hunters should stay put, keep warm, improvise a shelter and conser ve food, water and energy.
Sounding the international distress signal, three short blasts in quick succession, may help in obtaining aid.
Alcohol should not be taken for the purpose of keeping warm.
Although it seems to have a warming effect on the body, it actually lowers the skin and body temperature and impairs judgment and coordination.
Before hunting a number of safety precautions need to be addressed.
All hunters should be trained in first aid and Cardiopulmonary Resuscitation (CPR).
A hunter should prepare for the elements in the area to be covered by wearing adequately warm boots and clothing.
Always let someone know where you are going and when you plan to return.
And finally, both law and courtesy require a hunter to ask permission to hunt on private property.
The landowner can tell a Hunting safety should approach downed game with caution, a s the animal may only be stunned.
Bear, elk and moose can kill a person, and even a deer is extremely dangerous when wounded.
Game should never be carried over the shoulders.
A p a i r o f antlers emerging from brush or trees is a perfect t arget f or another eager hunter.
The hunter should drag the animal out, carry in on a travois or dress it out, quarter it and bring out the pieces.
Last year, it is estimated that 350 firearm deaths involved hunting.
At the same time, 1200 persons died from firearm accidents in the home environment.
Obviously, the hunter s concern for guns must not end after he returns from t he fields.
After the hunt, hunting guns should be unloaded, cleaned and stored in a locked cabinet until the next hunting trip.
Firearm DOs and DONTs Safe, responsible firearm handling is the most important skill for hunters.
Three rules of proper firearm handling are: 1.
Treat each firearm like a loaded firearm.
2.
Always control the muzzle of your firearm.
3.
Be sure of your target and what is beyond.
Know how to load and unload your firear m safely.
G eneral guidelines for safely loading a firearm are: 1.
Control the muzzle.
Point it in a safe direction.
Know the location of all people in your area.
2 .
Open the action.
Is the barrel open and clear? 3.
Load the magazine.
Count your cartridges or shells.
4 .
Close the action.
The chamber is loaded.
5.
Put the safety on.
Check it.
6.
C a rr y the firear m safely.
Unload your firearm when you cross obstacles such as steep hillsides, streams, and large fallen logs.
To safely unload a firearm: 1.
Keep your finger outside the trigger guard.
2.
Control the muzzle.
Point it in a safe direction.
Know the location of all people in your area.
3 .
Open the action.
4 .
Remove the magazine.
5.
Eject cartridges if it is the only way to remove them.
Do not let the action completely close.
Use extra care with lever action firearms.
6.
Count your cartridges.
Is the magazine empty? 7.
Check the chamber and magazine to sure the firearm is empt y. Never run or jump with a loaded firearm.
Loaded firearms should not be carried in your vehicle.
Do not shoot until you can identify your target.
Do not shoot at game behind bushes.
Sounds or movement might be from another hunter.
The most experienced hunters map a zone for each person in the group.
A safe hunter should wear shooting glasses and earplugs or muffs at a shooting range.
This ear protection prevents ear damage.
D o not wear earplugs or muffs when hunting.
Hunters need good hearing for hunting.
Always wear protective eyewear with high impact lenses.
The glasses guard eyes from (Continued on Page 4) TDCJ Risk Management Department Volume 2, Number 6 September 2000 TRAINING CIRCULAR Sharon B. Keilin Robert P. Koenig, Sr. Assistant Director for Risk Manager Operational Support TDCJ The Training Circular, a publication of the Texas Department of Criminal Justice Risk Management Department, is published monthly in an effort to promote and enhance risk management issues related to TDCJ employees.
Design and layout of the Training Circular is performed by The ECHO staff at the Huntsville Unit.
Comments, suggestions, or safety related topics are welcomes.
Send suggestions to Paul Brown, Risk Management Department, P.O. Box 99, Huntsville, TX 77342-0099, or send by electronic mail to user-id PBR9188.
All items received become the property of the Risk Management Department, unless otherwise agreed, and are subject to be rewritten for length and clarity.
Permission is hereby granted to reprint articles, provided source is cited.
September 2000 TDCJ Risk Managements Training Circular 3 Careless actions become sudden accidents in the woods.
Hunter education and preparation efforts, including these rules, can help ensure the sports collective safety.
1.
Never hunt alone.
Te l l someone where you are going and when you plan to return.
If you move from one area to another, tell someone.
Dont become a statistic: learn the basic rules for outdoor sur vival Being prepared will make for a safer and more enjoyable hunting season 2.
Wear hunter orange.
Remember the legal requirement is a minimum; you can always wear more.
3.
Never point a gun at someone else or even in someone elses direction.
Control the direction of the muzzle at all times.
4.
Keep your guns unloaded and your finger off the trigger until ready to shoot.
5.
Never climb into a tree stand or shooting house with a loaded gun.
6.
Dont use alcohol or drugs before or during hunting trips.
7.
Understand the safety features and functions of your weapon.
8.
Unload guns prior to storing.
Store in an area that no children have access to.
9. Use the proper caliber ammunition in your gun.
Ammunition boxes are marked.
Use caution when hunting with several different guns.
10.
Beware of potential tripping hazards and trigger snags when walking.
11.
Hand your gun to your hunting partner before jumping ditches or climbing fences.
12.
Practice regular gun maintenance.
Make sure barrels and actions are clean and free of blockages or obstructions before use.
13.
Take adequate emergency gear on ever y tripand know how to use it.
Carry enough food for overnight.
Take along two compasses and a map of the area.
Know how to use them.
Wear proper clothing and carr y proper equipment.
Cellular phones and GPS receivers are also recommended.
Plan your hunt so that you can return to your car or camp one hour before dark.
14.
Know the area you will be using.
Mark trails.
15.
Wear a safety harness when climbing or hunting from a tree stand.
16.
Know how to build a fire and take proper fire starting materials.
As hunting season gets into full swing, more and more hunters will be heading for the woods.
Taking time to assemble the items of a basic hunting survival kit will reduce the chance of serious injury and help you make the most of your hunting trip.
The following items are recommended to make a complete hunting survival kit: 1.
A spare pocket knife 2.
A spare compass 3.
A plastic whistle 4.
Matches in waterproof container 5.
A second fire making method 6.
Fire starter 7.
Soap 8.
Water purification tablets 9.
Medication 10.
First Aid kit 11.
Drinking water 12.
Nylon cord 13.
Extra glasses (if you wear them) 14.
Safety glasses 4 TDCJ Risk Managements Training Circular will help you take more turkeys than all the camo you c an w ear.
9.
Never shoot at a sound or movement.
Be 100 percent certain of your target bef o re y ou pull the tr igger.
Don ' t e v er sho ot a t a " piec e" of a tur k e y. You must see the whole bird to determine whether it is safe or legal to shoot.
A good rule of thumb is to not shoot until you can clear ly see the gobbler 's e y e .
T h a t w a y, the bir d will b e in r ange and y o u will b e sur e it is a tur key.
1 0 .
When turkey hunting, assume that another hunter is making every sound you September 2000 hear.
Onc e y ou pull the tr igger, y ou c a n ne v er tak e tha t shot back.
If another hunter approaches your calling area, never wave to him to get his attention.
Sitting still, call out in a clear, loud v o i c e or c ough t o let him know that you are in the vicinit y. 11.
Hunting should not be treated as a competitive sport.
Peer pressure to bag a bird leads to poor judg- R ememb er, eliminat ing movement is your Continued from Page 1 key to success, not total concealment.
7.
Defensive hunting tactics are a key par t of b eing a saf e hun t e r. S et-up against a stump, tree trunk or rock wider than your shoulders.
This will prevent a hunter from walking up behind you and detecting movement that could be mistaken for a bird.
Position yourself so you can see 180 degrees in front of you.
8.
Camouflage conceals you.
It does not make you invisible.
When turkey hunting, think and ac t def ensiv e l y. Av oid all unnecessar y mov emen t. Rememb er, y ou are visible to both turkeys and hunters when you mov e ev en slightly.
Sitting per f ec tly still Talking turkey Tree stands can provide hunters with an advantage if used safely Firearms and archery deer hunters commonly hunt from tree stands that are 10-20 feet above the ground.
Hunting from an elevated stand offers the element of surprise since deer generally don t look for danger from above.
Tree stands also give hunters a better view of their surroundings and make their scent more difficult to detect.
But on the down side, falls from stands easily break bones, compress spines, and puncture lungs or worse.
Hunters should buy and use the best safety equipment they can afford, including belts, full body harnesses and tree stands.
A ll such equipment should be inspected and thoroughly tested at ground level before each hunting season and periodically during the season.
In a survey from Deer and Deer Hunting magazine, it was found that more than 1/3 of all tree stand hunters at some time will fall from a stand and that about 3% of them will suffer crippling injuries.
The magazine noted that more than 70% of falls occur when a hunter is climbing a tree, descending from a tree or leaving the stand.
The survey also showed that only about twenty percent of hunters wear a safety belt while doing these things.
The following tree stand safety advice comes from the National Rifle Association.
Tell someone where you will be hunting and leave a note at your vehicle detailing your location to help searchers if you dont return.
When using a portable tree stand, securely attach it at a safe height- six to eight feet is recommended.
Use a safety belt or full-body harness to secure yourself to the tree.
Harnesses made for this purpose are much safer than rope.
Keep the tree stand in good working condition and replace any worn or missing parts.
Select straight, live trees for tree stand sites and inspect the tree for bee nests and animal dens.
Climb down if becoming drowsy.
Falling asleep is a common tree stand accident cause.
Never use alcohol or drugs during any kind of hunt.
Keep the safety belt or harness on when climbing up to or down from a stand.
ment. 1 2 .
Discuss hunting safety techniques with your hunting companions.
When hunting with companions, be sure of e v e r y one 's loca tion. 1 3 .
Don't assume that other hunters are not in your area.- even if you are the only one on the land with permission to hunt.
Also, don't assume that other hunters are as safety conscious as you.
Chances are, they are not.
1 4 .
Always keep your gun pointed in a safe direction.
1 5 .
Use a flashlight when walking in the dark.
1 6 .
Make sure your head net does not obscure your vision.
1 7 .
Be aware of what is beyond your target before you shoot.
Defensive hunting is a t w o w a y str eet. Ta k e time t o identify your target.
No hunt is worth the risk of accidentally injuring or killing someone.
1 8 .
Keep your gun unloaded until you are set up in the field.
Keep your finger off the trigger until you are ready to shoot.
1 9 .
Respect property rights and secure permission before hunting.
Firearm DOs and DONTs Continued from Page 2 twigs and branches, falling shot, and firearm mal function.
Tinted lenses also help prevent tired- ness of the eyes.
Know which eye is your master eye before you buy a firearm.
When selecting a fir ear m, mak e sur e it fits pr op er l y. T he siz e , weight, and length must be right.
Consider the species of game you will be hunting.
Know which caliber and gauge firearms are legal for that game.
A wrong selection will not give you a clean one-shot kill.
A responsible hunter has respect for the hunted game.
Clean your firearm after each use.
Store it in a safe, dry place.
Store firearms and ammunition separately.
Tr igger locks should be used on all firearms.
Store broadheads and hunting knives safely in a locked cabinet away from small children.
