EVALUATING WELFARE REFORM: A Proposal for New York H. Carl McCall State Comptroller
Special Thanks The Office of the State Comptroller extends a special thanks to the Women in Public Policy Graduate Fellowship Program at the Center for Women in Government and to Catherine Lawrence, who co-authored this report during her research residency with the Office of Fiscal Research and Policy Analysis in the Office of the State Comptroller.
TABLE OF CONTENTS I. II.
III.
IV.
V. VI. VII.
EXECUTIVE SUMMARY . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
1 Evaluating Welfare Reform: A Discussion of Practical Issues . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
3 Evaluation Techniques: Using the Best Methods Available . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
7 Evaluation Questions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
12 Proposed Legislation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
23 Bibliography on Welfare and Evaluation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
27 Acknowledgments . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
30
I. EXECUTIVE SUMMARY As New York State moves ahead with new welfare reform legislation, we need to provide resources for a professional, independent, evaluation of these programs.
A professional evaluation asks and answers the questions of what works and what does not in assisting the state's low income population.
The State has historically failed to devote the time and talent to addressing these questions, but the new welfare law gives us both the opportunity and the incentive to improve public accountability and increase sound program management.
The new welfare law passed last August in Washington created new fiscal rules and expanded state authority to assist the poor.
It requires New York State to redesign its income support programs for single mothers and their children.
The State is using the opportunity to reform its programs for single adults as well.
This moment in the State's history should also be a time to focus attention on what it means for a welfare program to be successful, and what we need to do to achieve that success.
An evaluation program can help the state by addressing core questions such as: ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! ! If welfare caseloads go down does it mean that the situation for low income people, particularly mothers and children has improved? Can jobs created in our local economies provide sufficient opportunities for people who are trying to leave the welfare rolls? For those who secure jobs, are their incomes sufficient to maintain a home and provide for the basic subsistence needs of a family? Are child and health care supports such that the children are well cared for and the mothers are able to retain the jobs they have as well as advance in them as opportunities open? Which job training programs best prepare welfare mothers and other low income residents to move from welfare to work? What happens to those who become ineligible or receive reduced assistance because of strict work requirements or because they exhaust the time limits on receipt of support? What combinations of support offer more examples of success then failure, for which parts of the population and under what circumstances? What programs save the taxpayers money and help the poor and which programs are wasteful? What are the most effective ways to assist those who are not in the labor force but who are caring for a child, a disabled adult or elderly person? What can we do to assist those with other special needs: a person living with HIV/AIDS or other disability, a homeless family, a drug or alcohol dependent person or a troubled youth?
-1-
In short, the State needs to begin asking today the questions it will want answered tomorrow.
Last November the State Comptroller released a report covering a decade of job training programs.
The report found that similar questions had not been asked or answered by those responsible for program administration.
Subsequent research, and the Executive's welfare reform proposal now under discussion, show that little has been learned in other areas of social service management over the last twenty years.
Although Washington passed the new welfare law nine months ago, the magnitude of its change is only now being understood in Albany -- and it has yet to be fully felt in local welfare offices and households of the state's low income population.
What has emerged thus far is: ! ! ! ! ! The new objective of public assistance programs must be to move increasing numbers of people from the welfare rolls into permanent paid employment at an adequate wage.
Welfare reform is a large and expensive undertaking.
The combined federal, state and local annual spending for public assistance in New York State is $5.5 billion.
The new law establishes two major changes in the rules: 1) federal financial support to each state is capped annually, and 2) assistance to those in need has a five year lifetime limit.
The state must use federal support and its own monies with a new sense of urgency.
County governments share more directly in this new calculus of risk and responsibility.
The prospects of each low income family in the State are linked to state and local budgets in profound ways as a result of these new realities.
A careful program of evaluation that objectively measures the effects of welfare reform over time can benefit the fiscal health of families as well as state and local governments.
If welfare reform fails, the first consequence is continued and deepening poverty for large numbers of the state's low income residents.
The second is rising caseloads and growing costs that will not be reimbursed by the federal government beyond the annual cap.
These costs will be borne by local and state taxes.
Program evaluation can give state and local government a powerful tool to improve choices regarding investments in social services programs.
Specialized research can produce highly relevant information to budget and policy officials and to the line staff who run the programs.
This combination of service practitioners and program analysts can help forge a consensus between policy makers and line staff and to improve state and county relationships in social service administration.
The welfare reform process thus far reveals serious strain in this critical area of state government.
New York State's use of program evaluations has historically been limited.
Many other states, some for over a decade, have found that incorporating professional evaluation into welfare programs provides a valuable management tool, giving answers and yielding important insights into critical program questions.
Furthermore, professional evaluation can strengthen the State's claims for federal support as well as "bonus money" for performance excellence.
Evaluations will also position the State to forcefully articulate its interest in upcoming federal-state policy debates that will have significant impact on how New York runs its program.
-2-
The Comptroller strongly recommends that welfare reform for New York State include resources and direction for an ongoing study of its new program.
The specific bill directs the responsible social services agency to contract with an independent organization to research and report on critical issues related to the State's program.
The legislation then offers a way to communicate the results of those reports in order to improve public dialogue on the progress and challenges we continue to face.
The welfare program enacted in this legislative session must serve the residents of New York State through the coming years ­ through population changes, upturns and downturns in the economy and through the inevitable cultural changes that shape our views on welfare.
Government's greatest challenge during this period ­ whether welfare reform succeeds, fails or just muddles through ­ is to communicate to its citizenry in an honest and open manner.
True failure would be to say at the end of the day that we do not know what happened because we did not care to ask.
-3-
II.
Evaluating Welfare Reform: A Discussion of Practical Issues A New Era of Accountability When lawmakers in Washington passed the new welfare law last year, they gave each state a new opportunity to shape its own programs and policies for aid to poor children and families.
With this new flexibility, however, came an increased level of responsibility and need for improved accountability.
In designing its own program, New York State will be congratulated for successes, but also held accountable for failures.1 Thus, state policy makers must engage in every reasonable method to determine how well our new welfare program performs so we may continue what works and change what does not.
As New York State residents, we all have a vested interest in the success of welfare programs; if they are effective and efficient, we all benefit.
These programs must be designed, therefore, based on the current knowledge of best known practices.
Unfortunately, this knowledge is very limited.
In fact, Tony Cipollone of the Annie E. Casey Foundation states that "as a nation, we are not able to make timely, well-thought out, data-driven decisions on behalf of poor kids and families."2 On the same subject, Lisbeth Schorr of Harvard University points out that the study of social programs has simply not yielded information that is very helpful to policy makers and program planners.3 If the current wisdom of those who study poverty and income support programs offers incomplete direction, we must create this wisdom ourselves as we venture into the new territory of state-designed aid to needy children and families; now is the time, more than ever, to learn from what we do through careful and rigorous research and program evaluation.
Evaluating our Efforts Formal evaluations of social programs attempt to distinguish what works and what does not.
Evaluations seek ways to improve programs through constructive criticism; program evaluation results provide a sound management opportunity, an information feedback loop, that helps determine if enacted policies achieve the publicly promised goals.
Program evaluation also attempts to establish
This increased level of responsibility was highlighted during a March 11, 1997 meeting between the Regional Office of the Department of Health and Human Services and the Welfare Reform Task Force at the Office of the State Comptroller.
Appendix A in: Annie E. Casey Foundation.
Getting Smart, Getting Real: Using Research and Evaluation Information to Improve Programs and Policies.
Baltimore: Annie E. Casey Foundation, 1995.
Based on the Presentation entitled New Approaches to Evaluation: Helping Sister Mary Paul, Geoff Canada and Otis Johnson While Convincing Pat Moynihan, Newt Gingrich and the American Public, in: Annie E. Casey Foundation.
Getting Smart, Getting Real: Using Research and Evaluation Information to Improve Programs and Policies.
Baltimore: Annie E. Casey Foundation, 1995.
3 2
1
-4-
a causal link between social policy and program outcomes.4 A combination of thorough monitoring and careful program evaluation will tell a story with two plots: how the program was effective, and if state resources were used efficiently.
Ultimately, it is a tool for the Legislature and Executive to objectively identify goals that have been achieved, determine proximate causes, assess what is not effective and apply this information to future state planning and spending.5 Focusing on the State's Welfare Program The evaluation of social programs in general is a critical component of sound program planning and implementation.
The evaluation of welfare reform in particular, however, is crucial and timely for a variety of reasons.
First, welfare reform is a large and expensive undertaking.
Total annual spending under the governor's proposed and restructured Temporary and Disability Assistance programs is almost $5.5 billion.6 These programs are estimated to serve almost 1.4 million people in 1997 alone, the majority of whom are children.
In addition, the Governor's proposed budget includes total spending for child care services for low-income and welfare families that approaches $400 million.7 At the same time, the new federal welfare law brings new financial risks to the State.
The law changes the financial relationship between levels of government by capping federal welfare funds for New York State.
If state welfare expenditures exceed the new federal limits, the State must spend its own resources to make up the difference.
For example, if a recession increases the number of people in need of assistance or if job training programs are ineffective, the costs implications of these
See Wolfe, Barbara.
Comments from "Monitoring the Effects of the New Federalism: A Conference" Focus 18, (1996): 7 - 17.
The New York State Office of the State Comptroller (OSC) has conducted dozens of audits on welfare and welfare reform related programs.
For this report, OSC has reviewed the new welfare law, the Governor and Assembly's proposals for the State, attended three public hearings sponsored by the Assembly, reviewed numerous pieces of testimony, conducted three internal workshops with outside experts on welfare reform and surveyed the literature in the field .
Based on prior audits and these efforts, we have determined that an evaluation program for New York State should be part of the state's overall responsibility for implementing its program of public assistance.
As such, the evaluation function outlined in this report falls within the purview of the Executive.
It is the recommendation of OSC that the Executive carry out this function through an independent contractor that specializes in the field of welfare program evaluation.
The evaluation third party contract and the activities carried out under its terms would be treated as any other state contract for the purposes of pre-audit and management audit oversight.
New York State.
Executive Budget, 1997-98, page 79.
This amount includes funding for the state SSI supplement, some welfare-related employment program and Emergency Assistance to Families.
Caseloads associated with these funding streams are not reported in the 1.4 million recipients estimate.
7 6 5
4
New York State.
Executive Budget, 1997-98.
Appendix II, page 17.
-5-
factors will be borne by State taxpayers.8 By transferring primary fiscal responsibility for poor children and families from the federal government to the states, the new law introduces an unquantifiable but foreseeable risk to future State budgets.
Welfare Reform is also a highly charged issue.
Policy and program discussion has been characterized by a tangle of facts and values that must be separated and clearly understood if the State is to stay focused on its goals.
State welfare programs must both assist families and control State costs.
As currently proposed, welfare reform in New York will actually be a compilation of a number of different initiatives at the same time.9 The program features ultimately implemented, be they time limits, wage supplements or the availability of child care, will all impact poor children and families.
The degree to which each of these new initiatives can be identified as beneficial or detrimental is the key to success for children and families as well as for controlling State costs.
A professionally developed evaluation will help clarify most effective ways for the state to deliver successful, efficient programs in each community.
Welfare reform is an issue for local communities.
New York State operates a state-directed, county-administered design for delivering social services.
As such, the state sets overall policies for public assistance programs which are then implemented, with some variations, in each county.
As the diverse counties across the state each deliver public assistance services, they must address various factors unique to their region or county.
Professional evaluation can give valuable feedback to counties on what works best in their distinctive location as they shape and reshape the services they provide.
This feedback becomes more valuable as counties implement the new welfare law; unknown costs associated with this new law have been a major concern of county governments as they prepare to implement the changes developed by the Governor and State Legislature.10 As demonstrated by the Manpower Demonstration Research Corporation study of Greater Avenues for Independence (GAIN), California's welfare-to-work program, similar programs yielded varied results when implemented in different counties.
This was also demonstrated by the Abt Associates study of the Child Assistance Program (CAP) in New York State, which showed varying levels of success in three different counties studied over a period of five years.
Differences between counties reflect the variety of county demographics, environment (urban or rural) and effective
The State's job creation and job training capacity was assessed in an earlier report from the Office of the New York State Comptroller, Office of Fiscal Research and Policy Analysis, New York State's Job Training and Job Creation Programs: Prospects for Welfare Reform, published November 21, 1996.
Both the New York State Executive Budget, 1997-98 and Assembly Bill A7530 propose welfare reform plans that include multiple programs as a part of New York State's adoption of the new federal welfare law.
Written testimony of the New York State Association of Counties (NYSAC) and County Legislators and Supervisors (ClaS) before the New York State Assembly hearing regarding the implementation of the federal Personal Responsibility and Work Opportunity Reconciliation Act of 1996 in New York State.
10 9
8
-6-
program implementation.11 Both the New York and California reports provide valuable information to counties on an individualized basis, information that is specific to their own welfare populations and income support programs.
As counties work to best implement the state's new welfare programs, research and evaluation can continue providing a steady flow of reliable information to make needed improvements.
More than Data Alone In seeking to answer the question, "Are welfare programs reaching the stated goals?" New York State currently gathers data to ascertain statistical trends.
This reporting typically includes statistical compilations of specified program characteristics and are invaluable for budget preparation and financial accountability.
The reported data does not, however, offer analytical insights into program effectiveness and is frequently used inappropriately.
For example, a decline in caseload is often identified as evidence of program success.12 However, caseloads can decline because more people get good paying jobs or because program administration terminates cases without regard to family need.
A decline in caseload may have little to do with the welfare services program itself.
As such, data alone communicates very little and is easily distorted or superficially interpreted.
At present, the New York State Department of Social Services (DSS) carries the primary responsibility of statewide data collection on poor children and families.13 These data are reported annually in documents such as the Statistical Supplement to the Annual Report, the Annual Report to the Legislature of the State of New York on Employment and the JOBS Training Programs and the Quarterly Report of Performance Measures from the New York State Department of Social Services.
These reports constitute an important step in tracking welfare programs.
However, comprehensive program evaluation reaches beyond this level of data collection and traditional reporting requirements.
Evaluation precisely describes what is measured by each number and analyzes its relevance to family well-being and program costs.
Both the GAIN and the CAP studies only suggest reasons for the variation between counties in the test states.
The studies did not provide conclusive causal analysis of differences demonstrated between counties.
For a discussion of how program success is measured, see Friedlander, Daniel and Gary Burtless.
Five Years After: The Long-term Effects of Welfare-to-Work Programs.
New York: Russell Sage Foundation, 1995.
New York State Social Services Code, Sect. 21.2 requires the Department to promulgate regulations specifying the types of information to be collected and transmitted by the local DSS, methods for collection and transmittal, and procedures for utilization of the data maintained in the Welfare Management System.
13 12
11
-7-
III.
Evaluation Techniques: Using the Best Methods Available Evaluating Social Programs It is difficult to produce definitive answers to the programmatic questions of social policies.
Social sciences measure human behaviors and responses and therefore are not exact sciences.14 However, there is opportunity to gather information and use it analytically to improve the understanding of what happened, to whom and with what effect.
This exercise is designed to inform the debate on what steps should be taken next.
In recent years, the field of program evaluation has grown in expertise and ability to apply research and evaluation to social programs.15 While no one design of program research can answer all the questions the public will ask, the combined expertise of evaluation professionals is increasingly credible and relevant to policy makers.
Many states have taken advantage of these improvements in evaluation techniques, especially regarding the evaluation of social welfare programs.
Prior to the passage of the new federal welfare law, in fact, forty five states16 were conducting extensive evaluations of alternative welfare programs designed under the Federal AFDC waiver provision.17 As a result of information generated by these evaluations, states such as Wisconsin, Illinois and California have extensive research that they can use in improving their welfare programs.
Under the new federal welfare program, many states will continue their evaluations of welfare programs.18 At the same time, each state's program, perhaps even each county's program, will be unique due to the flexibility of program design under the new federal law.
As such, almost all research and evaluation of welfare programs will necessarily be conducted on a state by state basis.
Therefore, See Corbett, Thomas and Wiseman, Michael.
"Reform and Evaluation: An Overview."
[Online] University of Wisconsin, Madison.
Available: www.ssc.wisc.edu/irp/w2abs.htm#controlled [02/25/97].
15 14
See Moffitt, Robert A. "Evaluating the New State Welfare Reforms," Focus 18, (1996): 18 - 20.
As reported by Michael Kharfen of the U.S. the Department of Health and Human Services, Administration of Children and Families.
Beginning in 1988, states were encouraged to redesign their AFDC programs under the Section 1115 waiver provision.
As a part of this waiver granted by the United States Deputy of Health and Human Services, states were obligated to rigorously evaluate these alternative programs.
Under the new law passed in 1996, states were granted the right to redesign their programs without the required program evaluation.
According to Howard Ralston of the Department of Health and Human Services, thirty states have applied to the Department of Health and Human Services to continue or continue with modification their evaluations of welfare programs developed under the waivers program.
Nine states are currently continuing evaluations with no change.
Twenty four states have received grants of $24,000 each to plan their modified program evaluation designs.
18 17
16
-8-
the responsibility of rigorous program evaluation will fall on each state, as research will not be easily generalized from state to state.19 Choices in Research Design and Methodology The following program evaluation methodology is available to assist New York State in determining the effectiveness and efficiency of welfare programs.
1.
Experimental Designs: Assessing Long-term impacts Program evaluations that use experimental designs attempt to determine a causal link between a program and a set of outcomes.
In attempting to answer the question "Are the new welfare programs effective?," these experimental studies highlight several key variables for study.
For example, the Abt Associates study of New York State's Child Assistance Program (CAP) gauged the effect of increased earnings disregards on Aid to Families with Dependant Children (AFDC) recipients' incentive to work for economic gain outside the home.
Unless specified in state law, the monthly AFDC benefit was reduced dollar for dollar by the amount of income earned through employment.20 An earnings disregard program reduces the monthly grant by an amount less than dollar for dollar.
It "disregards" a certain amount of employment income, for example, the first thirty dollars, or $.50 for every dollar earned.
To determine the effect of earnings disregards on recipient behavior, all eligible AFDC recipients in the CAP study sites were randomly assigned to two groups.
The control group remained subject to New York State and AFDC provisions pertaining to earnings.
Participants in the experimental group, however, had their earnings disregard changed from $1.00 reduced per dollar earned to $.10 reduced per dollar earned after the $30 and one-third provision.
The difference between earnings from employment alone in the two groups were then compared over a period of five years.
The Abt Study measured an average of a 20% increase in earnings in AFDC families in the experimental group.21 The earnings disregards had a statistically significant affect on the level of AFDC recipients' earnings from employment.
The Abt Study demonstrates that program evaluation provides a crucial link between enacting policies and understanding their effects.
Zedlewski, Sheila and Linda Giannarelli.
[Online] Diversity among State Welfare Programs.
The Urban Institute.
Available: www.urban.org/newfed/anf_a1.htm.
[05/05/97].
New York State provides that the first $90 of monthly earned income is disregarded for general work expenses.
After that, the first $30 and one-third of remaining earned income is disregarded in New York State for four months.
After four consecutive months have passed, only the first $30 is disregarded for eight months.
After a year has passed there is no additional disregard for purposes of calculating the monthly welfare benefit.
Welfare reform proposals by both the Governor and the Assembly seek to change this provision to improve work incentives.
The actual increase in dollars earned through employment as reported by the CAP study were relatively small, averaging $2,600 per family for the entire five year study period.
21 20
19
-9-
Evaluation studies establish precisely what will be measured and how.
For example, a study that measures the effectiveness of child care on job retention might study two groups of working parents in which each parent is randomly assigned to a control group or an experimental group.
The experimental group would receive the new child care services established by New York State while the control group would receive no special services from the State.
The study would then measure job retention rates of each group and compare the two.
Job retention would be precisely defined, perhaps as the continuous and voluntary maintenance of employment over a specified period of time.
The study would establish ways to measure retention, perhaps tracking any change in earnings or the number of hours worked as well as job movement (promotions and demotions) and job losses, including the reasons cited by parents and employers.
Finally, the gathered data would be reviewed and analyzed in relation to the State's child care services and policy.
Conclusions would be drawn regarding the effectiveness of the program in assisting working parents to retain their jobs.
Randomized control-group experiments are one research method that can help gauge the effectiveness of New York State's welfare programs.
However, as discussed above, the natural variation among communities makes it hard to generalize the results of one study to the rest of a population.22 Additionally, experimental designs require long periods of time to gather data and analyze results (five to eight years), and are quite focused.
23 Furthermore, the dramatic national changes resulting from the passage of the Federal Welfare Reform Act compound the difficulties of establishing a distinct control group for purposes of comparison.
Randomized control-group experiments present certain ethical issues which need to be addressed as the study is designed.
The pursuit of scientifically reliable and valid answers to questions of social welfare must be carefully balanced with the recognition that the study subjects are citizens with at least one common experience -- material deprivation.
Questions arise such as: Will participation in either treatment group or control group present substantial risks to participants? If individuals are randomly assigned to the control group, and do not receive services, will they be waived from the five year life time limit imposed by the new Federal Welfare Reform Act? Fortunately, states which have implemented their own welfare programs and evaluations through AFDC waivers have used randomized control groups successfully.
Their experience provides models for New York State to follow.
24
See Manski, Charles F.
"Where we are in the Evaluation of Federal Social Welfare Programs."
Focus 12, 1990.
Bibliography.
23
22
Moffitt, Robert A. "Evaluating the New State Welfare Reforms," Focus 18, (1996): 18 - 20.
24
Gueron, Judith and Edward Pauly, From Welfare to Work.
New York: Russell Sage Foundation, 1991.
-10-
2.
Process Evaluation Process evaluations, a frequently overlooked form of program evaluation, provide crucial information about social policies and programs.25 As described by Thomas Corbett, the new welfare policies and programs attempt "to change the behavior of participants by fundamentally altering their experience in the programs.
A good process evaluation tells us whether the proposed changes have actually taken place, thereby lending credence to the assumption that participants have experienced something new."26 Process evaluation divides new programs into distinct parts and asks questions regarding implementation at each juncture.27 Questions typically relate to the availability and quality of services, agency responsiveness to clients, and coordination among agencies.
Process evaluations are very similar to management tools that measure the quality of services provided to clients.
They are directly related to measuring the effectiveness of services, however, and thus go hand in hand with experimental studies.
Consider, again, an experimental evaluation that looks at the effect of child care services on job retention.
Two sites involved in the evaluation provide child care services for parents working outside the home.
At one site, the program director becomes very ill and is hospitalized shortly before the opening of the child care centers.
As a result, staff are not hired at the rate or expertise intended, letters are not sent to parents as planned, and a child care service for second and third shift workers is never designed.
At the other site, the program director does not become ill.
This person is an experienced professional and succeeds in motivating her staff to a high level of performance.
Child care at this site was thoroughly implemented, has no waiting lists, provides around the clock care for parents employed during "off hours," has transportation services and even provides options of vegetarian and kosher snacks and lunches for the children.
Parents at each of these hypothetical sites would have drastically different experiences.
Although these two examples are extreme, they illustrate that implementation is not a precise exercise; sites have distinct strengths and weaknesses, and programs are implemented by humans, not computers.
The importance of a program evaluation is that it gives credence to the experimental evaluations that attempt to measure the effect of a program; it is "proof" that the program is operating as designed.
Without this assurance, it is hard to know whether the program itself had an impact on participants.
As discussed by Manski, Charles F.
"Where we are in the Evaluation of Federal Social Welfare Programs."
Focus 12, 1990.
See Corbett, Thomas.
1996.
"Wisconsin Works: A View from the Ground," [Online] University of Wisconsin, Madison.
Available: www.ssc.wisc.edu/irp/w2abs.htm#controlled [02/25/97].
27 26
25
Ibid.
-11-
3.
Reporting Requirements: Using Data to Understand Program Trends In the current public focus on accountability within welfare reform, data reporting requirements of local and state governments are receiving increasing attention.28 While many questions have arisen around the implementation of data reporting, one thing is clear: the production of timely and relevant data has never been so technically possible nor so widely demanded.29 The new Federal Welfare Reform Act translates into very real and immediate consequences for children and their families who exceed the 60 month time limit.
States and localities cannot afford to wait five or even three years to begin analyzing the data reported by localities.
In six months to a year after the passage of state welfare legislation, state officials will need to know the initial effects of welfare reform on the state's low income families, jobs and the economy.
New York State must therefore seek to obtain immediate feedback on welfare program utilization.
Monthly data reporting provides a picture of what is happening while its happening.
In order for this short-term data to be relevant, however, it must be timely as well as accurate.
Thus, a process for the collection of this data must be determined with the cooperation of all the key players at the State and local level.
First, New York State must assess its ability to produce relevant data in a timely manner30.
Many questions will be asked regarding selected trends of concern to the public and policy makers: who is on the rolls, off the rolls, using day care, homeless shelters, etc.
New York State must be in a position to respond appropriately with relevant and accurate information.
At such time, the broader analysis of social welfare policy can take place.
In Conclusion: What We Can Gain The effort to evaluate welfare programs may seem an unnecessary burden to add to the political process involving welfare reform; the difficult social issues and competing demands are
This issue was addressed at the Conference on Evaluating Comprehensive State Welfare Reforms held in Madison, Wisconsin, Nov. 21 - 22, 1996 (Available: www.ssc.wisc.edu) and was addressed by Charles McClintock, Professor and Associate Dean of the New York State College of Human Ecology at Cornell University in testimony on welfare reform before the New York State Assembly Joint Public Hearings, January 23, 1997.
For a discussion of management information systems issues related to welfare reform, see Open Forum: Innovations in Information Resource Management to Support Government.
"Welfare Reform: The Information Challenge."
Vol. 10, No. 3.
On April 25, 1997, four County Commissioners of Social Service wrote to Acting Commissioner Brian Wing of the New York State Department of Social Services and Commissioner John Sweeny of the Department of Labor.
Among the issues raised in their letter, they highlighted specific concerns regarding the state's ability to proceed with welfare reform absent a significant redesign of its information systems.
30 29
28
-12-
already challenging.
As a program takes shape, however, implicit assumptions about program success will be made.
Over time the players in the public process will make claims of success or failure.
Absent a measure of objective evaluation, very little of what will be claimed will actually be known.
In addition, the stakes are higher now, for the State's fiscal health as well as the health of low income families and individuals.
When all is said and done, the last thing we want to say to the public about welfare reform is that we do not know what happened.
Various sections of the Personal Responsibility and Work Opportunity Act (PRWOA) authorize the Secretary of Health and Human Services (HHS) to report on aspects of program outcomes.31 No specific guidance has been offered as yet by HHS in response to these sections of the law.
In addition, the new federal law provides bonus payments to states that are successful in special program areas.32 Accurate reporting will assist New York State in meeting new federal compliance standards as well as improve its chances for bonus payments or other supplementary funding available under the new law.
The best, and indeed the only way to avoid a lack of knowledge to guide policy and program planning around welfare reform is to conduct careful program evaluation.
In short, a well-designed evaluation program seeks, from the beginning, answers to the important questions we will ask in the end.
31
In the newly created Social Security Act sections, Sec. 411(b) and Sec. 413(d),(e).
In the newly created Social Security Act sections, Sec. 403(a)(4) and Sec. 403(a),(2).
32
-13-
IV.
EVALUATION QUESTIONS Questions regarding the effects of welfare reform will be extensive and expansive.
Those presented below are meant to be analytical, but also embody many of the issues inherent in welfare reform.
They assume the existence of data and reporting systems that are also undergoing change.
A review of the evaluation literature involving other States shows that several methods can be combined to address many of these questions.
Comparative questions, for example, can be answered by setting up control groups or employing baseline standards.
The precise research methods will have to be developed following the State's decision to proceed with an evaluation initiative.
One major consideration in this undertaking is the level of resources the State will devote to this endeavor.
There may be some support from the federal government to assist the State, but the federal government's direction is uncertain.
The following list of questions would be costly to answer thoroughly.
By necessity, some of them will have to go unaddressed.
The good news is that there is a growing number of professional organizations that have been exploring issues of income maintenance and welfare for a decade or more.
Defining what a State hopes to achieve and then implementing an evaluation program is well worn terrain.
The fundamental focus of the Federal Welfare Reform Act requires that New York State focus time and attention on the relationship between the size of the caseload and the well-being of recipients as well as the efficiency with which the State balances these two.
The dynamics that emerge from these variables will tell us whether the State has developed sound fiscal and programmatic reforms.
The first set of the questions that follow focus on this area.
A secondary set of questions relate to the social policy issues underlying the debate.
Successful program outcomes will generate fiscal benefits for the State.
Equally important, however, is that questions regarding the societal impact of welfare reform are asked and answered.
The issues involved -- poverty, homelessness, mental illness, out of wedlock births -- stem from the deeper issue of the quality of life and availability of opportunities for the State's indigent population.
-14-
Moving People from Welfare to Work I. Caseload A. Caseload reductions: How did New York's welfare reform affect caseload size? 1.
If caseloads decreased, what combination of eligibility measures, sanctions and job placement accounted these reductions? What aspect of the eligibility process accounted for the highest incidence of rejection or created the greatest likelihood that applicants would not comply? Of those individuals who were officially denied assistance and successfully appealed, what part of the process most frequently compelled initial denial? What aspects of local economic conditions played the biggest part in caseload size and lengths of stay on public assistance?
2.
3.
4.
B. Caseload Characteristics: How has New York's welfare reform changed the characteristics of the income-supported population? 1.
What family characteristics, job status and combination of income produces the greatest number of people who leave the rolls through employment? What income alternatives were utilized by those denied assistance or who dropped out of the process? What changes occurred in demographic characteristics of the caseload as a whole?
2.
3.
II.
Effectiveness of Work-Related Activities A. Rate of Job Placement: How has New York's welfare reform changed the rate of job placement for the income-supported population? 1.
Which work-related activities produce higher placement rates in the shortest period of time? Which work-related activities produce higher placement rates in jobs with higher hourly wages? (Hourly wages above $6/hour) Which work-related activities place people in jobs that are stable and retained? Three months, one year and five years? -15-
2.
3.
4.
Of those neither participating in or nor completing work related activities, how many found jobs on their own? How do various work related activities compare to each other with regard to placement rates and cost per person? Which work related activities have the greatest level of participants who return to the rolls and what were the causes of the return to assistance? Does membership in one of the following categories effect the outcome of work related activities? (placement rates, hourly wages and job retention) a. b. c. d. e. f. g. h. I.
First-time welfare recipient.
Long-term welfare recipient.
Recidivist welfare recipient.
Age of mother.
Age(s) of children.
Number of Children.
Educational Attainment.
Drug and Alcohol Addiction.
Prior incarceration.
5.
6.
7.
III.
Effectiveness of Sanctions A. Client compliance: How does the use of sanctions impact client compliance? 1.
What sanction(s) induced the greatest level of compliance with work requirements? Is the rate of recidivism lower for those who left the rolls due to sanctions? Do people who leave the rolls due to sanctions create other institutional costs? What sanctions precipitated the greatest rate of people leaving the public assistance rolls? In instances where sanctions were imposed and successfully appealed, what part of the process was most likely to have compelled the original sanction?
2.
3.
4.
5.
-16-
B. Voucher use: How does the use of vouchers affect client behavior? 1.
Does the use of vouchers as a sanction produce greater labor market participation than for those on cash assistance? Does the use of vouchers as a sanction produce greater incidence of program compliance with drug treatment requirements?
2.
IV.
Employment, Income and Job Stability A. Income: How has the implementation of New York's welfare reform affected income earnings for New York's low income families? 1.
Within the welfare caseload, what are the trends in income and earned income increases? Over three months? One year? Five years? What are the patterns of earned income increasing over time? How much is this attributable to increased work activity? How much to increased wages? Do program participants demonstrate higher starting salaries and benefits than non-participants? Initially? One year? Three years? Five years? To what degree do earnings increase lift a family out of poverty? What are the incidences where earnings allow a family to attain the Bureau of Labor Statistics Lower Living Standard? What is the proportion of participants in work-related activities who receive lower welfare payments -- after one year, three years, five years -- as a result of increased earnings? What is the relationship between earnings increases and public assistance benefit reductions? How do the program participants from the various work-related programs compare with regard to earnings gains when work-related and child care expenses are factored in? Do work-related activities that result in employment produce statistically higher annual earnings for those participants after one year, three years, five years?
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
8.
-17-
B. Job Retention: How has the implementation of New York's welfare reform changed job retention rates for New York's low income families? 1.
2.
Do program participants demonstrate greater job retention rates? When tr ansitional supports like health care, child care, transportation assistance and cash supplements are reduced or terminated, is there an increased incidence of either employment termination or return to public assistance? What mix of ongoing occupational supports results in greater job retention rates? What mix of ongoing occupational supports improves the capacity for greater income earnings?
3.
4.
C. Work-related activities: How does participation in work-related activities change the level of family reliance on public assistance? 1.
For individuals and family heads-of-household in similar economic circumstances, what factors create the greatest possibility that public assistance will not be used in the future? Did those who returned to public assistance after work related activities go on to achieve improved job stability after their second experience with these programs?
2.
V. Child Care A. Use of Child Care: How has the implementation of child care services in New York's welfare reform changed mothers' participation in the work force? 1.
For mothers in the labor force, what mix of child care arrangements produces the highest incidence of labor market success? What mix of child care arrangements are utilized most by program participants who successfully complete work programs? How do child care needs vary with the type of employment parents obtain? Do parents with second or third shift jobs have a higher incidence of job termination related to a lack of child care?
2.
3.
4.
-18-
5.
What is the correlation of failed child care arrangements to a family's return to public assistance? What are the precipitating factors and incidence of change of child care arrangements for program participants?
6.
B. Affects of Child Care: How does state funded child care affect child well-being indicators? 1.
How does a child's age and developmental needs impact a parent's choice of child care arrangements when they are enrolled in work programs? Were the children of program participants who received child care services better prepared to enter public schools? How do children of program participants who received child care services perform on physical and mental health indicators of child well-being compared to children who receive no services?
2.
3.
VI. Government Savings A. How has the introduction of New York State's welfare reform programs affected budget savings for State expenditures on low income families? 1.
Which aspects of the eligibility process and work programs are most successful at reducing outlays for cash assistance? Does the reduction of outlay create pressures on costs in other institutions that serve low-income people? Does the introduction of a voucher program generate identifiable savings? What are the trends in public assistance per case outlays and what have been the impact of sanctions? What is the impact of increased earnings by recipients on budget expenditures?
2.
3.
4.
5.
-19-
Underlying Social Policy Considerations I. Poverty A. Children in Poverty: How did New York State's welfare reform programs impact the lives of children living in poverty? 1.
What happened to the poverty rate of children following implementation of New York State's welfare reform programs? What were the service categories of these children? (i.e., were they in families with a single mother, legal immigrant, teen parent?) Of those children who moved above the poverty line following implementation, what were the causal factors? (Did the parents find work, was the family reunified, was child support secured, did economic factors improve, was the minimum wage increased?)
2.
B. Families in Poverty: How did New York State's welfare reform programs affect the ability of low income families to rise above the poverty line? 1.
How often did moving from welfare to work result in a family rising above the poverty line? What were the characteristics, other than income, of those families who did rise above the poverty line compared with those who did not? Does earnings increase lift a family out of poverty? Do the earnings allow a family to attain the Bureau of Labor Statistics Lower Living Standard? How many of those families below the poverty line have had their benefits reduced? For what reason(s)? How many have exceeded the five year limit?
2.
3.
4.
II.
Child Well-being A. Education: How did New York State's welfare reform programs affect educational indicators for children? 1.
Did parents who had been sanctioned due to nonattendance of children in school become more involved with the school following the sanction? What impact did sanctions have on family access to basic needs of food, clothing, shelter and medical care?
2.
-20-
3.
What were shared characteristics of families who were sanctioned for nonattendance compared to families who were not? What impact did the implementation of New York State's welfare reform programs have on the rates of school attendance? Did schools and parents receiving assistance work more closely together when there was a problem with the child's attendance? Did implementation of New York State's welfare reform programs result in a higher rate of high school graduation?
4.
5.
B. Health: How did New York State's welfare reform programs impact health indicators for children? 1.
Did New York State's welfare reform programs decrease infant mortality rates? Did families served by New York State's welfare reform programs experience any interruption of health care services? How many families in New York State remain either uninsured or without access to routine health care? How many of these families receive income support? What is the cost of preventable medical emergencies to the county and/or state (i.e., an infection that became an emergency situation because it went untreated)? How did New York State's welfare reform programs affect mothers' access to pre-, peri- and post-natal care? How did New York State's welfare reform programs affect the rate of low birth weight infants? How many families received health services or health insurance as a result of employment that was obtained through state funded job training programs?
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
C. M ental Health: How did New York State's welfare reform programs impact mental health indicators for children? 1.
Did young children (under age two) in families receiving income support have sufficient access to a primary care giver to form a secure attachment? How do children in the various categories of recipients perform on developmental milestones? -21-
2.
D. Child Welfare: How did New York State's welfare reform programs impact chil d welfare indicators? 1.
What impact did New York State's welfare reform programs have on the rate of Child Protective, Preventive and Foster Care services? Did families who exceeded time limits experience a rise in Child Protective, Preventive and Foster Care services?
2.
III.
Out-of-wedlock births A. Pregnancies: How did New York State's welfare reform programs affect the number of out-of-wedlock births? 1.
2.
Did families on income support have a lower rate of second pregnancies? Did families on income support have a higher rate of terminated pregnancies?
B. Establishment of Paternity: How did New York State's welfare reform programs affect establishment of paternity? 1.
2.
Was any family denied services due to failure to declare paternity? What is the demographic/psychosocial profile of those families in which paternity is not established? Did the rate of paternity established at birth increase?
3.
C. Household patterns: How did New York State's welfare reform programs affect household makeup and stability? 1.
Did previously estranged partners reunite due to a lifting of the federal deprivation clause? How many families seek income support as a result of divorce? Domestic violence? Are additional services offered to families who enter the rolls for these reasons?
2.
-22-
IV.
Teenage Pregnancy A. Preventive impact: How did New York State's welfare reform programs impact the rate of teen pregnancy? 1.
What kinds of pregnancy prevention services are available in communities with a high rate of families receiving income support? What was the pre-post rate of pregnancy for adolescents in relation to the implementation of New York State's welfare reform programs? Do female minors in families who receive income support show a rate of pregnancy that is different than the rest of the population of women overall and of adolescents in particular?
2.
B. Characteristics of the Father: How did New York State's welfare reform programs impact the behavior and level of responsibility displayed by male partners of adolescent mothers? 1.
What is the reported age and age difference of the fathers of both in and outof-wedlock births? What percentage of the births to adolescent mothers was a result of nonconsensual intercourse? How much income support did children of adolescent mothers receive from the father? What are the characteristics of this support and these fathers (i.e., age, income, marital status)? What was the frequency of judicial activity pursuant to statutory rape laws? What results did these actions have?
2.
3.
4.
C. Characteristics of the mother: How did New York State's welfare reform programs affect child-bearing behavior of the female adolescent population? 1.
How many adolescent mothers dropped out of school? At what stage did they discontinue school (pre-natal, following birth, etc.)
How many adolescent mothers attended a school program for teen mothers? Did it include on-site child care? How many adolescent mothers could not live with a parent and for what reasons? Where did these mothers live?
2.
3.
-23-
4.
Did New York State's welfare reform programs help delay the age at which adolescent women bore children?
V. Homelessness 1.
How many single adults served by homeless shelters have dependants living somewhere else? Are these children cared for by kin, another parent, or a social service agency? What are the characteristics of those served by the shelter system? Where were they sleeping prior to seeking institutional shelter? What trends are occurring at emergency service centers such as soup kitchens, emergency shelters and emergency rooms? Of those families who are seeking homeless services, how many times did they apply for income support? For housing or shelter? What were the reasons they were denied?
2.
3.
4.
VI. Substance Abuse 1.
How did mandatory drug testing affect families served by New York State's welfare reform programs? What services were offered to families in which a parent tested positive for drug use? What follow up services were utilized?
2.
VII.
Immigrant Populations 1.
2.
What number of immigrant families lost SSI and food stamp assistance? Where are legal immigrant families finding support services once they have been denied government support? What is the rate of use of shelters, emergency care, or doubling up with others?
VIII.
Disability 1.
What is the incidence of care givers with mental, physical and learning disabilities in the income supported population? Who determines when a family is eligible to move into the Temporary Disability Program (TDP)? What specialized services are available in the communities for disabled populations? -24-
2.
V. Proposed Legislation Draft Welfare Reform Evaluation Legislation33 Section 1.
Subdivision 3 of section 20 of the social services law, as amended by chapter 304 of the laws of 1990, is amended to add a new paragraph j to read as follows: (j) to exempt or otherwise hold harmless any individual or family currently or formerly receiving public assistance from reduction or termination of such assistance resulting from participation in an evaluation conducted pursuant to section 36.
Section 2.
Section 36 of the social services law, as amended by chapters 110 and 947 of the laws of 1971, is amended to read as follows: Section 36.
Studies and Evaluations
1.
The department shall[, in so far as available appropriations will permit, study and] be responsible for collecting information [in relation to]
The scope of the evaluation shall include, but not be limited to a. the number and conditions of persons who lack or are threatened with the deprivation of the necessaries of life, or seek, or are receiving public assistance or care and all matters pertaining thereto, including the causes thereof and advise measures for their relief, and also for the relief of those in receipt of aid from private charity; b. unemployment, poverty, economic distress and other problems of social welfare generally as may be useful in the discharge of its duties or contribute to the promotion of social and economic security; c. the number of recipients of aid in, and the receipts and expenditures of, each public welfare district; d. dependence and local conditions relative thereto; e. the effect that eligibility measures, sanctions and job placements each have on caseload changes; f. the demographic characteristics, job status and combination of income that produces the greatest number of people who leave welfare through employment; g. each type of work related activity and its effectiveness in improving recipient prospects for short stays on relief and successful job placement; h. the extent to which different welfare reform strategies are effective in assisting families to increase their income from employment, retain jobs and decrease the need for public assistance; i. the uniform and accurate use of sanctions and their effect on client behavior; 33
Additions in text indicated by underline; deletions by [brackets].
-25-
the implementation of child care services to recipients of public assistance and how the delivery of those services assist the recipients to participate in the work force; k. the costs and benefits of support programs, including, but not limited to any budget savings for state and local governments and taxpayers; l. the costs and benefits of support programs, including, but not limited to their impact on the household budgets of public assistance families; m. support programs which are most effective in assisting families achieve incomes above the poverty line; n. each support service program available to families on public assistance and their impact on child well-being as reflected in educational attainment, health, mental health and child welfare indicators; o. support programs which are most effective in reducing the number of out of wedlock births; p. support programs which are most effective in reducing teen pregnancy and increasing the male partner's responsibility for child rearing; q. the impact of changes in the system of income maintenance and the effect of these changes on the homeless population; r. the combination of income and support service programs that most successfully assist individuals with substance abuse histories; s. the combination of income and support service programs which most successfully assist families and children with disabilities maintain independence; t. such o ther matters in respect to public and private charities as it may deem advisable[;]
The department shall contract with one or more organizations qualified to conduct (2) research studies to perform the evaluation required by subdivision 1 of this section.
Qualified organizations are those organizations which have: (a) successfully performed studies of public assistance programs using random assignment technique over a period of at least three years in states and counties with large urban populations; and (b) performed such studies under contract with governmental entities and/or foundationsupported projects in cooperation with local units of government.
All contracts for the evaluation of the state's public assistance programs shall be awarded by competitive bidding, or in response to requests for proposals from the department, if in the department's judgment, competitive bidding is not practical.
Such contracts shall be awarded in accordance with the provisions of article 11 of the state finance law.
(3) All qualified organizations which are awarded evaluation contracts pursuant to this section shall be considered authorized representatives of the commissioner for purposes of section 136.
All evaluation contracts shall include a provision requiring the qualified organization to consent to be subjected to the confidentiality provisions relating to bona fide news disseminating firms or organizations contained in subdivision 1 of section 136.
j.
-26-
(4)
(5)
(6)
Failure to abide by such provisions shall result in automatic termination of the evaluation contract, in addition to any other sanctions contained in subdivision 1 of section 136.
The annual evaluation required by subdivision 1 of this section shall include at least one core study according to random assignment sampling techniques, and such other, additional studies as assist the legislature, department and local social service districts fulfill the objectives of this section.
The research design for the evaluation shall be structured around short-term and long-term reporting.
Analytical findings should be developed to identify month-to-month and year-to-year trends, and also to gauge longterm (five years and longer) program outcomes.
To the extent possible, the data collection system for this evaluation shall be designed to collect reliable data in the least expensive and least time-consuming manner possible.
Support shall be provided to counties who cooperate with this initiative.
To provide for public information and review: a.
Prior to competitively bidding or requesting proposals for the evaluation required by this section, the department shall conduct public hearings in the upstate, capital and downstate regions of the state.
Each public hearing shall be held at a time and location deemed by the department to be convenient to the greatest number of persons receiving public assistance in that region.
At least one such public hearing shall be conducted in a city having a population of one million or more. b.
Not ice of such hearings shall be published in the state register; and on three successive days in at least one newspaper having general circulation throughout the state.
Notice of each regional hearing shall be published in at least two additional newspapers having general circulation within the applicable region.
The date specified for the hearing shall be not less than ten nor more than thirty days from the date of the first publication of such hearing.
The notice of hearing shall state the purpose thereof, the time when and the place where the public hearing will be held and the address and phone number where the written information required by paragraph (c ) may be obtained.
At each such hearing, any person may be heard regarding the proposed terms of the evaluation.
c. Commencing with the first publication of the first public hearing, the department shall make available to all interested persons written descriptions of: (a) the scope of the evaluation program; (b) minimum contractor qualifications; (c ) the contract award procedure and time table; (d) the criteria for awarding contracts; (e) the program evaluation criteria; (f) the research design specifications; and (g) such other information as is necessary to fully and adequately review the evaluation award procedure.
d.
The department shall consider the comments received at the public hearings in finalizing the evaluation award procedure.
The department shall submit to the legislature and comptroller a proposed plan for the implementation of the evaluation program within 30 days after final contract approval; and shall submit a final plan to the legislature and comptroller prior to commencing the evaluation.
The department and the contracting organizations shall conduct such briefings
-27-
(7)
and supply such additional information as may be requested by the legislature or the comptroller.
The department and the contracting organizations shall report annually to the governor on the overall effectiveness of the state's welfare assistance programs and the progress of t he evaluation program.
The governor shall propose a written plan of action for improving the overall effectiveness of the state's welfare assistance program and its evaluation program identified in such annual report.
A copy of the annual report, together with the governor's written proposal, shall be submitted to the legislature and the comptroller no later than the last day of each calendar year.
-28-
VI. Bibliography on Welfare and Evaluation Annie E. Casey Foundation.
Getting Smart, Getting Real: Using Research and Evaluation Information to Improve Programs and Policies.
Baltimore: Annie E. Casey Foundation, 1995.
Bane, MaryJo and David Ellwood.
Welfare Realities: From Rhetoric to Reform.
Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1994.
Brown, Amy.
Work First: How to Implement an Employment-Focused Approach to Welfare Reform.
New York: Manpower Demonstration Research Corporation.
1997.
Corbett, Thomas.
1996.
"Wisconsin Works: A View from the Ground," [Online] University of Wisconsin, Madison.
Available: www.ssc.wisc.edu/irp/w2abs.htm#controlled [02/25/97].
Corbett, Thomas and Michael Wiseman.
"Reform and Evaluation: An Overview."
[Online] University of Wisconsin, Madison.
Available: www.ssc.wisc.edu/irp/w2abs.htm#controlled [02/25/97].
David, Martin H. 1996.
"Monitoring Income for Social and Economic Development," [Online] University of Wisconsin, Madison.
Available: www.ssc.wisc.edu/irp/w2abs.htm#controlled [02/25/97].
Edin, Kathryn and Laura Lein.
Making Ends Meet: How Single Mothers Survive Welfare and Low Wage Work.
New York: Russell Sage Foundation, 1997.
Ellwood, David P. Poor Support.
New York: Basic Books, 1988.
Friedlander, Daniel and Gary Burtless.
Five Years After: The Long-term Effects of Welfare-toWork Programs.
New York: Russell Sage Foundation, 1995.
Funiciello, Theresa.
Tyranny of Kindness: Dismantling the Welfare System to End Poverty in America.
New York: The Atlantic Monthly Press, 1993.
Greenberg, Mark and Steve Savner.
A Detailed Summary of Key Provisions of the Temporary Assistance for Needy Families Block Grant of H.R. 3734: The Personal Responsibility and Work Opportunity Reconciliation Act of 1996.
Washington: Center for Law and Social Policy, 1996.
Gueron, Judith and Edward Pauly.
From Welfare to Work.
New York: Russell Sage Foundation, 1991.
-29-
Hamilton, William L., et al.
The New York State Child Assistance Program: Five Year Impacts, Costs, and Benefits.
Cambridge: Abt Associates Inc., 1996.
Haveman, Robert.
"From Welfare to Work: Problems and Pitfalls," Focus 18, (1996): 21 - 24.
Institute for Women's Policy Research.
"Welfare to Work: The Job Opportunities of AFDC Recipients."
Research in Brief, March, 1995.
Knox, Virginia W., Amy Brown and Winston Lin.
The Minnesota Family Investment Program: An Early Report on Minnesota's Approach to Welfare Reform.
New York: Manpower Demonstration Research Corporation, 1995 Levitan, Sar A. and Gallo, Frank.
Jobs for JOBS: Toward a Work-based Welfare System.
Washington: Center for Social Policy Studies, 1993.
McNichol, Elizabeth C. "New York Works Proposal Will Leave Gaps in the Safety Net and Put Pressure on County and New York City Budgets."
Washington: Center for Budget and Policy Priorities, 1997.
Males, Mike A.
The Scapegoat Generation: America's War on Adolescents.
Common Courage Press, 1995.
Manski, Charles F.
"Where we are in the Evaluation of Federal Social Welfare Programs."
Focus 12, 1990.
Mead, Lawrence.
Beyond Entitlement.
New York: Free Press, 1986.
Moffitt, Robert A. "Evaluating the New State Welfare Reforms," Focus 18, (1996): 18 - 20.
Moynihan, Daniel Patrick.
Miles to Go: A Personal History of Social Policy.
Cambridge: Harvard University Press, 1996.
Murray, Charles.
Losing Ground: American Social Policy, 1950 - 1980.
New York: Basic Books, 1994.
Nightingale, Demetra S. and Robert H. Haveman, eds.
The Work Alternative: Welfare Reform and the Realities of the Job Market.
Washington: The Urban Institute Press, 1995.
New York State Assembly.
Session of 1997.
Assembly Bill No. A7530.
Albany, 1997.
New York State Association of Counties (NYSAC) and County Legislators and Supervisors (ClaS).
Testimony to New York State Assembly on the implementation of the Federal Personal Responsibility and Work Opportunity Reconciliation Act of 1996 in New York State.
-30-
New York State.
Office of the Governor of New York.
Executive Budget, 1997-98.
Open Forum: Innovations in Information Resource Management to Support Government.
"Welfare Reform: The Information Challenge."
Vol. 10, No. 3.
Po savac, Emil J. and Raymond G Carey.
Program Evaluation: Methods and Case Studies.
Upper Saddle River: Prentice Hall, 1997.
Riccio, James, Daniel Friedlander and Stephen Freedman.
GAIN: Benefits, Costs, and Three-year Impacts of a Welfare-to-Work Program, California's Greater Avenues for Independence Program.
New York: Manpower Demonstration Research Corporation, 1994.
U.S. Library of Congress.
H.R. 3734, The Personal Responsibility and Work Opportunity Act of 1996.
Venner, Sandra.
"Five States' Innovative Approached to Welfare: Promoting Economic Security Among America's Poor."
Tufts University: Center on Hunger, Poverty and Nutrition Policy.
Weissman, Evan.
Changing to a Work First Strategy: Lessons from Los Angeles County's GAIN Program for Welfare Recipients.
New York: Manpower Demonstration Research Corporation, 1997.
Wilson, William Julius.
When Work Disappears: The World of the New Urban Poor.
New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 1996.
Wolfe, Barbara.
Comments from "Monitoring the Effects of the New Federalism: A Conference" Focus 18, (1996): 7 - 17.
Zedlewski, Sheila and Linda Giannarelli.
[Online] Diversity among State Welfare Programs.
The Urban Institute.
Available: www.urban.org/newfed/anf_a1.htm.
[05/05/97].
-31-
VII.
Acknowledgments The Comptroller would like to thank the Assembly Standing Committee on Ways 
OSC staff benefited immeasurably from hearings held by the joint committees on January 23, 1997 and February 7, 1997 in New York City and on January 14, 1997 in Albany.
The Comptroller would also like to thank the following individuals and organizations who took the time to compile invaluable information and insights contained in testimony submitted during the hearings.
Alianza Dominicana, Inc./Northern Manhattan Collaborative, Moisés Pérez, Executive Director.
American Federation of State and County Municipal Employees, Sandy Socolar, Welfare Reform Network.
American Jewish Committee, NY, Norman H. Stein, President.
Asian Americans for Equality, Christopher Kui.
Association of the Bar of the City of New York, Committee on Social Welfare Law, Stephan Kass, Chair.
Association to Benefit Children, Beth Gorrie Bank Street College, Toni Porter, Center for Family Support.
Bloomingdale Family Program, Inc., Headstart.
Susan Feingold, Administrative Director.
Bronx Education Opportunity Center Child Care Center, Alison Pepper, Director.
Child Care, Inc., Nancy Kolben, Executive Director.
Children's Defense Fund NY, Marlene Halperin.
Citizen's Committee for Children, Martha Olson, Board President.
Coalition for Asian-American Children 
-32-
Coalition for the Homeless, Shelly Nortz, Director of State Policy.
Community Food Resource Center, Don Friedman and Liz Krueger.
Cornell University College of Human Ecology, Charles McClintock, Professor and Associate Dean.
Council of Family and Child Caring Agencies, Fred Brancato.
District Council 37, Stanley Hill, President.
Charles Hughes, President, Local 372.
Family Planning Advocates of New York State, JoAnn Smith, Executive Director.
Federation of Protestant Welfare Agencies, Megan McLaughlin, Executive Director.
Gay Men's Health Crisis, Lauren Shapiro, Director, State Government Relations.
Greater Upstate Law Project, Anne Erickson, Legislative Coordinator.
Housing Works, Michael Kink, Legislative Counsel.
Hunger Action Network of New York State, Mark Dunlea, Executive Director.
Korean American Family Service Center, Hali Lee, Executive Director.
Legal Aid Society, Richard Blum, Staff Attorney.
Manhattan Borough President, Office of Ruth Messinger, Martha Stark, Director of Policy and Development.
Metropolitan New York Coordinating Council of Jewish Poverty, Warren Feierstein, Associate Executive Director for Operations.
Milano Graduate School of Management and Urban Policy, Jack Krauskopf.
National Association of Social Workers, Ruth Brandwein, Chair of Welfare Reform Network.
National Employment Law Project, Maurice Emsellen.
National Organization of Women (NOW), New York City Chapter, Anne Conners, President.
-33-
New York City AFL-CIO, Ed Cleary, President.
New York Civil Liberties Union, Norman Siegel.
New York County Lawyers Association, Barbara Rochman, Board Member and Chair.
Board Member and Chair of Women's Committee, Women's City Club of New York.
New York Housing Conference, Carol Lamberg, Staff Director; Executive Director, Settlement Housing Fund.
New York Immigration Coalition, Margie McHugh, Executive Director.
New York Public Welfare Association, Sheila Harrigan, Executive Director.
New York State Coalition Against Domestic Violence, Joan Zorza, President.
New York Urban League, Dennis Wolcott, President.
Office of the New York City Comptroller, Patricia Beresford, Senior Policy Advisor.
Phipps Houses, Ronay Menschel, President.
Public Employees Federation, Kenneth Robertson, Vice President.
Queens College, Mariam Thompson, Labor Resource Center.
State Community Aid Association, Russell Sykes, Deputy Director.
UJA-Federation of Jewish Philanthropies, Ronald Soloway.
Welfare Reform Committee, Daniel A. Strasser, Executive Director.
Women's Prison Association and Home, Inc., Catherine Pradie, Executive Director.
-34-
