Animal Identification (Advanced) This Chapter Covers: Canine Identification Feline Identification Wildlife Identification Canine Identification You need to know dog breeds and groups, in addition to the information you learned in the basic course.
The American Kennel Club currently recognizes 136 breeds of dogs and divides them into seven groups:
! ! ! ! ! ! !
Sporting Dog Hound Working Dog Terrier Toy Non-Sporting Herding
Each group contains many breeds that have common features or a similar use.
Zoonosis Control Division ­ 9/03
Animal Identification - 1
Animal Identification (Advanced)
#
Sporting Dogs The sporting dogs are placed into four basic categories: pointers, retrievers,
setters, and spaniels.
This group contains what we usually consider the hunting dogs.
Pointers and setters are the breeds that "point" when hunting birds.
Spaniels are generally smaller and are used to flush birds from cover.
Retrievers recover downed birds after they have been shot.
In general, these breeds are of good temperament and most make good family or companion animals.
These dogs are very active and require exercise to stay in shape.
Some of the more popular breeds in the sporting group are: ! ! ! ! ! American Cocker Spaniel Golden Retriever Irish Setter Labrador Retriever Pointer
Other breeds in the sporting group are: * American Water Spaniel * Chesapeake Bay Retriever * Curly-Coated Retriever * English Setter * Field Spaniel * German Shorthair Pointer * Gordon Setter * Vizsla * Welsh Springer Spaniel * Brittany Spaniel * Clumber Spaniel * English Cocker Spaniel * English Springer Spaniel * Flat-Coated Retriever * German Wirehair Pointer * Sussex Spaniel * Weimaraner * Wirehaired Pointing Griffon
Animal Identification - 2
Zoonosis Control Divison ­ 9/03
Animal Identification (Advanced)
#
Hounds The hound breeds are divided into two categories: scent and sight hounds.
Both categories can be used for hunting, although greyhounds and whippets are used in dog racing.
Scent hounds have exceptional olfactory (smell) senses and are commonly said to Ahave a good nose.@ They are used to trail or track animals by scent.
These breeds are quite popular for rabbit, fox, and raccoon hunting.
Sight hounds hunt by seeing their game and chasing it until capture.
They possess very keen eyesight and great speed.
Some of the more common breeds in the hound group are: ! ! ! ! ! Beagle Bloodhound Dachshund Greyhound Norwegian Elkhound
Other breeds in the hound group are: * Afghan Hound * Basenji * Black and Tan Coonhound * English Foxhound * Ibizan Hound * Otter Hound * Rhodesian Ridgeback * Scottish Deerhound * American Foxhound * Basset Hound * Borzoi * Harrier * Irish Wolfhound * Pharaoh Hound * Saluki * Whippet
Zoonosis Control Division ­ 9/03
Animal Identification - 3
Animal Identification (Advanced)
#
Working Dogs The working group can be divided into two classes: guard and draft.
Guard
dogs are used to protect the life and property of humans.
Draft dogs are still used to pull sleds or carts.
Some of these breeds are large animals and may not be suitable for a small house with limited yard space.
Some of the more popular breeds in the working group are: ! ! ! ! ! Akita Doberman Pinscher Great Dane Rottweiler Siberian Husky
Other breeds in the working group are: * Alaskan Malamute * Boxer * Giant Schnauzer * Komondor * Mastiff * Portuguese Water Dog * Samoyed * Bernese Mountain Dog * Bullmastiff * Great Pyrenees * Kuvasz * Newfoundland * St. Bernard * Standard Schnauzer
Animal Identification - 4
Zoonosis Control Divison ­ 9/03
Animal Identification (Advanced)
#
Terrier Group Terriers were first bred to be hunters that could go underground after their prey.
They bark freely and make good burglar alarms.
Terriers are very playful and courageous; they also have good feet, good teeth, and a strong jaw.
In general, terriers make good companion animals, and most adapt well to city life.
Some of the more popular breeds in the terrier group are: ! ! ! ! ! Airedale Terrier Bull Terrier Miniature Schnauzer Scottish Terrier Wire Fox Terrier
Other breeds in the terrier group are: * American Staffordshire Terrier * Bedlington Terrier * Cairn Terrier * Irish Terrier * Lakeland Terrier * Norfolk Terrier * Sealyham Terrier * Smooth Fox Terrier * Staffordshire Bull Terrier * West Highland White Terrier * Australian Terrier * Border Terrier * Dandie Dinmont Terrier * Kerry Blue Terrier * Manchester Terrier * Norwich Terrier * Skye Terrier * Soft-Coated Wheaten Terrier * Welsh Terrier
Zoonosis Control Division ­ 9/03
Animal Identification - 5
Animal Identification (Advanced)
#
Toy Group The breeds in the toy group are the smallest of all breeds.
These dogs were
bred solely for companionship and are good for home or apartment life.
Most breeds in the toy group are very hardy and live longer than larger breeds.
Some of the more popular breeds in the toy group are: ! ! ! ! ! Chihuahua Pekingese Pug Toy Poodle Shih Tzu
Other breeds in the toy group are: * Affenpinscher * Chinese Crested * Italian Greyhound * Maltese * Miniature Pinscher * Pomeranian * Yorkshire Terrier * Brussels Griffon * English Toy Spaniel * Japanese Chin * Manchester Terrier * Papillon * Silky Terrier
Animal Identification - 6
Zoonosis Control Divison ­ 9/03
Animal Identification (Advanced)
#
Non-Sporting Group The non-sporting group is a "catch-all" group.
Breeds which do not fit in the
other groups are placed here.
Dogs in the non-sporting group are generally considered to be companion animals.
Some of the more popular breeds in the non-sporting group are: ! ! ! ! ! Bulldog Chow Chow Dalmatian Lhasa Apso Poodle
Other breeds in the non-sporting group are: * Bichon Frise * Finnish Spitz * Keeshond * Tibetan Spaniel * Boston Terrier * French Bulldog * Schipperke * Tibetan Terrier
Zoonosis Control Division ­ 9/03
Animal Identification - 7
Animal Identification (Advanced)
#
Herding Group The breeds in this group were bred to help man control and move cattle, sheep,
and other herd animals.
Most of these dogs are easily trained and make good pets.
The more popular breeds in the herding group are: ! ! ! ! ! Australian Cattle Dog Collie German Shepherd Old English Sheepdog Shetland Sheepdog
Other breeds in the herding group are: * Bearded Collie * Belgian Sheepdog * Briard * Pembroke Welsh Corgi * Belgian Malinois * Bouvier des Flanders * Cardigan Welsh Corgi * Puli
Animal Identification - 8
Zoonosis Control Divison ­ 9/03
Animal Identification (Advanced) Feline Identification Many breeds of cats that are listed as separate breeds are the same except for coat length or color.
This list shows the names for shorthair and longhair versions of several breeds: Shorthair * Abyssinian * Burmese * Colorpoint Shorthair * Exotic Shorthair * Manx * Siamese Longhair * Somali * Tiffany * Javanese * Persian * Cymric * Balinese
Other breeds that have both a shorthair and a longhair version but do not have separate names include: Shorthair * Japanese Bobtail * Oriental Shorthair * Scottish Fold Longhair * Long-haired Japanese Bobtail * Oriental Longhair * Long-haired Scottish Fold
Breeds that only have one coat length include: Shorthair * American Curl * American Shorthair * American Wirehair * Bombay * Cornish Rex * Devon Rex * Havana Brown * Korat Longhair * Birman * Maine Coon Cat * Tonkinese * Turkish Angora * Turkish Van
Zoonosis Control Division ­ 9/03
Animal Identification - 9
Animal Identification (Advanced) It is important that you know that cats come in many breeds, colors, and temperaments.
However, unless you live in a large city, you may never see many of these breeds.
The following are descriptions of some of the breeds of cats:
Abyssinian
An Abyssinian can occur in two colors: brown and copper red.
The coat has distinctive ticking with several grades of dark and light on each hair.
It is medium in size with a hard, muscular body.
American Curl
The distinctive feature of the American Curl is curled ears.
The ears are erect and open, curving in a smooth arc backward and away from the face; they point toward the center of the base of the skull.
The American Curl is a medium-sized cat.
American Curl cats can be long-haired or short-haired.
These cats have a wide variety of coat colors, including some that are solid back and others that have color characteristics like that of the Siamese.
American Shorthair
The American Shorthair has a strong, balanced build designed for endurance and agility.
The massive head and shorter nose are some of the things that distinguish this breed from the Domestic Shorthair (DSH).
American Shorthair cats have a variety of coat colors and patterns.
These include solid white, solid black, calico, and the tabby pattern in a wide range of colors.
American Wirehair
The coat of the American Wirehair is dense and resilient (springs back into place); it is also coarse and hard to the touch.
Animal Identification - 10
Zoonosis Control Divison ­ 9/03
Animal Identification (Advanced) Balinese The Balinese is a medium-sized, graceful, long cat with a distinctive combination of fine bones and firm muscles.
The coat is medium in length, silky, and lays flat against the body.
Balinese are the longhaired counterparts of Siamese.
They come in a variety of point colors traditionally associated with Siamese cats.
Birman The Birman is a color-pointed (seal, chocolate, blue, lilac, lynx, or flame) cat with long, silky hair and four pure-white feet.
It has a sturdy build, which is elongated and stocky.
The distinctive head has strong jaws, a firm chin, and a medium-length Roman nose.
The blue, almost round eyes are set wide apart.
Burmese The Burmese is a medium-sized cat with substantial bone structure and good muscle development.
Cornish Rex The Cornish Rex is distinguished from other breeds by its soft, short, wavy coat.
The cat is small to medium in size, and its back is naturally arched.
This breed has an Oriental body type, and its hair coat lacks the outer primary guard hairs.
The lack of primary guard hairs may make the cat uncomfortable when the weather is wet or cold.
This breed's coat comes in a wide range of colors, patterns, and points.
This breed is alert and usually likes to be handled.
Devon Rex The Devon Rex has a unique appearance.
It has large eyes, a short muzzle, prominent cheekbones, and large, low-set ears.
This breed has a medium, fine frame and is covered with a soft, short, wavy coat.
Unlike the Cornish Rex, this breed has both the primary and secondary guard hairs in its coat.
These hairs are more twisted than the Cornish Rex.
Like the Cornish Rex, Devon Rex coats come in a wide range of colors, patterns, and points.
Zoonosis Control Division ­ 9/03
Animal Identification - 11
Animal Identification (Advanced)
Havana Brown
The Havana Brown is a medium-sized cat with good muscle tone.
It has a long, square muzzle, brilliant and expressive eyes, and large ears that are tilted forward.
The coat is a solid brown color.
Japanese Bobtail
The Japanese Bobtail is a medium-sized cat with a strong, slender build.
The unique set of its eyes, high cheek bones, and long parallel nose give its face a unique Japanese look.
It has a short tail (like a rabbit tail) which is often kinked.
The Japanese Bobtail's tail is about 4 inches long and relatively inflexible.
Although there are no restrictions on the colors of this breed, the red and white bicolor coat and the tortoiseshell pattern are the most favored.
Korat
The Korat has a medium-sized, muscular body and huge eyes.
The coat is a silver-blue color.
This breed was developed in Thailand and is very rare.
Maine Coon Cat
The Maine Coon Cat is the native American long-haired cat.
It was recognized as a specific breed in Maine, where they were known for their mousing ability.
This breed is a sturdy cat that was adapted to harsh winters.
It is a large, rugged cat with a soft, shaggy coat.
These are large cats, with males weighing up to 18 lbs.
Their coats come in a wide range of colors, patterns, and points.
Manx
The Manx has a broad chest, short front legs, a short back which arches, and rounded, muscular thighs.
Its head is round with a round muzzle and prominent cheeks.
The Manx cat can be born with any length of tail.
Only the ones born without a tail can be shown in championship competition.
Animal Identification - 12
Zoonosis Control Divison ­ 9/03
Animal Identification (Advanced) Ocicat The Ocicat is a medium- to large-sized cat with a muscular body and a full body and chest.
The coat is agouti (each hair has several bands of color).
The area where the color bands fall together form a thumbprint-shaped spot.
This is a powerful, athletic, and graceful cat that looks like a wild cat.
Persian The Persian is a medium- to large-sized cat with thick bones and a soft, round body.
The large, round eyes are set wide apart in the large, round head.
They have a distinctive Apug-nosed@ face.
The Persian has a cobby build (short legs and a broad, deep chest).
The coat can be a variety of colors and is the longest coat of all breeds.
Russian Blue The Russian Blue, or Russian Shorthair, is a fine-boned cat with a regal appearance.
The head is broad and flat with round, green eyes and large, open ears.
The coat is soft and dense.
Those with blue coats look very similar to Korats.
Black and white forms of the Russian Shorthair have recently been developed in Australia and New Zealand.
Scottish Fold The Scottish Fold occurred as a spontaneous mutation among farm cats in Scotland.
Scottish Fold kittens are born with straight ears.
At approximately three to four weeks of age, their ears either fold or not.
Ones with straight ears are used for breeding.
Only cats with folded ears can be shown in competition.
The ears fold forward and downward on the head.
They come in a variety of coat colors and patterns.
Zoonosis Control Division ­ 9/03
Animal Identification - 13
Animal Identification (Advanced)
Siamese
The blue-eyed Siamese is believed to have originated in Siam, now Thailand, where only members of royalty were allowed to own them.
This is a medium-sized, muscular, refined cat with long tapering lines.
It is slender and has long legs.
The head is a long, tapering wedge with a flat skull.
The eyes are shaped like almonds and are a deep blue color.
It is a color-pointed (seal, chocolate, blue, lilac, lynx, or flame) cat.
Tonkinese
The Tonkinese was the result of breeding a Siamese to a Burmese.
The ideal Tonkinese is intermediate in type, it is neither cobby or svelte (sleek).
The cat has a muscular, medium build and is heavy for its size.
There is considerable variation in coat colors and points.
Turkish Angora
The Turkish Angora is a solid, firm cat.
The ears are large, wide at the base, pointed, and tufted.
The silky, wavy coat is medium in length and is long at the ruff.
White is the traditional color of this breed, although other colors and patterns occur.
Wildlife Identification As an animal control officer, you may need to solve problems with wildlife.
You may have to remove wildlife from residential areas, capture potentially rabid wildlife, or just identify a wild animal.
You must be able to recognize and identify the high- and low-risk animals for transmitting rabies as stated in Chapter 826 of the Texas Health and Safety Code.
It is important to know the difference between high- and low-risk animals when dealing with wildlife bites to humans.
Animal Identification - 14
Zoonosis Control Divison ­ 9/03
Animal Identification (Advanced) High-Risk Animals - animals that have a high probability of transmitting rabies, including: ! Bats - belong to the scientific order Chiroptera.
They are the only mammals that fly.
There are approximately 30 species common to Texas.
Four of these species are: * Brazilian Free-Tailed Bat (formerly known as the Mexican freetailed bat) - scientific name is Tadarida brasiliensis.
It is a mediumsized bat with broad ears and large feet; its body varies from reddish to black, while membranes and ears are black.
Hoary Bat - scientific name is Lasiurus cinereus.
It is a large, distinctive bat with short, rounded ears; its upper parts are graybrown frosted with white, while membranes are black (yellowish along the forearm).
Red Bat - a medium-sized migratory bat that can be found in Texas during the summer months; it is rusty-red to brown in color.
The eastern red bat (scientific name is Lasiurus borealis) has white-tipped hairs; the western red bat (scientific name is Lasiurus blossevillii) does not.
Silver-Haired Bat - scientific name is Lasionycteris noctivagans.
It is a medium-sized, nearly black bat with white-tipped hair, giving it a silvery color.
*
*
*
!
Raccoons - belong to the scientific order Carnivora.
The scientific name for the raccoon is Procyon lotor.
Raccoons are found throughout the state.
They are medium-sized animals weighing, on average, from 9 to 29 pounds.
Raccoons are easily recognized by their black face mask outlined in white and their alternating black and buff ringed tail.
Zoonosis Control Division ­ 9/03
Animal Identification - 15
Animal Identification (Advanced) ! Coyotes - belong to the scientific order Carnivora.
The scientific name for the coyote is Canis latrans.
The coyote is found throughout the state.
It is a medium-sized, 20- to 40-pound, dog-like animal.
The coyote has a grizzled gray color with buff-colored under parts.
! Foxes - belong to the scientific order Carnivora.
Foxes are small dog-like animals; there are three species found in Texas: * Red Fox - scientific name is Vulpes vulpes.
It is found mainly in the central and eastern parts of the state.
The red fox has rustyred upper parts and is white underneath.
The tail is long and bushy with a white tip.
Red foxes weigh from 8 to 15 lbs.
Gray Fox - scientific name is Urocyon cinereoargenteus.
It is found throughout the state except in the northern Panhandle.
The gray fox is similar in size to the red fox, weighing from 7 to 13 pounds.
The gray fox has grizzled gray upper parts, reddish sides, and a whitish throat and belly.
Swift/Kit/Desert Fox - now all classified as Vulpes velox.
It is found in the open desert areas of West Texas, and it is the smallest American fox, weighing 3 to 6 pounds.
It is a buff-yellow color above and white below with a black-tipped tail.
*
*
!
Skunks - belong to the scientific order Carnivora.
Skunks are small, lowslung animals.
All skunks have paired anal scent glands which can spray their scent up to 15 feet as a defense.
There are four species of skunks found in Texas: * Striped Skunk - scientific name is Mephitis mephitis.
It is the most common skunk in Texas.
It usually has 2 broad white stripes from the back of the head to the tail.
Sometimes the stripes are narrow or nonexistent.
It weighs from 3 to 14 2 pounds (depending on age and amount of fat).
Animal Identification - 16
Zoonosis Control Divison ­ 9/03
Animal Identification (Advanced) * Spotted Skunk - scientific name is Spilogale putorius (eastern) or Spilogale gracilis (western).
It is a small skunk found throughout most of Texas.
It has irregular stripes and spots.
Hooded Skunk - scientific name is Mephitis macroura.
It is found mainly in the Big Bend area of Texas.
It is marked similar to the striped skunk, but it has a large tail and a distinct ruff (a fringe of long hairs) on the back of the neck.
Hog-Nosed Skunk - scientific name is Conepatus mesoleucus or Concepatus leuconotus (eastern).
Commonly called the "rooter skunk.@ Found in Central and West Texas.
It is a large skunk with a single stripe from the back of the head to the tail.
It often roots with its nose in search of food and has long front claws adapted for digging.
*
*
Low-Risk Animals - animals that have a low probability of transmitting rabies, including: ! Order Rodentia - Rodents * * * * * * * * * * ! Rats Mice Squirrels Beavers Prairie Dogs Gophers Voles Muskrats Porcupines Nutria
Order Lagomorpha * * * * Eastern Cottontails Desert Cottontails Swamp Rabbits Black-Tailed Jack Rabbits
Zoonosis Control Division ­ 9/03
Animal Identification - 17
Animal Identification (Advanced) ! Order Didelphimorphia (formerly Marsupialia) * Virginia Opossums ! Order Insectivora * Shrews * Moles ! Order Xenarthra * Nine-Banded Armadillos Snakes Snakes are reptiles.
There are over 100 different kinds of snakes in Texas.
The snakes that will concern you the most will be the four groups of venomous snakes.
These can be divided into two families, the coral snake family (Elapidae) and the pit viper family (Viperidae).
! Elapidae - Coral Snakes.
These are strikingly colored snakes with alternating broad bands of red and black separated by a narrow yellow band.
The head is black with a yellow band behind the eyes.
These snakes possess a neurotoxin (poison that affects the nerves) that is very dangerous.
* Texas Coral Snake - scientific name is Micrurus fulvius tenere.
This is the only coral snake found in Texas.
It has random black spots on the red bands.
Remember: Red and yellow, kill a fellow.
Red and black, venom lack!
Animal Identification - 18
Zoonosis Control Divison ­ 9/03
Animal Identification (Advanced) ! Viperidae - Pit Vipers.
The name is derived from the heat-sensitive pit on each side of the head that is used to locate warm-blooded prey.
These snakes also have vertical pupils, while most snakes have round pupils.
Their venom is a hemotoxin, a complex mixture of proteins which act on the victim=s blood tissue.
There are three groups of pit vipers in Texas: rattlesnakes, copperheads, and cottonmouths.
Rattlesnakes - represented by two scientific genera - Crotalus and Sistrurus.
They are easily recognized by the rattle on their tail.
There are nine different rattlesnakes found in Texas: * * * * * * * * * Western Diamondback - scientific name is Crotalus atrox.
Inhabits most of the state.
Timber Rattlesnake - scientific name is Crotalus horridus.
Inhabits eastern 2/3 of the state.
Mottled Rock Rattlesnake - scientific name is Crotalus lepidus lepidus.
Inhabits mainly the Trans-Pecos to South-Central Texas.
Banded Rock Rattlesnake - scientific name is Crotalus lepidus klauberi.
Found only in extreme West Texas.
Northern Black-Tailed Rattlesnake - scientific name is Crotalus molossus.
Found mainly in West Texas and parts of Central Texas.
Prairie Rattlesnake - scientific name is Crotalus viridis.
Found in West Texas and Panhandle regions.
Western Pygmy Rattlesnake - scientific name is Sistrurus miliarius.
Found only in East Texas.
Western Massasauga - scientific name is Sistrurus catenatus tergeminus.
Found in North-Central and South-East Texas.
Desert Massasauga - scientific name is Sistrurus catenatus edwardsi.
Found in West and South Texas.
Zoonosis Control Division ­ 9/03
Animal Identification - 19
Animal Identification (Advanced) Copperheads - belong to the genus Agkistrodon.
These are stoutbodied snakes with a copper, orange, or pink-tinged color and bold chestnut or reddish-brown crossbands.
Their bite is painful, but rarely fatal.
* * Southern Copperhead - scientific name is Agkistrodon contortrix contortrix.
Found mainly in East Texas.
Broadbanded Copperhead - scientific name is Agkistrodon contortrix laticinctus.
Found in North Texas through South-Central Texas.
Trans-Pecos Copperhead - scientific name is Agkistrodon contortrix pictigaster.
Found only in the Davis Mountain-Big Bend area of Texas.
*
Cottonmouth - also called water moccasin.
Belong to the genus Agkistrodon.
They are dark, heavy-bodied water snakes with the head noticeably wider than the neck.
* Western Cottonmouth - scientific name is Agkistrodon piscivorus leucostoma.
It is the only cottonmouth in Texas, and it is found in the northern, eastern, and central regions of Texas.
Animal Identification - 20
Zoonosis Control Divison ­ 9/03
Animal Identification (Advanced) References: Alderton, David.
Cats.
New York: Dorling Kindersley, Inc., 1992.
Alderton, David.
Dogs.
New York: Dorling Kindersley, Inc., 1993.
American Kennel Club.
The Complete Dog Book.
New York: Howell Book House, Inc., 1997.
Davis, William B., and Schmidly, David J.
The Mammals of Texas.
Austin: Texas Parks and Wildlife Press, 1994.
Fletcher, Walter R. Dogs of the World.
Toronto: Bantam Books, 1977.
Grady, Wayne.
The World of the Coyote.
San Francisco: Sierra Club Books, 1994.
National Audubon Society.
Field Guide to North American Mammals.
New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 1996.
Price, Andrew H. Poisonous Snakes of Texas.
Austin: Texas Parks and Wildlife Press, 1998.
Pugnetti, Gino.
Simon 
New York: Simon 
Schmidly, David J.
The Bats of Texas.
College Station: Texas A
Warner, Matt.
Cats of the World.
Toronto: Bantam Books, 1983.
Wright, Michael and Walters, Sally, eds.
The Book of the Cat.
New York: Summit Books, 1980.
The American Kennel Club (http://www.akc.org) has additional resources, including a video series on dog breeds and identification.
The Texas Department of Health has a video available on bat identification.
A copy can be borrowed through your Regional Zoonosis Control Program or the Audiovisual Library at (512) 458-7260.
Zoonosis Control Division ­ 9/03
Animal Identification - 21
