MAMMALS OF BALCONES CANYONLANDS NATIONAL WILDLIFE REFUGE Revised: December 5, 2002 Taxonomy and sequence follow Davis and Schmidly (1994).
Virginia Opossum [Bats [Cave Myotis [Eastern Pipistrelle Eastern Red Bat [Hoary Bat [Evening Bat Mexican Free-tailed Bat Nine-banded Armadillo [Desert Cottontail Eastern Cottontail Black-tailed Jackrabbit Rock Squirrel Eastern Fox Squirrel American Beaver [Mice and Rats Texas Mouse White-footed Mouse Deer Mouse White-ankled Mouse Northern Pygmy Mouse Hispid Cotton Rat Eastern Wood Rat [House Mouse Porcupine Nutria Coyote Red Fox Common Gray Fox Ringtail Common Raccoon Striped Skunk Common Hognose Skunk Feral Cat Mountain Lion Bobcat Didelphis virginiana Order Chiroptera Myotis velifer Pipistrellus subflavus Lasiurus borealis Lasiurus cinereus Nycticeius humeralis Tadarida brasiliensis Dasypus novemcinctus Sylvilagus audubonii Sylvilagus floridanus Lepus californicus Spermophilus variegatus Sciurus niger Castor canadensis Family Muridae Peromyscus attwateri Peromyscus leucopus Peromyscus maniculatus Peromyscus pectoralis Baiomys taylori Sigmodon hispidus Neotoma floridana Mus musculus Erethizon dorsatum Myocastor coypus Canis latrans Vulpes vulpes Urocyon cinereoargenteus Bassariscus astutus Procyon lotor Mephitis mephitis Conepatus mesoleucus Felis catus Felis concolor Lynx rufus 1 Common Poorly documented] Hypothetical]
Feral Pig Collared Peccary ("Javelina") Axis Deer lands White-tailed Deer [Pronghorn [Bison [Barbary Sheep Blackbuck References
Sus scrofa Tayassu tajacu Cervis axis Odocoileus virginianus Antilocapra americana Bos bison Ammotragus lervia Antilope cervicapra
Common Very rare (extirpated?) Introduced on private Common Hypothetical, historical] Hypothetical, historical]
Davis, W. B. and D. J. Schmidly.
1994.
The Mammals of Texas.
Texas Parks 
Jones, R. K., et al. 1992.
Revised Checklist of North American Mammals North of Mexico, 1991.
Occas.
Pap. Mus.
Texas Tech.
Univ., No. 146.
Toomey, R. S., III, and S. C. Caran.
1994.
Mammals.
Chapter 3, In: E. A. Kutac and S. C. Caran.
Birds and Other Wildlife of South Central Texas.
A Handbook.
Univ. of Texas Press, Austin.
2
