MARY ANN LAFFERTY named ^TEACHER of the YEAR] The New Jersey Agricultural Society presented the 2001 ^Teacher of the Year]
The Agriculture in the Classroom activities that she has developed for use with the primary students in her school were made possible by an educational grant from the Ag Society.
The learning stations are all hands-on activities that introduce children in grades 1 through 3 to New JerseyZs agricultural products.
Students pick fruits and vegetables, search for eggs, make yarn from wool, dress scarecrows and milk a cow.
All of these activities are intended to be fun while teaching children basic aspects of NJ agriculture.
In addition to using the project in school, Lafferty has shared it with fair goers in Gloucester and Salem Counties.
In her spare time, Mrs. Lafferty is a 4-H leader in Gloucester County and very involved in the 4-H International Exchange Program both on the state and national levels.
Congratulations, Mary Ann! W e appreciate TEACHER TOUR DATES The New Jersey Agricultural Society is proud to your efforts to educate students about the role announce that the 2001 Farm Tours for agriculture plays in their lives Teachers program will be visiting Gloucester every single day! County on June 28 and Passaic County on October 4.
Hands-on activities provide teachers with ideas on how to use agriculture as a resource to help meet content standards.
7 professional development credits given.
Need more information? Contact Maryann at (609) 394-7766.
TEACHERS put SOCIETY GRANTS to good use The Educational Grant Program awards grants to educators that develop and implement projects designed to integrate some facet of NJ agriculture into regular curriculum subjects.
Grants are awarded for projects which can be replicated.
Starting this school year, two funding cycles have been implemented.
Awards are announced in September for fall and year-long projects and in March for winter and spring projects.
mStuart Wisse, Mercer County Technical Schools, Pennington, Building and Grounds Beautification.
Students will apply job entry level skills in their technical education course.
Students will design an indoor atrium, select plants, prepare soil and propagate selected interior plants.
mNancie Greaney, Lebanon Borough School, Lebanon, Growing and Comparing Plants.
Students will plant vegetables and flowers, observe root, stem and leaf development and chart their findings.
mAnnie Darling, W estbrook Elementary School, W est Milford, Homegrown Learning.
Kindergarten children will plant wheat and beans both in the classroom under a grow light and outside.
They will compare and contrast growing conditions and growth rates and develop a memory book. mPatti Sw eeney, Franklin Township Elementary School, W ashington, Why Mrs. Sweeney Loves Cows!.
Second grade students will study cows, milk, dairy products, food groups, dairying then and now and learn barnyard vocabulary.
mKevin Milhous, Brigantine Elementary School, Brigantine, Flower and Vegetable Seed Growth.
Students will examine seeds and chart growth of plants.
Journals will be kept and artwork developed.
Plants will be given as gifts, used in school plantings or taken home for continued study.
mDonna Blair 
In this cross-currlcular unit children will research how farming was important to the Lenni-Lenape and the importance of agriculture today through observations and plant life cycles.
mEileen Sudock, W ashington School, Edison, New Jersey Storykeeper Simulation.
Students are grouped into families, assigned a plot of land and must keep the history of their land and family from the time of the Lenni-Lenape Indians to the present.
mGail Mayer, Bradley Beach School, Bradley Beach, Native Gardens.
Environmental club students will develop landscape designs and study uses for indigenous plants.
Agriculture fits in many categories - explore these SCIENCE FAIR PROJECT IDEAS questions.
Botany - W hich way is up? Many seeds and bulbs have to know to grow.
Zoology - Can different colors of cloth attract or repel insects from plants? Nutrition - Are all apples equally sweet? Environmental Science Is there chemical contamination in your stream? Find out with lettuce.
Check out www.ars.usda.gov/is/kids/fair/story.htm
PIECE-A-PIE Materials:
Grades: Primary/Intermediate
Materials to make chart or bulletin board; supplies for making a pizza or pre-made pizza; toaster oven; knife; napkins; actual products (tomato, picture of animals, wheat) advertisements; menus
Vocabulary:
PRIMARY pizza ingredients dairy products produce grain wheat tomato sauce sausage cheese harvest crop
INTERMEDIATE Agriculture Consumer producer-production Food processors Food manufacturers Interdependent Distributors Marketing
Background: People in the cities and people in the country need each other.
W e are INTERDEPENDENT upon one another.
The food we eat, the clothes we wear, and even the homes we live in all start with agriculture.
But the growing and harvesting are only the beginning.
It takes many workers in all walks of life to get products to our stores.
W e depend not only on the farmer, but the workers that process, market, advertise and distribute the finished product.
Procedure: 1.
Display pizza items.
2.
3.
4.
5.
6.
7.
Discuss the items on display.
Select a graphing activity from Math activities - do as a class project.
Create the chart by asking questions relating to the origin of the supplies on display or ingredients in the pizza.
See Piece-A-Pie Fact Sheet.
W here do you think I got these items? How did they get to the store? Introduce INTERDEPENDENT to intermediate ages children.
W hat workers helped make the pizza or sauce? Trace back to farm.
Time permitting, select some follow-up questions to discuss.
Select a follow-up activity.
Make pizza.
FOLLOW-UP DISCUSSION QUESTIONS Primary: W hat are some other ingredients we could put on a pizza? W here do they come from? W hat would happen if the hogs got sick? W hat would happen if the electricity went off? Could we make our pizza? W ould some of our ingredients spoil?
Intermediate: How would a drought affect food production? How would a rail strike affect our food supply? W hat would happen if the price of pizza doubled?
ACTIVITIES Math - Graphs or Venn Diagrams - W hat do you like on your pizza? W ho makes the best pizza? W hat type of pizza crust do you like best?
Language Arts -
Primary
- W rite the directions for making a pizza.
Create a new type of pizza.
Story
Starters ]The Giant Tomato]
Intermediate - W rite a persuasive paragraph - __________ makes the best pizza.
or ________ pizza is better than ________ pizza.
Research the origin of pizza.
Research cheese production.
Story Starters ^If I lived on a farm ...]
^If I owned a pizza parlor ...]
^If I ran a supermarket ...] Science/Cooking -
Primary/Intermediate
- Make cheese, pizza dough or tomato sauce.
Intermediate
- W eigh pizza dough before adding ingredients; weigh after each addition; which ingredient weighs the most? W hy? Art - Create a poster for your favorite pizza.
Make a collage using different pasta.
Make a small wreath using different pasta.
EXTENDED ACTIVITIES Visit a local pizza parlor - interview the owner.
Visit a local food processing company.
Repeat lesson using hamburger as food item.
Survey the school for favorite pizza toppings.
Graph results.
Compare ingredients in other Italian dishes.
Study the different types of advertising techniques.
Compare ads.
Compare packaging of different pizza products.
PIECE-A-PIZZA KIDZS FACTS ZZ Wheat - A Grain Some grains are fed to animals after they are harvested.
Corn, oats, rye barley are examples of other grains.
Grains consumed by humans must be processed before they can be eaten.
In addition to pizza dough, what else can wheat be made into?
Tomatoes - A Field or Garden Vegetable Vegetables are good for people as well as some animals such as pigs or rabbits.
Truck farms are small fruit and vegetable farms that are located close to big cities.
Fruits and vegetables can be brought in fresh.
Some are sent to factories to be canned or frozen.
W hat are some other garden vegetables?
Cheese - A Dairy Product Milk comes from dairy cattle.
It is high in calcium which builds strong bones.
Many other products are made from milk.
W hat are some other dairy products?
Beef - A Meat from Cattle More than 100 medicines used by humans come from cattle.
Besides beef what are some other products we get from cattle?
Pork Sausage - From Pigs - A Livestock Pigs or hogs are very useful livestock.
The skin fro hogs is used to treat severe burn victims and heart valves are used to replace human heart valves.
Pigs also give us lard, pig skin (leather), brushes from their tough hair and fabric dyes from their blood.
W hat are some other meat products we get from pigs?
Materials provided by National Farm-City Council, Inc.
AGRICULTURAL CURRICULUMS GRANTS FUND
ADVICE and CONNECTIONS at KIDSGARDENING.COM
As part of the New Jersey Agriculture in The nonprofit National Gardening AssociationZs W eb the Classroom program, the New Jersey site for educators and parents offers more than ^how-to] Agricultural Society is announcing its 2001 advice, classroom stories, grant information, and other Educational Grant Program.
resources to help kids grow.
It is also a great place for Up to 15 grants for as much as $500 will learning from and with other educators who use plants and fund the development and implementation of gardens to delight, engage and enrich learning.
Through projects that integrate New Jersey agriculture into their Garden in Every School Registry, you can learn whatZs regularly taught curriculum areas and at all grade happening in nearly 1,000 school gardens, greenhouses and levels.
habitats and swap ideas, seeds, and more with those who Projects may explore the science, social, share your interests.
The National Gardening AssociationZs historical or environmental importance of ambitious goal is to document and feature every school agriculture to New JerseyZs quality of life or garden and habitat project in the country and beyond.
demonstrate how scientific theories and W hatZs your story? Be sure your program is counted by technological practices are applied in hands-on, registering at (www.kidsgardening.com/school/register.asp). real-life situations.
Proposals may involve simple projects, such as buying seeds and containers to enable first and second graders to enjoy their first growing experience or the plans can involve such extensive efforts as purchasing a stereozoom ANNOUNCING . . .
HEALTHY SPROUTS dissecting microscope or funding secondary AWARDS!! school field trips to agricultural research labs.
Information regarding the 2001 Healthy Sprouts Grants will be awarded for projects which can be replicated as teaching units and included Awards: Teaching Awareness of Nutrition and Hunger is now available at the National Gardening AssociationZs site in regularly taught subject areas.
The deadline for applying for a fall/full www.kidsgardening.com/healthysprouts.asp.
Apply to win a year grant is July 1, 2001.
For a copy of the grant package of mulch, plant ties, fertilizer, garden fabric, guidelines and application or for lesson plans tomato teepees, windowsill propagation system, and books.
from previous winners, contact the New Jersey One winner will also receive $500 in cash for a garden Agricultural Society, PO Box 331, Trenton, NJ coordinator position.
08625, call (609) 292-8897 or visit our website www.state.nj.us/agriculture/agsociety/classroom.hNJ Department of Agriculture Seeks tm. Sponsors for Summer Food Service Program
Agriculture Secretary Art Brown has launched the annual search for organizations interested in providing meals for needy children under the federally-funded Summer Food Service Program.
The program reimburses participating organizations for meals served to children from areas in which at least 50 percent of the children qualify for free or reduced price meals under the National School Lunch Program.
Applicants may include public or private non-profit school food authorities; units of local, municipal, county or state governments; public or private non-profit organizations; residential summer camps and National Youth Sports programs.
Organizations interested in such a sponsorship should write to Cherrie M. W alker, assistant coordinator of NJDA's Summer Food Service Program, at NJDA, Division of Markets, Bureau of Child Nutrition Programs, P.O. Box 334, Trenton, New Jersey 08625-0334 or call (609) 292-4498.
The deadline for submission of completed applications is June 15, 2001.
New Jersey Agricultural Society Welcomes Suzanne Macauley The New Jersey Agricultural Society is pleased to welcome Suzanne Macauley, of Burlington, to the staff of the Ag in the Classroom program.
SuzanneZs responsibilities include developing and providing in-service training for teachers; promoting the Food DoesnZt Grow in the Supermarket video and teachers guide; increasing the number of participants in Ag in the Classroom programs; and finally, expanding and developing relationships with school officials to include Ag in the Classroom in their school.
Suzanne is a former third grade teacher in the Lakewood School district.
She is familiar with our programs and is enthusiastic about her ability to have teachers utilize Ag in the Classroom programs as part of their TEACHER WORKSHOP DATES curriculum.
Her knowledge of core curriculum The New Jersey Agricultural Society is proud to content standards, curriculum development and inannounce the sponsorship of a new program.
service training are all strengths.
In addition, she has This summer we will be offering two in-service workshops to be held at the NJ Museum of the enthusiasm we were seeking to show teachers Agriculture.
They are scheduled for Thursday, how ag in the classroom can be incorporated into July 12 and Thursday, August 9.
Scheduled regularly taught curriculum and make meeting the from 9 - 4, the program will offer hands-on standards easier for students.
activities that will provide teachers with ideas on W elcome, Suzanne! how to use agriculture as a resource to help
MUSEUM PROGRAMS
meet content standards.
7 professional development credits given.
Space is limited to 30 per session and there is a charge of $25 per person.
Need more information? Contact Maryann at (609) 394-7766.
The New Jersey Museum of Agriculture is offering a variety of spring school programs and a summer camp program.
For information call (732) 249-2077 or check out their web site ` www.agriculturemusuem.org.
NON-PPOSTAGE U.S. ROFIT ORG.
PAID PERMIT NO. 273 TRENTON, NJ
