TEXTILES AND APPAREL COURSE DESCRIPTION Textiles and Apparel is a specialized course designed to prepare students to understand the social, psychological, and physiological aspects of textile and apparel products.
Instruction in how to select, produce, maintain, and alter textile and apparel products and the effect of consumer choices on the needs of the individual and family are included in the course of study.
The integration of Family, Career, and Community Leaders of America (FCCLA) provides students with opportunities for leadership development, personal growth, and school/ community involvement.
Pre-requisite: Recommended Credits:
None 1/2 - 1
Recommended Grade Level:
10-12
Note: Learning expectations to be completed for one-half credit have no asterisk.
Additional learning expectations to be completed for one credit are identified with one asterisk.*
TEXTILES AND APPAREL STANDARDS 1.0 2.0 3.0 4.0 5.0 6.0 7.0 Students will demonstrate leadership, citizenship, and teamwork skills required for success in the family, workplace, and global community.
Students will evaluate textiles and apparel selections in terms of social, cultural, and psychological influences.
Students will demonstrate design skills in textiles and apparel selections.
Students will apply knowledge of fibers, fabrics, and design when evaluating textile products.
Students will examine textile and apparel product selection, maintenance, and consumer strategies.
Students will demonstrate skills needed to produce, alter, or repair textile products and apparel.
Students will analyze career options within the textiles and apparel design industries.
TEXTILES AND APPAREL STANDARD 1.0 Students will demonstrate leadership, citizenship, and teamwork skills required for success in the family, workplace, and global community.
LEARNING EXPECTATIONS The student will: 1.1 Examine the components of FCCLA and the relationship to the course of study in Textiles and Apparel.
1.2 Assess factors involved in successful leadership skills, citizenship traits, and teamwork traits.
1.3 Plan activities using the FCCLA Planning Process.
1.4 Apply leadership, citizenship, and teamwork skills as an integral part of classroom activities.
PERFORMANCE STANDARDS The student: 1.1 Relates the components of FCCLA to classroom activities.
1.2A Inventories personal leadership qualities.
1.2B Develops a plan for personal leadership growth.
1.3 Implements an activity using the FCCLA Planning Process.
1.4 Demonstrates character, citizenship, and leadership skills.
.
SAMPLE PERFORMANCE TASKS · · · · · Classify positive or negative leadership skills, citizenship traits, and teamwork traits.
Conduct a personal assessment of leadership skills.
Implement FCCLA's National Programs of Work such as: Financial Fitness, Career Connections, Leaders at Work, and Community Service Project.
Participate in STAR Events such as Skills for Life, Illustrated Talk, Applied Technology, Entrepreneurship, and Chapter Service.
Implement FCCLA's Power of One Program.
INTEGRATION/LINKAGES English II Gateway Standards 1.0, 2.0, 3.0, 4.0, Family and Consumer Sciences National Standards 1.0, 2.0, 12.0, 13.0, 16.2, 16.3, 16.4,16.5, Applied Communications, Computer Skills, History and Geography, Colleges and Universities, School and Community Libraries, Art, Science, FCCLA (State Fair - Fashion Revue and Focus on the Children), Peer and Professional Collaboration, Retail and General Business, Marketing, Economics, Psychology and Sociology, Leadership Course, Extra-Curricular Activities, and SCANS (Secretary's Commission on Achieving Necessary Skills)
TEXTILES AND APPAREL STANDARD 2.0 Students will evaluate textiles and apparel selections in terms of social, cultural, and psychological influences.
LEARNING EXPECTATIONS The student will: 2.1 Analyze the significance of apparel and fashion.
2.2 Examine the impact of fashion trends and forecasting on textile and apparel products.
2.3 Examine garment styles and features.* 2.4 Analyze the impact of technology on textiles and apparel design, production, and sales.* PERFORMANCE STANDARDS The student: 2.1A 2.1B 2.1C 2.2A 2.2B 2.3A 2.3B 2.3C 2.4A 2.4B 2.4C Analyzes how clothing satisfies physical, psychological, and social needs throughout the life cycle.
Examines how values, attitudes, and personality affect clothing choices.
Relates family lifestyle patterns to clothing needs and choices.
Analyzes historical, cultural, and ethnic influences upon fashion.
Identifies current fashion and fad trends for both clothing and home.
Describes various garment features.
Illustrates how garment features can be combined in different ways to achieve new and different fashions.
Describes how garment styles are modified for individuals with special and unique needs.
Describes the impact of computer-aided design and manufacturing on apparel design and production.
Explains electronic merchandising.
Describes the growth of home shopping network, catalog, and Internet sales.
SAMPLE PERFORMANCE TASKS · · · Look through recent magazines to find clothing advertisements that appeal to psychological needs.
Share examples with classmates.
Work in groups to prepare a presentation on clothing that meets physical needs for individuals and families throughout the life cycle.
Examine several clothing items to identify garment features.
· · · · · · · ·
Invite a clothing buyer or clothing store owner/manager to share information on recent styles and fashion trends in clothing.
Prepare a collage of illustrations depicting current fashion and fad trends in clothing and home assessories.
Invite a guest speaker to address how various lifestyles have altered clothing needs.
Display and evaluate out-of-date textiles and garments to determine how styles have changed.
Select clothing for individuals with special or unique needs and identify special garment features that meet the needs.
Research on the web for the most recent advances in textiles and apparel.
Present findings to the class.
Take a field trip to a textile industry to observe advanced technology in the textiles and apparel industry.
After exploring shopping sites on the web, compare pros and cons of this shopping strategy.
INTEGRATION/LINKAGES Family and Consumer Sciences National Standards 1.0, 2.0, 6.0, 12.0, 13.0, 15.0, Family and Consumer Sciences National Standards - Textile and Apparel Standards 16.2, 16.3, English II Gateway Standards 1.0, 2.0, 3.0, 4.0, Biology I Gateway Standard 5.0, FCCLA (Community Service Project), Applied Communications, Computer Skills, History and Geography, Colleges and Universities, Algebra I Gateway Standard 2.0, Science Industry, School and Community Libraries, Art, Peer and Professional Collaboration, Retail and General Business, Marketing, Economics, Psychology and Sociology, Leadership Course, Extra-Curricular Activities, and SCANS (Secretary's Commission on Achieving Necessary Skills)
TEXTILES AND APPAREL STANDARD 3.0 Students will demonstrate design skills in textiles and apparel selections.
LEARNING EXPECTATIONS The student will: 3.1 Analyze the effect of color as an element.* 3.2 Examine the application of the elements and principles of design in textiles and apparel products.* PERFORMANCE STANDARDS The student: 3.1A Examines the psychology, symbolism, and terms related to color.
3.1B Practices using color schemes and illusions effectively in apparel.
3.1C Chooses colors than enhance physical appearance.
3.2A Identifies elements and principles of design.
3.2B Explains how to use principles and elements to enhance the appearance of body shapes.
3.2C Explains how principles and elements of design are used in fashion design and construction.
3.2D Describes silhouette and its effect on appearance.
SAMPLE PERFORMANCE TASKS · · · · · Participate in a "Color Analysis".
Work in pairs to develop a personal analysis.
Identify personal features to consider when selecting clothing such as body type and face shape.
Using a computer analysis program, determine garment styles appropriate for various types of silhouettes.
Select different examples of texture and patterns; explain how the fabric would affect one's personal choice.
Determine most desirable/flattering colors by using fabric swatches for individual skin tones and how these color schemes can be used in personal clothing choices.
INTEGRATION/LINKAGES Family and Consumer Sciences National Standards 1.0, 2.0, 6.0, 12.0, 13.0, Family and Consumer Sciences National Standards - Textile and Apparel Standards 16.2, 16.3, 16.4, 16.5, 16.6, English II Gateway Standards 1.0, 2.0, 3.0, 4.0, Algebra I Gateway Standards 2.0, 3.0, 5.0, FCCLA (Service Project, Focus on the Children, Illustrated Talk), Applied Communications, Computer Skills, History and Geography, Colleges and Universities, Science Industry, School and Community Libraries, Art, Science, Peer and Professional Collaboration, Retail and General Business, Marketing, Economics, Psychology and Sociology, Leadership Course, and SCANS (Secretary's Commission on Achieving Necessary Skills)
TEXTILES AND APPAREL STANDARD 4.0 Students will apply knowledge of fibers and fabrics when evaluating textile products.
LEARNING EXPECTATIONS The student will: 4.1 Describe 4.2 Describe 4.3 Examine 4.4 Illustrate the physical and chemical properties of fibers.
fabric construction methods.
fabric finishes and dyes. various types of fibers, yarns, and fabrics.*
PERFORMANCE STANDARDS The student: 4.1A Analyzes characteristics of natural and synthetic fibers.
4.1B Describes the characteristics of blended fibers.
4.1C Analyzes the impact of technology on fiber production and textile design and manufacturing.
4.2 A Describes how fabrics are produced from fibers and yarns.
4.2B Compares methods of fabric construction and characteristics of each.
4.3A Explains how color and surface designs are applied to fabrics.
4.3B Compares dyeing and color processes.
4.3C Describes how finishes affect the characteristics of fabrics.
4.4 Collects and organizes examples and illustrations of various types of fibers, yarns, and fabrics.
SAMPLE PERFORMANCE TASKS · · · Construct simple weaving projects using different types of weaves and textile products (i.e., potholders, rugs, placemats, etc.).
Sketch findings from microscopes and/or magnifying glasses showing difference in yarns.
Create a portfolio to describe, categorize, and display various textile products (i.e., natural fibers, synthetic fibers, woven, non-woven, knits, etc.).
INTEGRATION/LINKAGES Family and Consumer Sciences National Standard 2.0, Family and Consumer Sciences National Standards - Textile and Apparel Standards 16.2, 16.3, 16.4, English II Gateway Standards 1.0, 2.0, 3.0, 4.0, Algebra I Gateway Standards 1.0, 2.0, 3.0, 4.0, 5.0, Applied Communications, Computer Skills, History, Colleges and Universities, Science Industry, School and Community Libraries, Art, Science, FCCLA (Illustrated Talk, Applied Technology), Peer and Professional Collaboration, Retail and General Business, Marketing, Economics, Psychology and Sociology,, SCANS (Secretary's Commission on Achieving Necessary Skills)
TEXTILES AND APPAREL STANDARD 5.0 Students will examine textile and apparel product selection, maintenance, and consumer strategies.
LEARNING EXPECTATIONS The student will: 5.1 Demonstrate guidelines for wardrobe planning and coordinating existing clothing.
5.2 Evaluate the quality of textile and apparel products.
5.3 Examine consumer strategies for the selection and maintenance of textile and apparel products.
5.4 Examine apparel for infants and children.* 5.5 Determine methods to recycle and/or renovate textile and apparel products.* PERFORMANCE STANDARDS The student: 5.1A Describes the benefits of a well-planned wardrobe.
5.1B Analyzes current wardrobe to determine wardrobe needs for personal lifestyle.
5.1C Examines the selection and use of accessories for wardrobe expansion.
5.2A Analyzes the quality of workmanship, fabric, and design.
5.2B Recognizes the importance of proper fit for maximum wardrobe value.
5.3A Demonstrates the use of recommended practices to follow when shopping for textile and apparel products for the home and family.
5.3B Evaluates the use of information on the label of textile and apparel products.
5.3C Examines products and procedures for laundering, pressing, and storing textile and apparel products.
5.3D Evaluates and applies techniques to treat and remove a variety of stains.
5.3E Examines the necessity, benefits, and costs of dry cleaning.
5.4 Evaluates apparel needs and features for infants and children.
5.5 Explains how textile products can be recycled or renovated.
SAMPLE PERFORMANCE TASKS · · · · · · Complete a personal wardrobe inventory.
Identify and describe purchases needed.
Illustrate clothes for various occasions in one's lifestyle.
Identify required information on sample textile labels.
Using identified standards, evaluate various garments for quality of fabric, construction, and fit.
Identify sources for information one can use for the care of textile and apparel products.
· · · · · · · ·
Contrast and compare results of garments laundered using correct and incorrect methods.
Debate why items for laundering should be sorted.
Bring a garment to class to be ironed or pressed.
List reasons why one should read and retain textile and apparel labels and hang tags.
Design a poster identifying symbols for proper care of textile and apparel products.
Display a variety of products used for stain removal and evaluate the effectiveness of each.
List steps used in removal of stains in given situations.
Research the cost of dry cleaning a coat in your area.
Assume you will be wearing the coat for three years.
Determine how much you would have to spend to keep it clean.
INTEGRATION/LINKAGES Family and Consumer Sciences National Standards - Textile and Apparel Standards Standard 16.2, 16.6, English II Gateway Standards 1.0, 2.0, 3.0, 4.0, FCCLA (Illustrated Talk, Interpersonal Communications), Applied Communications, Computer Skills, History and Geography, Colleges and Universities, Algebra I Gateway Standards 1.0, 2.0, 3.0, 4.0, 5.0, Science Industry, School and Community Libraries, Art, Science, Peer and Professional Collaboration, Retail and General Business, Marketing, Economics, Psychology and Sociology, and SCANS (Secretary's Commission on Achieving Necessary Skills)
TEXTILES AND APPAREL STANDARD 6.0 Students will demonstrate skills needed to produce, alter, or repair textile and apparel products.
LEARNING EXPECTATIONS The student will: 6.1 Develop skills in the use and maintenance of construction equipment and tools.
6.2 Evaluate textiles and apparel construction projects for difficulty level.
6.3 Demonstrate methods for repairing and altering textiles and apparel.
6.4 Construct a textile or apparel product using a pattern.* PERFORMANCE STANDARDS The student: 6.1A Identifies equipment and tools needed for producing textile and apparel projects.
6.1A Practices the use of cutting, marking, measuring, sewing, and pressing equipment and tools.
6.2 Demonstrates proper care of equipment and tools.
6.3 Practices techniques for repairing and altering textile and apparel products.
6.4A Selects appropriate fabric and sewing notions.
6.4B Practices cutting, construction, and pressing techniques using tools and equipment correctly.
.SAMPLE PERFORMANCE TASKS · · · · · · · Develop bulletin board displaying sewing equipment.
Demonstrate simple maintenance (iron, machine).
Practice threading machine correctly.
Practice sewing on paper.
Demonstrate skills by preparing samples (seams, stitching, threading, cutting, marking, etc.).
Identify problems and give solutions for common sewing problems (may use samples of problems).
Select a pattern and construct a textile or apparel product.
INTEGRATION/LINKAGES Family and Consumer Sciences National Standards: 1.0, 2.0, English II Gateway Standards: 1.0, 2.0, 3.0, 4.0, Algebra I Gateway Standards 1.0, 2.0, 3.0, 4.0, 5.0, Applied Communications, Computer Skills, History and Geography, Colleges and Universities, Science Industry, School and Community Libraries, Science, Peer and Professional Collaboration, Retail and General Business, Marketing, Economics, and SCANS (Secretary's Commission on Achieving Necessary Skills)
TEXTILES AND APPAREL STANDARD 7.0 Students will analyze career options within the textiles and apparel design industries.
LEARNING EXPECTATIONS The student will: 7.1 Analyze career ladders and job requirements in the textiles and apparel design industries.
7.2 Identify personal qualities that contribute to employability in the textiles and apparel industries.
7.3 Identify opportunities to broaden and enhance job preparation skills.* PERFORMANCE STANDARDS The student: 7.1A Distinguishes between entry level, intermediate level, and professional level of career ladders.
7.1B Identifies education and/or training required at each level.
7.2A Evaluates personal attributes to determine characteristics related to employability.
7.2B Discusses the importance of each employment characteristic.
7.3 Researches opportunities available in local area and/or other areas for textile and apparel employment.
SAMPLE PERFORMANCE TASKS · · · · · · · · Create a career ladder for textiles and apparel (entry, intermediate, and advance).
Select and evaluate a textile and/or apparel occupation of interests.
Create a poster to identify characteristics of employability.
Role-play situations relating appropriate/inappropriate characteristics for employment.
Invite guidance counselor to identify places students can obtain education/training for careers in textile and apparel (i.e., part-time, summer, full-time).
Search classified sections of newspapers and clip; prepare a bulletin board or poster showing opportunities.
Discuss and list industries related to textiles and apparel.
Interview persons employed in textiles and apparel.
INTEGRATION/LINKAGES Family and Consumer Sciences National Standards 1.0, 2.0,13.0, 16.0, Family and Consumer Sciences National Standards - Textiles and Apparel Standards 16.1, 16.3,16.4,16.6, 16.), English II Gateway Standards 1.0, 2.0, 3.0, 4.0, Algebra I Gateway Standards 1.0, 2.0, 3.0, 4.0, 5.0, FCCLA (Job Interviewing and Entrepreneurship, Applied Technology, Leaders at Work, Career Connection, Financial Fitness), Applied Communications, Computer Skills, History and Geography, Colleges and Universities, Science Industry, School and Community Libraries, Peer and Professional Collaboration, Retail and General Business, Marketing, Economics, Psychology and Sociology, Leadership Course, Extra-Curricular Activities, and SCANS (Secretary's Commission on Achieving Necessary Skills)
