December, 2000 Draft Public Review Copy Implementation Plan For the Reconstruction and Interpretation of the May 10, 1869 [last%20spike%20site.GIF] LAST SPIKE SITE Historic Scene for GOLDEN SPIKE NATIONAL HISTORIC SITE INTRODUCTION (Purpose and Scope of Plan) Golden Spike National Historic Site was established in 1965 to commemorate the May 10, 1869 completion of the transcontinental railroad.
In the 35 years since the Historic Site was established (and earlier), efforts have been made to reconstruct the historic landscape of the Last Spike Site.
The purpose of this plan is to build on prior efforts, and to present a specific implementation framework for additional reconstruction of the Last Spike Site historic scene.
Presently, the existing conditions of reconstructed components at the Last Spike Site have been successful.
For the past 21 years, having working replica engines epitomizes the cultural landscape and the park story.
However, while pleasing, the existing conditions at the Historic Site represents the tip of the iceberg.
Many other important components are missing, such as tents, other pieces of rolling stock, and various other accoutrements.
Thus, the entire scene (as currently reconstructed) is not a completely accurate picture.
A more accurate representation of the historic scene will offer much additional interpretive value and potential for the park.
Because the current cultural landscape and historic scene at the Last Spike Site is a focal point for almost all park visitors, this reconstruction effort is consequently a very high priority for the park.
Accordingly, this project continues to be identified as a top priority in the park's strategic plan as well as in the comprehensive interpretive plan.
This implementation plan presents a framework for reconstruction of the Last Spike Site over the next five years (2001 to 2005).
The plan focuses on the immediate area of the Last Spike Site, directly behind the park visitor center.
Specific components in this plan include rolling stock, tents, wayside exhibits, and other site components and considerations.
BACKGROUND (Summary of Previous Reconstruction Efforts) Many decades prior to the formal establishment and national designation of Golden Spike National Historic Site, efforts were undertaken to commemorate and reconstruct the historic achievement of the May 10, 1869 completion of the transcontinental railroad at Promontory Summit.
This plan represents a continuation and expansion of these longstanding efforts to commemorate this significant achievement in our Nation's history.
The following provides a summary of the history of the Last Spike Site, along with more recent reconstruction efforts over the past several decades:
Promontory serves as the interchange point between the Central Pacific and Union Pacific Railroads.
New buildings are established around the Last Spike Site.
Changes are made to the track with the addition of sidings, spur tracks, etc.
1869-1904 Promontory is along the mainline of the first transcontinental route.
Promontory continues to serves as a rail road station.
Ranching and agricultural uses also become dominant land use activities in the Promontory Summit area.
Changes are made to the track with the addition of sidings, spur tracks, the round house, etc.
After the completion of the Lucin Cutoff, the Promontory Branch line continues operations until World War Two.
Promontory continues to serves as a rail road station.
Ranching and agricultural uses continue in the surrounding Promontory Summit area.
Continued evolution of buildings, railroad facilities, etc.
White Obelisk installed c1917.
1942-1965 Promontory becomes a ghost town and is neglected.
In 1952, the Golden Spike Association was formed and began an annual reenactment program to commemorate the May 10, 1869 driving of the gold spike.
Efforts also initiated to establish the Historic Site, which is achieved in 1965.
Reconstruction efforts include a section of ties and track; period dress costumes, and telegraph poles.
1965-1979 Focus was on initial site establishment: land acquisition, site planning, staffing, providing for basic visitor services and facilities, preparations for Centennial celebration.
Additional sections of track was added to the Last Spike Site area, and the placement of (non-working) replica locomotives.
Four tents were added in the 1970's.
Efforts undertaken from the mid-1960s onwards to acquire operating replica locomotives.
"Necessary" modern facilities added (visitor center, sidewalks, crosswalks, seating, wayside panels); these facilities, though needed and beneficial, are acknowledged to be major intrusions on the historic scene.
1979-1994 Track was lengthened and realigned to better match 1869 conditions, following historical research and documentation (Jones, 1979; Anderson, 1978; General Management Plan, 1978).
Archeological survey report completed in 1982 (Ayers, 1982).
Working replica locomotives were acquired and put into service in 1979.
Four tents removed.
Two false fronts, with tent structures behind, were later erected (Bakery 
Some efforts made (unsuccessfully) to acquire rolling stock, lengthen track.
1995-2000 Primarily, during this period, the park updated most essential planning documents: Comprehensive Interpretive Plan prepared in 1997; Resource Management Plan prepared in 1999; 5-year Strategic Plan prepared in 1997, and then updated in 2000.
All of these plans identify a strong need for additional reconstruction of the Last Spike Site cultural landscape and historic scene.
Also, during this period, wood bench seating was added; the two false fronts were removed; telegraph poles replaced.
PLANNING GOALS AND OBJECTIVES The following overall goals and parameters are identified for this implementation plan.
These goals and parameters will serve as guide-posts for the development and decision-making of specific implementation plans, which follow.
Geographical Area of the Historic Reconstruction Zone: Generally, the historic reconstruction zone will begin as visitors walk away (north) from the visitor center across the siding towards the Last Spike Site.
East and west, long the tracks, the historic reconstruction zone will extend from the laurel wood tie to the box elder tree, and an equal distance in the other direction.
On the far side (north) of the tracks, the historic zone will extend out 20-40 yards to the heavily vegetated areas.
(It is recognized that some landscape elements will extend out further, such as the telegraph poles, the track, and the surrounding lands and mountain peaks of Promontory Summit).
For the purposes of this plan, reconstruction efforts for the Last Spike Site cultural landscape and historic scene will focus on this specific area as defined above.
Scope of this Implementation Plan.
95% of plan should be directed at what the park can realistically accomplish in the next two to five years.
5% of this implementation plan should explore the feasibility of potential longer-term goals.
No decisions on these longer-term goals will be made in this plan, though potential variables and practical considerations relative to these longer-term goals should be identified.
The Historic Site should aim for partial restoration; it is unrealistic to reconstruct everything that was here on May 10, 1869.
A partial restoration is sufficient to create the feeling of May 10, 1869 and to tell the story of the events that transpired.
Thus, a major goal of this implementation plan is to determine and decide which components have the most impact and value, in light of limited funds and resources for accomplishing this plan.
While reconstruction of the May 10, 1869 historic scene is proposed in this plan, the park will concurrently implement a "preservation" management treatment at the Last Spike Site.
Aside from the Visitor Center Complex, the "Preservation Zone" surrounds the proposed "Historic Reconstruction Zone."
The "Preservation Zone" includes features from various time periods.
Primary features include archeological remains and historic vegetation (Box Elder Trees, Matrimony Vine, Golden Currant).
Mainly, these zones are separate.
However, the edges of these two zones are very close.
Before any implementation of reconstruction occurs, it is assumed that a detailed site check will be performed to ensure that no resources in the "Preservation Zone" will be affected.
[preservation%20zone.gif]
PERIOD OF SIGNFICANCE (For the Last Spike Site) In accordance with the Cultural Landscape Inventory and Report, the period of significance for Golden Spike National Historic Site runs from 1868 through 1942.
Within this broader period of significance, three delineations are specified as follows: * Primary Period of Significance: Fall, 1868 to January, 1870.
(This period encompasses railroad construction by both companies up to May 10, 1869; the Golden Spike Ceremony on May 10, 1869; the upgrade and finishing work completed in the months following May 10, 1869; the abandonment of the UP grade on the east slope; and the time when Promontory served as the interchange point between the two railroad companies).
* Second Period of Significance: May 10, 1869 to 1904.
(encompasses the period or railroad operations when Promontory was on the transcontinental mainline and served as an active Section Station).
* Third Period of Significance: 1904 to September, 1942 (encompasses the period when the Promontory line no longer was on the transcontinental mainline, but continued to serve as the Promontory Branch line).
The Last Spike Site cultural landscape and historic scene encompasses all of the above-mentioned periods.
Yet, the earliest period of significance for the park will be given emphasis for historic reconstruction, particularly focusing on the historic scene as it existed on May 10, 1869.
In short, this proposed reconstruction effort seeks to add items to strengthen and augment the interpretation of the primary period of significance, which has May 10, 1869 as a focal point.
It is recognized that the Last Spike Site contains little or no physical remains of May 10, 1869.
The Last Spike Site does have physical remains and remnants from the other periods of significance (i.e. two box elder trees, matrimony vine, archeological remains, etc.).
All reconstruction plans will be designed to not significantly affect, alter, or damage of any remnants of other periods.
These resources are to be preserved.
RELATIONSHIP TO OTHER PARK PLANS In an effort to comply with the legislative intent of Congress in establishing the area, a General Management Plan for Golden Spike National Historic Site was prepared in 1978.
The General Management Plan integrated four planning documents: a statement for management, a statement of resource management goals, a visitor use plan, and a general development plan.
As a composite of these four documents, the General Management Plan for Golden Spike continues to serve as the basis for all management activities and programs.
All subsequent planning documents, such as this Implementation Plan for reconstruction of the Last Spike Site Historic Scene, tier from the General Management Plan.
The preparation of an implementation plan for reconstruction of the Last Spike Site Historic Scene falls within the scope of park's 1978 General Management Plan.
Similarly, this implementation effort has been identified as a management objective in four other planning documents.
First, the five-year Strategic Plan for Golden Spike National Historic Site, 2001 to 2005 includes a long-term goal that calls for the planning and implementation efforts for additional reconstruction of the Last Spike Site Historic Site.
Second, the 1999 Resource Management Plan identifies the same objective.
Third, the park's 1997 Comprehensive Interpretive Plan also identifies a strong need for additional reconstruction of the Last Spike Site Historic Scene.
Finally, in 2000, a Cultural Landscape Report was prepared for the Historic Site.
This document recommends historic reconstruction as the best treatment method for the Last Spike Site.
In short, the preparation of this implementation plan for reconstruction of the Last Spike Site historic scene has long been identified as a management goal for Golden Spike National Historic Site.
The preparation of this implementation plan is compatible with all of the above-mentioned plans.
Indeed, this implementation plan will make great strides in the implementation of all of the above plans.
EXISTING CONDITIONS AT THE LAST SPIKE SITE The Last Spike Site between the two locomotives facing, pilot to pilot, is focal point of Golden Spike National Historic Site.
Past reconstruction efforts have resulted in the following historic scene landscape components: * Replica Locomotives * 1.5 miles of track * Flagpole * Telegraph poles * Wayside Exhibits * Sidewalks * Wood Bench Seating * View Stands * Visitor Center Complex
The following photographs depict existing conditions at the Last Spike Site.
[CENTER.JPG]
Figure 1 - North view of the Last Spike Site
[LEFT.JPG]
Figure 2 - Northeast view of the Last Spike Site
[right.jpg]
Figure 3 - Northwest view of the Last Spike Site
A. Rolling Stock Component The term rolling stock is used to describe any of the various locomotives, passenger cars, box cars, or other cars that were present at the Last Spike Site on May 10, 1869.
A considerable amount of research exists on the rolling stock at Promontory.
In most of the books and research documentation on the May 10, 1869 Golden Spike Celebration, there is considerable discussion of the various parties that arrived on different trains at different times.
Moreover, the photographic documentation of the events on May 10, 1869 vividly highlights the rolling stock pieces that were present.
A particularly important source document is the 1980 Eckberg report: "Rolling Stock at Promontory."
Eckberg documented that there were 9 locomotives and 54 other pieces of rolling stock at Promontory on May 10, 1869.
Also, the 1969 Historic Base Map by Ketteson (particularly Map 1) shows the location of rolling stock pieces at the Last Spike Site, and how the positions of each car changed from early morning to the noon hour.
Finally, Appleman's 1966 locomotive study report provides very insightful analysis of the historic photographs.
The purpose of having several pieces of rolling stock at the Last Spike Site would be to achive several important interpretive themes: convey the idea of rail transportation: both freight 
A concurrent objective would be to more accurately show what was present on May 10, 1869, and how each of the pieces of rolling stock fit into the story of this great event.
The use of rolling stock was a large part of the story of the events of May 10, 1869.
Many of the participants arrived by train for the May 10, 1869 Golden Spike Ceremony.
The various pieces of rolling stock here on that day are important components of the cultural landscape.
Overall, it is recommended that the Historic Site acquire three to five pieces of rolling stock.
This implementation plan will provide a listing of acceptable pieces as well as general priorities.
This listing will provide a broad menu of possible choices.
However, specific selections will be made on the basis of several factors (availability, reconstruction needs, whether the item requires a small-scale funding amount or a large-scale funding level that would necessitate a foundation grant, etc.).
Thus, consideration of the acquisition of any particular piece would be undertaken on a case-by-case basis.
Even though a considerable amount of research has been completed on the rolling stock at Promontory, the park does not have much information on the availability and associated costs for any rolling stock reconstruction effort.
Additional information, research, and planning on the park's rolling stock needs and the potential options is needed for the park to make informed decisions.
Thus, this implementation plan recommends the preparation of a "Rolling Stock Acquisition Feasibility Analysis."
The purpose of this analysis would be to thoroughly explore all options for the acquisition of rolling stock.
The analysis would consider the availability of existing historic pieces, the possibility of retrofitting a historic piece from a different time-period, and the possibility of building replica pieces, what companies exist for construction of replicas, and the estimated cost for any and all of the above options.
It is envisioned that this Feasibility Analysis would be structured along two broad implementation tracks.
The first implementation track would include pieces rolling stock that will require a great deal of funding (i.e. anything over $20,000).
Acquisition of such pieces would be clearly outside of the financial capacity of the park through existing park funding sources or through a donation by Friends of Golden Spike.
In short, acquisition of any such pieces would require a larger-scale fundraising effort, perhaps up to several hundred thousand dollars.
This effort would focus on reconstructing the more expensive pieces (i.e. the "special cars: the cars used to transport in the key participants to the golden spike ceremony).
Implementation of a larger-scale fundraising effort would require a great level of sophistication and design.
Very likely, the park may have to develop concept plans and specifications in order to market and facilitate fund-raising.
The park and Friends of Golden Spike may have to obtain the services of a grant-writer, or work closely with the National Park Foundation.
The second implementation track would be to acquire some of the inexpensive rolling stock pieces (anything under $20,000).
It is recognized that acquisition of these more inexpensive rolling stock pieces may still require a fundraising effort.
Yet, at a more reasonable price tag, it is believed that the park could obtain the necessary funding from various sources (donation account, Cooperating Association Support Account, Friends of Golden Spike, etc.)
Also, it is believed that the park would be able to obtain volunteer support and assistance on any rolling stock piece that might require some level of "in-house reconstruction or retrofitting."
It is believe that reconstruction efforts would be less involved, and would be on a scale that could likely be accomplished with a more limited amount of funding.
It is fully acknowledged and recognized that beginning a rolling stock program is a complicated, expensive, and time-consuming endeavor.
The park proposes to begin this program, realizing that it is a long-term undertaking.
This implementation plan proposes that "ideal goals" be established, but that there are limitations in funding, staffing, and logistical constraints.
It was decided it would be best to formulate what would be the ideal and work towards that objective, rather than have the rolling stock issue and plans to simply be driven by what is available.
Rolling Stock to Be Acquired: Top Priorities:
1.a.
UP Directors Car No. 29 (Car Barn required) 1.b.
CP Baggage Subsistence or Stanford's Private Coach (Car Barn required)
2.
Flatcar with debris or construction materials (may be housed outside)
3.
Water-car parked on CP siding as was done 5/10/1869 (may be housed outside)
4.
Regular Passenger or Emigrant Car - (may be housed inside or outside)
5.
Box Car (may be housed outside)
6.
Gondola (may be housed outside)
At this time, it would be ideal to have the UP and CP specials cars reproduced completely.
They should be fully constructed, and not just outside appearance only.
This would enable tours though the cars and the possibility of interpretive talks in the cars.
However, if it is cost-prohibitive (or if a fundraising effort is not successful), the park may have to be satisfied with having these cars with only an exterior reconstruction.
Storage Facility The rolling stock component of this implementation plan is the most expensive and complex component in this implementation plan.
It is also the component that will take the longest to implement.
It is clear that a major obstacle for the future implementation of a rolling stock program is the need for a storage facility.
While some rolling stock pieces can be stored outside, the most important pieces would require inside storage.
Various locations have been considered for a storage facility.
Major decision factors include the following.
The facility should not further intrude on the cultural landscape; it should not affect cultural resources (archeological sites or the historic grades; it needs to be close to engine house and close to utilities.
While other options may still need to be considered, one possible site is the land adjacent (east) to the Engine House.
This tract is already included in the park's boundary, but funds have never been authorized for its acquisition.
If this property were acquired, then conceivably, a storage facility could be built onto the east side of the Engine House into hillside.
Utilities are already available at this location, there would be no intrusion on the historic landscape from the Last Spike Site.
Additionally, the close proximity to the engine house makes the most sense for optimizing the efficiency of the locomotive and train crews.
No other area meets these qualifications.
Summary of Implementation Plan Recommendations for Rolling Stock: 1.
Recommend the preparation of a "Rolling Stock Acquisition Feasibility Analysis."
This analysis would thoroughly explore all options for the acquisition of rolling stock, consider the availability of existing historic pieces, the possibility of retrofitting a historic piece from a different time-period, and the possibility of building replica pieces, what companies exist for construction of replicas, and the estimated cost for any and all of the above options.
2.
Recommend that the park determine whether the land east of the Engine House is available.
3.
Recommend the preparation of concept drawings for a car barn facility.
4.
Set aside $5,000 to $10,000 set aside as a "quick-purchase-fund."
These funds would be used to purchase a rolling stock component, if a buying opportunity arises.
B. Tent Component Of the 16 tents that were in existence on May 10, 1869, reconstruction of at least five tents is proposed in this implementation plan.
These five tents would be reconstructed in the approximate locations as they existed on May 10, 1869.
After these five tents have been erected, the erection of four additional tents will be considered.
To a large extent, the location and dimensions of tent structures at Promontory has already been researched and documented.
Hedron (1978) provides a map and a number system that shows the approximate relative locations of all 16 tents that existed on May 10, 1869 (see attached).
Boyce (1980) provides a compilation of specifications for a few of these structures.
However, some further work would be necessary to confirm the dimensions and specifications of each tent (particularly those not included in the Boyce Report) and to specifically site each of the locations of the 10 tents at the Last Spike Site.
Location of Tents May 10, 1869 (Hedron Report, 1978)
[tent.gif]
Also, from the 1978 Hedron Report, it is known that four tents have clearly known uses: HS-6 was a restaurant 
HS-12/13 was likely some type of railroad establishment.
The use of all other tents is unknown, but many were likely used for sleeping purposes.
Four factors have driven the proposed reconstruction of 10 tents:
* North-view backdrop.
Reconstructing tents on the north side of the tracks behind the locomotives provides an important backdrop to the historic scene, which is one of the main views depicted in the historic photographs.
Also, visitors currently approach the Last Spike Site from the south and are mainly viewing the historic scene in a northerly direction.
* Proximity.
Reconstruction of tents located in the immediate vicinity of the Last Spike Site is recommended.
Those located further away are not recommended for reconstruction.
* Known Use and dimensions.
Per the Boyce and Hedron reports, it is recommended that priority be given to reconstructing tents for which their use and function is known.
Also, it is recommended that priority be provided to reconstructing tents for which we have information on their design, specifications, and dimensions.
* Visitor Use Conflict.
Recommend that tents not be reconstructed that would conflict with modern visitor use and circulation.
After considering the above-mentioned criteria, the following five tents are recommended for reconstruction: HS-6, HS-8, HS-9, and HS-12/HS-13.
After these five tents have been erected, the erection of four additional tents will be considered (HS-4, HS-5, HS-7, HS-10).
Reconstructing five (and possibly nine) of the 16 tents in the immediate vicinity of the Last Spike Site is considered both desirable and feasible.
The tent structures will provide a high level of interpretive value by creating the feeling or sense of place and time relative to May 10, 1869.
For all the other tents, recommend that a wood frame be constructed on which to place the canvas tent.
The wood structure would need to be placed on concrete foundation piers.
Recommend that tents remain up all year round.
The tents would be open, so that visitors could wander inside.
HS-12/13 is the only tent that had a wooden floor.
Recommend additional improvements to this tent: specifically, the construction of a lockable shed structure within the tent.
This space could be used for interpretive exhibits, and would be secure.
The interior of this tent could have canvas hanging from the walls.
The tents would be located approximately in their original locations.
Exact locations for placing each tent would be determined by an on-the-ground field analysis of all the historic photographs along with the 1978 Hedron report.
Before a final decision is made on the exact location of each tent reconstruction, the park will need to ensure that none of the archeological sites in the vicinity will be affected.
From a cursory review of the 1978 Cultural Resource Base Map, the 1982 Ayers Archeological Survey Report, and the 2000 Cultural Landscape Report Base Map, it is believed that no archeological sites exist at the proposed tent locations.
However, since the proposed tent locations are very close to several archeological sites, a careful field review by an archeologist is recommended during the time when the exact location for each tent reconstruction is proposed.
Recommend that the tents be kept up year-round.
It is believed that seasonal removal of the tents would cause more damage to the canvas and wood structures than would occur if they were just left up.
Moreover, having the tents up year-round will provide additional interpretive value to the Last Spike Site Historic Scene.
It is fully recognized that the reconstruction of tents will subsequently require cyclical maintenance funding to replace the canvas and make repairs.
Summary of Implementation Plan Recommendations for Tents: 1.
Recommend a pilot project for constructing 4 tents, which are about the same size (HS-6, HS-7, HS-8, and HS-10).
2.
Recommend construction of the next group of tents, which also have similar dimensions (HS-3, HS-4, HS-5).
3.
Recommend construction of the larger tents, with a more complicated design (HS-9 and HS-12/13).
C. Wayside Exhibit Component Early in the Last Spike Site Reconstruction planning process, when the placement of additional wayside exhibits was first raised, the park staff considered the basic issue of whether or not to have wayside exhibits at the Last Spike Site.
In short: does the interpretive value of wayside exhibits outweigh the negative impact of wayside exhibits, namely the addition of "modern components" at the Last Spike Site.
Because the Last Spike Site is the focal point of the park's interpretive story and because of the many historic photographs in existence that document the events of May 10, 1869, the placement of wayside exhibits is strongly recommended.
Finally, when the locomotives are not in operation and the proposed tents do not have canvass, having wayside exhibits would provide off-season visitors with some level of interpretation at the Last Spike Site.
In summary, the interpretive value of exhibits is considered to greatly outweigh their obtrusive effect.
Yet, if possible, the exact placement of wayside exhibits should be identified to minimize their intrusiveness.
The purpose of having wayside exhibits at the Last Spike Site is to interpret the major interpretive themes for the park, which are clearly identified in all park planning documents, particularly the 1997 Comprehensive Interpretive Plan.
From a review of the interpretive themes for the park, the following important interpretive themes should be addressed in the design and layout of wayside exhibits:
* National significance and importance of the completion of the railroad.
How it changed the country.
Welding of the Nation: physically, economically, spiritually, and emotionally.
* National focus on Promontory.
Media coverage and telling of the story.
* What happened on May 10, 1869.
The sequence/story of the ceremony.
* Promontory as the interchange point between the railroads following May 10, 1869.
* Prominent officials involved/present.
Those not present (Brigham Young).
Limited role 
* Piedmont Incident, delay from planned ceremony date of May 8.
Central Pacific delegation here first, waiting.
* Why the Jupiter 
* Determination of Promontory as the meeting point in April.
* Railroad Construction, the last spike site being newly constructed.
(Note: this is a part of the last spike story, however, interpretation of railroad construction is currently a focus of interpretation on the east 
Recommend the installation of about six to eight wayside exhibits at the Last Spike Site.
Their exact location, content, and layout and design would require the assistance and consultation with a wayside planning specialist.
Recommend that a "Wayside Proposal" document be prepared in-house for approximately 8 waysides.
Recommend that a wayside specialist from Harper's Ferry assist the Historic Site, with an on-site visit, with this task.
Subsequently, recommend that three different options be considered for the preparation of detailed design drawings for each wayside (Harper's Ferry, Contractor, or in-house).
Cost estimates would need to be obtained.
Recommend that detailed drawings be prepared as funding is available (both funding for detailed drawings and production).
Recommend that exhibits be designed around the most important historic themes, rather than building exhibits around photographs.
Yet, the inclusion of historic photographs would be very appropriate and valuable, since there are a series of valuable historic photographs that were taken of Promontory in 1869.
Planning for wayside exhibits should include an exhaustive review of all photographs.
Based on a cursory review, the following wayside exhibits (listed below) locations are proposed - to be situated in the approximate locations that the historic photo was taken.
These exhibits would blend the visual impact of these historic photographs with other text or graphics to address the interpretive themes identified above.
1.
Wayside to south of last spike site, facing north (with historic photograph of engines, flagpole, man on ladder, horses, crowd).
2.
Wayside on Jupiter viewstand facing east (with historic photograph taken from top of Jupiter the of engines, military, others, etc.) 3.
Wayside on No. 119 viewstand, facing west (with historic photograph of engines, military, others, etc.) 4.
Wayside to east of last spike site, facing westward (with historic May 9 photograph of Central Pacific equipment and delegation, missing final section of track).
5.
Wayside to west of last spike site, facing east (with historic photograph of Chinese workers laying last rail).
6.
Wayside on east side, facing north (with historic photograph of crowd in front of locomotive or crowd in front of car).
7.
General view of Promontory wayside, northwest of Last Spike Site, pointing east (with historic photograph of engines and cars from this location).
8.
General view of Promontory wayside, pointing west (two possible locations; several historic photographs to consider).
Possible Location of Wayside Exhibits
[wayside.gif]
The above suggested locations should be considered a "starting point" for a more detailed planning effort to exact location, content, and layout and design would require the assistance and consultation with a wayside planning specialist.
Summary of Implementation Plan Recommendations for Wayside Exhibits:
1.
Recommend that a "Wayside Proposal" document be prepared in-house for approximately 8 waysides.
Recommend that a wayside specialist from Harper's Ferry assist the Historic Site, with an on-site visit, with this task.
2.
Recommend that detailed drawings be prepared as funding is available (both funding for detailed drawings and production).
Other Site Components This category is a catch-all of items beyond what has been identified in the three prior sections (tents, rolling stock, and wayside exhibits).
From a review of the historic photographs, the following items were observed:
* Barrels (large and small) * Buckets * Railroad Ties (stacked as well as loosely lying around) * Telegrapher's table and stool * Parallel telegraph poles, wiring, 
Presently, a number of these reconstructed items already are on display at the Last Spike Site, including: * Barrels (2 large) * Telegrapher's table and stool * Parallel telegraph poles, wiring, 
It is recommended that the following items be added * Additional Barrels (both large and small) * Buckets * Railroad Ties (stacked as well as loosely lying around) * Rail * Horses and mule teams (during special events such as the May 10 Celebration and during Railroader's Festival) * Additional Wagons * Various hand tools (spike mauls, shovels, etc) * Grinding wheel * Camera and tripod * Crates * Benches (in front of some tents) * Push car * Hardware (spikes, fish-plates, etc.)
The specific numbers, locations, and placement of these items is not too important, since the items appear in different locations throughout the day of May 10, 1869.
Rather, the items should be acquired and placed to fit in and around tent locations and existing modern intrusions (i.e. sidewalk and benches).
In determining specifics, recommend that consideration be given to creative ways to display things in keeping with the following criteria.
First, the placement of any additional item shuld consider the potential for safety hazards.
Second, the items should be historically accurate (i.e. visible in the historic photographs).
Third, the placement of additional items should be done in a manner to ensure that each item will not be moved or stolen.
Fourth, cost should be a factor in selecting additional items.
Finally, the park should try to keep maintenance requirements low.
In keeping with these criteria, the following creative display methods are proposed: * Buckets (should be affixed to another site feature (i.e. tie, barrel, etc.)
* Railroad Ties.
Stacks of ties and individual ties should be displayed at various locations in the vicinity of the Last Spike Site.
Ties should be affixed to the ground.
Ties should not be treated with creosote.
Rather, they should be sanded and finished with a clear coating that would present an accurate visual image of a railroad tie, but would minimize safety hazards such as splinters or rough edges.
As discussed in the next section, some ties can be situated in front of the Last Spike Site and adaptively used for seating.
* Piles of rail.
Stacks of rail and individual pieces should be displayed at various locations in the vicinity of the Last Spike Site.
Rail should be affixed to the ground.
As discussed in the next section, some rail can be situated in front of the Last Spike Site, on top of two crates perhaps, and adaptively used for seating.
* Crates.
Should be located around the vicinity.
All crates should be affixed to the ground.
As discussed in the next section, some crates can be situated in front of the Last Spike Site, on top of two crates perhaps, and adaptively used for seating.
* Horses and mule teams (should be on display during special events such as the May 10 Celebration and during Railroader's Festival, when the park is able to obtain volunteer support).
Horses and mules should be permitted to walk around the area during celebrations, and some should be tethered.
To the greatest extent, riders should be dressed in period dress costumes.
All the applicable safety precautions will need to be in force when horses and mules are present.
* Additional Wagons.
Recommend the placement of several additional wagons around the Last Spike Site.
All wagons are firmly affixed to the ground by some method.
To preserve the wagons and for safety reasons, visitors will not be allowed climb on the wagons.
They will be marked "closed to public" with a small sign.
Recommend adding freight 
* Various hand tools (spike mauls, shovels, etc.). (should be affixed to another site feature (i.e. tie, barrel, etc.).
Coat with heavy urethane-type coating to prevent rust and metal slivers.
* Grinding wheel (should be affixed to another site feature (i.e. tie, barrel, etc.)
* Camera and tripod (should be affixed to the ground).
For the camera and tripod, three options were presented: permanent fixture, removable fixture, or used as an interpretive device for visitors to look through.
* Benches (in front of some tents) * Hardware (spikes, fish-plates, etc.).
Should be affixed to another site feature (i.e. tie, barrel, bucket, etc.).
Coat spikes with heavy urethane-type coating to prevent rust and metal slivers.
Summary of Implementation Plan Recommendations for Other Site Components: 1.
Recommend the acquisition or fabrication of all of above-mentioned items (as funding permits).
Recommend that a committee be established to research the availability and obtain prices for acquiring the various components listed above.
The committee would make recommendations on specific site locations for each component.
Other Site Considerations
Modern Facilities already at the Last Spike Site
Existing Sidewalk.
Presently, recommend that the sidewalk be left as it currently exists.
Eventually (after 5+ years), it would be desirable for the sidewalk to be removed and replaced with a synthetic walkway material (that would appear more "dirt-like" but have the desirable properties of a paved surface).
Existing wood bench seating.
It is acknowledged that the existing 28 wood benches have limitations (they are too low; the current formal row structure is an intrusion on the historic scene; the current layout also creates a problem of people in the front rows blocking the view of those in the back).
It is fully acknowledged that on May 10, 1869, there was virtually no seating during the Golden Spike Ceremony (a few participants are seated on ties, etc.).
Yet, it is strongly believed that the convenience of having this seating in front of the Last Spike site is vitally important for visitor comfort during interpretive programs at the Last Spike Site (re-enactment program or ranger programs).
For this implementation plan, it is recommended that modifications be made to the existing wooden bench, and that some of these benches be removed.
Recommend that bench seating be augmented with additional "adaptive seating."
Such seating will be accomplished with the adaptive use of ties, rails, crates, casks, boxes, etc.
It is recommended that a total number 80 seats be provided (with the relocation/redesign of wooden benches combined with adaptive seating).
This level of seating would be sufficient for current visitation levels (average attendance at reenactments is about 65 people).
This level of seating would also be sufficient for larger groups, as well as for future visitation increases.
This seating proposal provides seating and achieves an important objective of satisfying visitor comfort and convenience.
This objective is balanced with the need to provide some level of historic accuracy in a way that to some extent blends in with the cultural landscape.
Presently, the Last Spike Site is wheel-chair accessible, but there are not adequate locations for wheel chairs in the seating area.
Recommend that two locations within the defined seating area be established for wheel chairs.
Existing Viewstands.
As with wood bench seating, the viewstands are believed to provide a valuable visitor service.
If they were not present, visitors would not be able to see inside the locomotive cabs.
The viewstands also provide an interpretive opportunity for visitors to interact with the locomotive staff.
However, it is fully acknowledged that the viewstands were not present on May 10, 1869, and that they are an intrusion to the historic scene.
They are hidden behind the locomotives most of the time.
In weighing their relative merit, it is recommended that the park continue to have the viewstands at the Last Spike Site.
The current viewstands are still in good condition, though are beginning to show their age.
It is recommended that the park begin exploring design options for a replacement design.
Perhaps the new design should be use steel or some other metal as a building material.
The new design should be roughly similar to the existing raised platforms, but steps should be built perpendicular to the tracks.
The viewstands should accommodate about 4-6 people.
Perhaps only one viewstand is needed.
Existing Wayside Exhibits.
Following the installation of new wayside exhibits, all existing exhibits should be removed.
This is not urgent.
The existing exhibits provide interpretive information, though the new series will be far superior.
Visitor Circulation Patterns.
Generally, the Last Spike Site will be an area in which visitors will be able to freely circulate in whichever direction they choose.
From experience, most visitors will be attracted to the locomotives and the Last Spike Site.
This will be the focal point for interpretation (i.e. re-enactment, other park ranger talks, or informal interpretation).
Visitors will then be able to freely circulate around the immediate vicinity to "get the feeling" of the May 10, 1869 historic scene.
Wayside exhibits will provide interpretive information.
This proposed lay-out, with no defined circulation pattern, will encourage visitors to explore the Last Spike Site area while learning about the history of the completion of the transcontinental railroad.
Recommend the construction of an additional cross-walk behind the Jupiter (similar in location and construction as the one behind the No. 119).
Currently, visitors often cross the tracks at this location, and having a cross-walk would make access to the other side of the tracks easier and safer.
Ground Elevation The area between the Last Spike Site and the Visitor Center drops about two feet in elevation, and this area presents a challenging situation for large groups.
Currently, the seating area around the wooden benches can accommodate a maximum of 200 visitors (the 28 benches can seat almost 100 people, and there is room for about another 100 people to stand).
Thus, whenever the park has a group larger than 200 (including the May 10 Anniversary Celebration), there is a significant visibility problem.
The park has been dealing with problem by placing bleachers in a semi-circle in the depressed area.
This system provides for visibility to the Last Spike Site, but the audience is somewhat removed (about 120 feet away).
To solve this problem, it is recommended that the elevation of the area between the siding and the Last Spike Site be raised about two feet.
Recommend that material be trucked in and deposited to form a large semi-circle.
The material would have three layers (gravel, road base, and top-soil).
This design would somewhat enhance visibility, and would allow for the more effective accommodation of larger groups.
With this layout, the park could accommodate larger groups in several ways.
There would be additional "standing" room in the areas that now drop off behind the wooden benches.
The park could also bring out folding chairs for groups between 200-600.
The park could also temporarily place bleachers behind the wooden benches, or further back at large events.
The park would allow this fill area to grow grasses, which could be mowed for large groups.
[fill.gif]
It may be possible to establish a gradual slope down to the Last Spike Site.
This design would slightly enhance the visibility of audience members further away.
Also, some of the Historic photographs show the ground elevation of the tracks only slightly higher than the surrounding ground level.
Other photographs depict a drop-off of a couple of feet on the south side of the tracks (mainly from the scraping of soil to build a slight railroad grade).
Thus, a slight grade downwards to the tracks is proposed, combined with regular maintenance to "rough up" the ground near the track.
Maintenance Regular inspection and maintenance of all reconstruction components at the Last Spike Site will be an ongoing requirement.
Over time, repairs will be needed to the tent structures and other components.
An ongoing maintenance requirement will be to inspect and identify potential safety hazards (splinters, sharp edges, etc.).
In addition, the following maintenance program is recommended to make the Last Spike Site area look more like a newly constructed railroad line.
In keeping with the historic photographs, recommend that the ground paralleling the tracks on both sides be "roughed up" to a distance of about 20 feet away.
The "roughed up" zone would bulge out to a greater distance at the Last Spike Site, in front of tent structures (approximately 60-80 feet).
Roughing up the ground surface might be accomplished with mechanized equipment or with hand-tools.
This work may need to be performed several times a year.
For the Union Pacific siding, the "roughed up" area would about 15 feet on either side of the tracks.
Several historic photographs show the roughed zone along the Union Pacific siding to be narrower than along the mainline.
Another maintenance requirement would be to chemically treat weeds that grow on and along the tracks.
Also, the park needs to regularly steam clean the grease spots that occur directly below the "parking spots" for the locomotives.
As with the tent reconstruction, before this added maintenance program is initiated, specific boundaries would need to be delineated on the ground of the area proposed for disking.
Before a final decision is made on the initiation of this disking program, the park will need to ensure that none of the archeological sites in the vicinity will be affected.
From a cursory review of the 1978 Cultural Resource Base Map, the 1982 Ayers Archeological Survey Report, and the 2000 Cultural Landscape Report Base Map, it is believed that no archeological sites exist at the proposed tent locations.
However, since the proposed disking locations are very close to several archeological sites, a careful field review by an archeologist is recommended during the time when the exact location for disking program is proposed.
Safety Throughout this planning process, the park considered potential visitor and employee safety concerns and issues.
As a result of this effort, the following issues were identified.
First, implementation of any component in this plan should ensure that there is safety zone relative to the operation of the locomotives (to ensure adequate visibility for the engineers and for park rangers or other park staff).
Items placed near the tracks could inhibit visibility, thus the sub-committee recommends a zone where there should be no items located.
This zone would mainly be adjacent to the tracks and would expand at the Last Spike Site, which typically is a focal point for park visitors.
Second, it is recognized that any additional item placed in the Last Spike Site area creates some level of safety hazard.
Thus, it is important to evaluate the relative interpretive 
Summary of Implementation Plan Recommendations for Other Site Considerations: 1.
Increase the elevation of the area to the south of the Last Spike Site with layers of gravel, road base, and top soil.
2.
Recommend the acquisition or fabrication of rails, crates, casks, ties, and boxes for "adaptive seating."
Recommend the redesign and relocation of the wooden benches.
Recommend that a committee be established to make recommendations on specific site design and locations for best accomplishing the visitor seating goals in this plan.
3.
Recommend the construction of an additional cross-walk behind the Jupiter (similar to the one behind the No. 119.
4.
Shield the spike driving area with a pile of ties, vegetation, etc. 5.
Design and construct new view-stands (to be perpendicular to the tracks).
6.
Implement a regular maintenance program to rough up the ground along the tracks, to control weed growth on and along the tracks, and to clean the grease spots below the locomotives.
FUTURE GOALS AND CHALLENGES (Phase 2) It should be emphasized that the Historic Site intends to move gradually into a rolling stock program.
Presently, the Historic Site intends to acquire three to five pieces for display purposes only.
In the future (once implementation of this plan is underway), a phase two planning effort is anticipated.
This phase would consider the feasibility of a short extension of the current track (approximately 2-4 miles) and establishing a passenger operation.
While having a passenger operation at the Historic Site is considered a long-range goal, implementing such a passenger operation would require a whole new set of considerations and parameters.
A great deal of additional planning is necessary to begin consideration of a track extension and passenger operation.
This implementation plan outlines some of the parameters, as well as the major planning efforts that would need to be completed to guide the park in the implementation of a track extension and passenger operation.
The concept of having a short passenger operation (2-4 miles) has been identified in all recent park planning documents.
The outline of these plans are still very conceptual.
A specific implementation plan, similar to this document, would need to be prepared to propose a specific course of action.
Listed below are some elements and issues associated with the concept of having a future track extension and passenger operation: * Any such plans should be designed to follow the historic east-west linear track alignment.
Any deviation to the historic alignment, such as a loop, would be inappropriate.
* The possible distance of 2-4 miles is premised on several known "barriers."
To the east of the Last Spike Site, extending about 1.5 miles east of the existing east end of track, the historic Central Pacific/Southern Pacific grade bisected by a deep ravine at the burned out trestle site.
Also, following the burned-out trestle site, the grade crosses the County Road.
To the west of the Last Spike Site, extending about 2 miles west of the existing west end of tracks, the historic Central Pacific/Southern Pacific grade reaches Kings Pass.
At this juncture, the west auto tour currently terminates.
A greater concern, if the grade extended further west, is the impact on cultural features (historic culverts, cuts, fills, and the grade itself), if for example the grade has to be widened 3-6 feet to meet modern safety requirements.
On the West Slope and on the East Slope, there are a large number of sensitive cultural features which have tremendous historic integrity.
In contrast, there are few cultural features in the Summit area that would be affected by a track extension.
Finally, a financial barrier exists.
Typically, railroad construction costs close to a million dollars per mile.
While some of these costs might be reduced with donated materials, equipment, and labor, the project would still be a major financial undertaking.
* Consideration of a track extension and passenger operation would likely require a greater level of planning and environmental review, even though both of these activities would fall under the umbrella of the existing general management plan.
* Storage Facilities.
Another major expense item would likely be the need to construct a "car barn."
Some pieces of rolling stock at the Last Spike Site would be positioned outside all year round.
However, it is likely that some pieces would need to be stored inside a building.
Some preliminary or general/conceptual specifications for a "Car Barn: are identified as follows: + 3 Tracks wide, 115' long stalls; deep enough for 2 cars on each track; this would accommodate six 50' cars + Overhead 10- 25 ton Gantry crane running the length and width of shop with deep pit for working on locos and pulling boilers 
* The park does not have not currently have any extra funds for capital construction or for implementing the larger Phase Two plans.
Various options would need to be explored for large-scale fund-raising, such as a Congressional Add-on appropriation, foundation grants, donated materials and services, etc.
* Similarly, annual operating costs would also be increased with a track extension and passenger operation.
Such new facilities and operations would have an impact on park operations (staffing, operational costs, maintenance, etc.).
The park would need more operational staff and budget.
Presently, the locomotive staff is achieving park goals, but only with a very large number of volunteer support hours.
Any rolling stock reconstruction effort would need to consider the time requirements of existing staff and programs.
On the other hand, it is believed that the initiation of a rolling stock program would likely be a tremendous magnet for additional volunteers and financial support.
Summary of Implementation Plan Recommendations for Future Goals and Challenges:
1.
Recommend a study to determine the increased base operational costs for any additional rolling stock program (maintenance and operational costs).
2.
Recommend a feasibility study to consider a passenger operation and a short track extension (2-4 miles).
BACK
