U.S. Department of State
International Convention Against the Reproductive Cloning of Human Beings Sichan Siv, U.S. Representative to the UN Economic and Social Council Statement at the Fifty-seventh Session of the UN General Assembly, in the Sixth Committee New York, New York October 17, 2002
Released by the U.S. Mission to the United Nations
Mr. Chairman,
A year ago, the General Assembly considered the subject of Human Cloning for the first time.
A specific scientific topic came onto the agenda of the Sixth Committee and presented a unique challenge.
How could the international community cope with the legal and ethical issues related to this developing phenomenon?
Many of us were only vaguely familiar with the concept of cloning.
We heard of it first through reports of the birth of Dolly the sheep and later "CC" (Carbon Copy) the cat.
What exactly is cloning? The answer to that question was provided to the Ad Hoc Committee, in February.
Five experts presented scientific, ethical, philosophical, and legal information relevant to the topic.
Following this orientation, members of the open-ended Ad Hoc Committee exchanged views on the subject.
This discussion demonstrated that, with an enhanced understanding of the topic, delegations developed different views concerning the scope of the Committees mandate and the convention that it was asked to elaborate.
Many delegations favored a comprehensive ban on all cloning that would result in the creation of a human embryo.
This is whether for the purpose of bringing the embryo to term or for purposes of destroying it in the course of experimentation such as stem cell research.
Others preferred a ban limited to prohibiting production of those embryos earmarked to produce cloned children.
The Ad Hoc Committee reached no agreement, produced no recommendations, and adjourned, still pondering the issue.
After months of reflection, members of the Sixth Committee reconvened at the end of September to identify a way forward.
We engaged in a broad ranging but inconclusive discussion which raised many important issues.
Would unfettered human cloning produce genetically engineered humans, for example, or exploit poor women from developing countries for research purposes?
There were no easy answers, nor was there a consensus in the Working Group on how to proceed.
Indeed, after much discussion there are still divergent views on the mandate for the Ad Hoc Committees future work.
One proposal, L.8, calls for a convention to ban only cloning that would produce a cloned human baby.
The other proposal before the Committee, L.3, co-sponsored by Spain, the United States and 26 other countries, is to negotiate a convention that would ban all cloning of human embryos, whether the intention is to bring the embryo to term or to use it for research purposes, resulting in its destruction.
During the Working Group discussion, many states called for a total ban.
The introduction of A/C.6/57/L.3 responds to that call.
It also responds to a call by over one million youth from all continents.
They are members of the World Youth Alliance, who believe that only a total, comprehensive ban on human cloning would protect and respect the dignity of all human beings.
They respectfully asked the Ad Hoc Committee to work towards a complete ban.
To the youth, the future world leaders, we hope that the Sixth Committee will be able to say we heard you!
Proponents of a limited ban, in draft resolution L.8, assert that everyone agrees that reproductive cloning is wrong and should be prohibited.
Everyone does not agree, however, that banning only reproductive cloning is acceptable or would be effective.
This is a crucial difference that the proponents of L.8 have persistently refused to recognize.
The United States as a co-sponsor of L.3 agrees cloning to produce human beings is wrong, but we also believe creating and destroying human embryos for experimentation is equally wrong.
A ban on reproductive cloning only would be difficult to enforce in an environment that permitted therapeutic cloning in laboratories.
Once cloned human embryos are available, it would be virtually impossible to control what was done with them, including bringing an embryo to term.
Some might argue that many things that have legitimate uses can be misused by persons intent on doing so.
It would be wrong to apply this logic to human embryos.
First of all, I think we can all agree that human beings are different than other animate and inanimate objects.
Indeed, it is widely recognized that the human body and its parts should not, as such, become commodities, giving rise to financial gain.
Furthermore, accepted principles of medical science dictate that experiments should not be conducted where there is an a priori reason to believe that death or disabling injury of a human will occur.
There are alternatives to using cloned embryo stem cells.
One of the most promising, experimentation with adult stem cells, neither assaults human dignity nor transgresses the medical ethics principle referred to above.
The United States National Institutes of Health aggressively support research on developing the therapeutic potential of adult stem cells.
Scientists have discovered that adult stem cells in animals may be used to repair cartilage and bone damaged by injury and disease.
We believe that research with adult stem cells shows great potential and presents ethically acceptable alternatives to the use of stem cells derived from cloned embryos.
The Working Group developed no consensus on a mandate for the future work of the Ad Hoc Committee.
However, the sponsors of L.3 believe there can be broad agreement to take immediate action against all cloning.
That is the goal that we seek to achieve.
Other delegations, including one delegation that requested inscription of this item on the agenda of the General Assembly, Germany, should be able to accept a total ban because their domestic legislation already prohibits both reproductive and experimental human cloning.
In light of this, and the evident support for the total ban that is apparent in the Sixth Committee, we hope that Germany and other co-sponsors of L.8 will consider L.3 with an open mind.
The proposals set forth in draft resolution L.3 provide a program of action for the international community that would include negotiation of a convention prohibiting all cloning that produces human embryos.
Cloning of animals and other techniques including experimentation using adult stem cells would not be banned or otherwise affected.
Also, as a way to address the issue quickly, a moratorium on cloning of human embryos would be declared pending negotiation and adoption of a comprehensive convention.
We seek a total ban as soon as possible.
Promises to consider, at some future time, proposals for other international instruments, such as those contained in draft resolution L.8, are too vague to be taken seriously.
During the Working Group meeting it became clear that there are a small number of states that are intent on pursuing research on human embryos regardless of the moral, ethical, and practical concerns raised by so many delegations.
Many other delegations, including those that supported the "two step" approach championed by Germany and France, indicated their distaste for the killing of cloned human embryos.
It is clear to us that these two aspects of human cloning are indivisible intellectually, scientifically, and practically.
The question we must address is whether we are prepared to let a small group deter the rest of the international community from moving forward to outlaw in its entirety what is arguably the most troubling and serious assault on human dignity this august body has ever confronted!
It is our hope the United Nations will respond comprehensively to all who have called for action against human cloning.
Thank you.
[End]
