[daiywash.gif] *EPF309 06/24/98 SAVING THE BAY: THE CHESAPEAKE BAY FOUNDATION (From the "Advocacy in America" Electronic Journal (1740) By Stuart Gorin USIA Staff Writer Clear, blue waters.
Bathers splashing in gentle waves free of pollutants.
Sailboats gliding along the horizon.
An abundance of marine life and a healthy, diverse ecosystem.
This is a perfect picture of how the Chesapeake Bay on the Eastern seaboard of the United States should look.
But in the last 30 years, those images have not always been prevalent.
Enter the Chesapeake Bay Foundation (CBF), a nonprofit environmental advocacy group.
In the mid-1960s the Chesapeake Bay -- the largest estuary in the United States -- seemed to be dying.
Algae grew on the water.
Pollution from factories and sewage plants was rampant.
Fish and shellfish supplies were in rapid decline.
Many people felt something should be done to save the bay, but other than express their concern, few did anything about it.
It came down to a group of friends who used the bay for leisure activities such as boating and fishing.
Although the group asked for help from local officials, they were told to handle the problem by themselves.
They determined that a private-sector organization was needed -- something that could represent the best interests of the bay by encouraging local governments and private citizens to work together.
Rising to the challenge, in 1967 the group created the Chesapeake Bay Foundation, a Maryland-based, nonprofit membership-supported organization whose only goal was and is to protect and restore the bay to its natural environment.
The foundation adopted the motto "Save The Bay" and began to educate and involve citizens in hands-on environmental projects.
Such involvement meant teaching people about the Chesapeake Bay and striving to influence local government officials to pass legislation to help preserve it.
BECOMING A WATCHDOG In the early 1970s, the states of Maryland and Virginia had enacted tidal wetland protection acts.
Although the legislation was largely untested, Chesapeake Bay Foundation staff biologists pressed for strict enforcement of the Maryland act, a move that would strengthen the state's resolve.
Within a couple of years, tidal wetland loss fell by more than 90 percent.
By 1976, CBF had raised enough public concern over the future of the bay that former U.S. Senator Charles McC. Mathias (R-MD), a member of CBF's board of trustees, was able to push through Congress a seven-year Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) Chesapeake Bay Study.
It provided much of the scientific basis for the broad interstate effort that continues today.
While the study was underway, CBF staff members served as advisers to the EPA and to the university laboratories that carried out the program's research.
Scientists monitored the level of wastewater discharge-permit compliance by industries and sewage treatment plants in Maryland and Virginia under the 1972 federal Clean Water Act.
Operating as a watchdog, CBF highlighted several problems that were remedied by state water-quality agencies, and the foundation encouraged those agencies to address additional problems on their own.
In 1983, EPA issued its report on the bay study, documenting systemic declines around the Chesapeake.
Later that year, the governors of Maryland, Virginia and Pennsylvania, and the mayor of the District of Columbia met at a major conference that also included staff from CBF, other environmental organizations and research laboratories.
Their task was to hammer out what would become the first interstate Chesapeake Bay Agreement.
A particularly important outgrowth of the bay agreement was Maryland's Critical Area Act, the first land-use legislation intended to minimize the effects of shoreline development on the bay ecosystem.
As a result of the act, the outpouring of public interest in cleaning up the Chesapeake was tremendous.
CBF's membership reached 10,000 in 1981.
In 18 months, it had doubled to 20,000.
CBF WORKS WITH VIRGINIA AND PENNSYLVANIA In the 1980s, the Chesapeake Bay Foundation expanded its roles of both adviser and watchdog in resource protection by working with state legislatures in Virginia and Pennsylvania.
In addition, foundation officials often testified before state legislative committees, and individual CBF members also were urged to talk to their state representatives.
This practice still continues today.
As a result of lobbying state legislatures, one result was the passage by the General Assembly of Virginia of the Chesapeake Bay Preservation Act.
In 1987, at the urging of CBF, the General Assembly amended the act to include a 40 percent reduction in the flow to the bay of the nutrients nitrogen and phosphorous, along with the specific goal of elimination of toxics from all controllable sources.
The foundation also funded a small Virginia office and began running school trips with a fleet of canoes on Virginia waterways to educate and encourage students to participate in the cause.
With CBF's backing and an office in the state capital, Pennsylvania focused on agricultural issues in the intensely farmed south-central counties along the Susquehanna River.
Additional attention was directed to wastewater treatment, urban stormwater runoff and wetland protection.
In the late 1980s, the bay saw a new threat: exploration for oil.
Although the Texaco oil company drilled an exploratory well in Virginia near the Potomac River, it came up dry.
The threat led CBF to place renewed emphasis on the dangers of oil in the estuary, not only from exploration and production but from transportation and from the countless spills that would occur on a regular basis.
With vigorous support from the foundation, Virginia passed legislation prohibiting production oil wells.
CBF CONTINUES ITS ROLE Supporting a watershed that covers 64,000 square miles, the Chesapeake Bay region is currently home to 15 million people in six mid-Atlantic states and the District of Columbia.
The population is expected to increase by at least another 3 million in the next 20 years.
Growth, in the form of more roads and buildings, means more pollution flowing into the bay.
And so CBF continues its efforts to save the bay by working with citizen groups and government planning agencies.
From its modest beginnings with a membership of 2,000 in 1970 and a staff of three, the foundation has grown today to more than 80,000 members and 150 paid staff in three states: Maryland, Virginia and Pennsylvania.
Although small compared to other national environmental organizations, the Chesapeake Bay Foundation is America's largest such group at the regional level.
With an annual budget of $10 million, membership contributions plus grants and gifts from individuals and other charitable organizations obtained through fundraising efforts account for most of CBF's revenues.
The foundation's major advocacy programs are environmental education, restoration and resource protection, says Michael Shultz, its vice president for public affairs.
For example, CBF continues to interact with other national environmental groups in enforcing the Clean Water Act.
Although there are still a lot of problems -- not only for the Chesapeake Bay but for other bodies of water as well -- water quality is slowly improving, Schultz notes.
The biggest changes are in improved sewage treatment plants and a decrease in toxic chemical pollution from factories.
In the area of environmental defense, the foundation fights for improved programs to reduce pollution caused by discharges into the bay from industries, stormwater runoff and municipal sewers.
There is also concern about toxic pollutants which enter the bay from pesticides and fertilizers that flow off farms and lawns, and from cleaning chemicals and vehicle exhaust fumes.
CBF also works with business corporations "which take environmental responsibilities seriously and are interested in working with us," Shultz says.
He gives as examples the Chesapeake Corporation, an appropriately-named paper company, and Toyota, which have helped underwrite some of the foundation's education programs.
"We are wary about getting involved, however, when corporations present conflicts," Shultz adds.
When it comes to both business and government, he stresses, "We don't want to lessen our ability to do our job.
We cannot be financially beholden."
NEW GOALS AND NEW THREATS In 1993, the Chesapeake Bay Foundation began a long-term planning process designed to refocus its goals and to structure it for the 21st century.
To achieve its agenda, CBF placed new emphasis on constituent development, to expand significantly the number of people actively participating in the bay cleanup effort and on restoration programs, especially for oysters, wetlands, forested stream buffers and underwater grasses.
In these four areas, the technology of restoration has grown to the point where some of what has been lost now can be rebuilt.
During the first part of the 1990s, for example, the bay began to show modest improvements.
Underwater grasses returned to a number of areas from where they had disappeared.
Striped bass (rockfish) rebounded strongly from a fishing moratorium in the late 1980s.
At the same time, however, oyster stocks in both Maryland and Virginia declined to historic lows, causing great hardship in the seafood industry and dangerously increased fishing pressure on blue crabs, a staple of bay fisherman.
In 1997, a new threat arose from the fish-killing microorganism pfiesteria piscicida.
Pfiesteria had been associated with large fish kills in the Neuse and Tar Rivers of North Carolina's Pamlico Sound, in waters highly enriched by runoff of waste from hog farms.
The outbreaks on the Chesapeake Bay also began that summer on the Pocomoke River in Maryland, which has tens of millions of chickens in its watershed.
In late summer, fish kills occurred on Kings Creek, a tributary of the Manokin and the Chicamacomico Rivers.
CBF began an intensive monitoring effort, placing field staff on the rivers.
They found that the loss of fish and the subsequent human illness suffered by watermen and state workers investigating the outbreak was at high levels.
Monitoring efforts by additional field staff in Virginia found pfiesteria to be active there as well, but at a much lower level.
A WORK IN PROGRESS To bring wider attention to issues such as pfiesteria, CBF staff members such as Thomas Grasso, the Maryland executive director for the foundation, write op-ed newspaper articles to state positions on issues and urge the public and government to get involved.
"As environmental cleanups in other industries have shown, it's possible to have a healthy environment and a healthy bottom line -- for the whole community," Grasso says.
Such new threats as the pfiesteria epidemic are a compelling reminder that, Grasso emphasizes, the Chesapeake Bay is not yet saved, and the cleanup is a work in progress.
EDITOR'S NOTE: The Electronic Journal on Advocacy can be found on the Internet at: http://www.usia.gov/journals/journals.htm NNNN __________________________________________________________________
Return to Washington File Main Page Return to the Washington File Log
