Centers for Disease Control and Prevention About N C H S graphic and link Fastats A-Z provides health statistics and links to additional sources of information N C H S help graphic and link Coming Events graphic and link Surveys and Data Collection Systems graphic and link National Health and Nutrition Examination Survey graphic and link National Health Care Survey graphic and link National Health Interview Survey graphic and link National Immunization Survey graphic and link National Survey of Family Growth graphic and link State and Local Area Integrated Telephone Survey graphic and link National Vital Statistics System graphic and link Initiatives graphic and link Aging Activities graphic and link Disease Classification graphic and link Healthy People graphic and link Statistical Export and Tabulation System graphic and link Research and Development graphic and link News Releases graphic and link Publications and Information Products graphic and link Listserv graphic and link Graphic and link to FEDSTATS and other sites Download graphic Adobe Acrobat Reader graphic and link Accessible Adobe Acrobat Reader 5.0 graphic and link CDC Home Search Health Topics A-Z NCHS home page graphic and link National Health Care Survey logo - vertical bars with wave of dots over top National Health Care Survey NCHS Home | NHCS Home | New NHCS Releases | More About Us NHCS in the News | Ask the Expert | email us | Related Links NAMCS | NHAMCS | NSAS | NHDS | NNHS | NHHCS | NEHIS | NHPI CDC/NCHS Privacy Policy Notice | Accessibility | Search NCHS Data Definitions | Contact us NHCS News Clippings Americans' pill bottles multiply, study finds HMOs, aging patients, new therapies are cited LARRY LIPMAN COX WASHINGTON BUREAU 822 words 9 July 2002 Atlanta Journal - Constitution Home A.14 English (Copyright, The Atlanta Journal and Constitution - 2002 Washington --- Doctors are ordering their patients to take more medicine than they did in the mid-1980s, according to a study released today.
An aging population, new medications, new treatment patterns and advertising-boosted demand combined to produce a 34 percent increase in the number of medicines ordered between 1985 and 1999, according to the study, published in today's edition of the health policy journal Health Affairs.
In 1985 doctors prescribed 109 medications per 100 patient visits.
By 1999 the number of medications per 100 visits had increased to 146, according to the report by Catharine Burt, chief of the ambulatory care statistics branch of the National Center for Health Statistics.
The medications included prescription drugs, over-the-counter medicines such as aspirin, and immunizations.
Spending on medicines is increasing at about 15 percent a year and probably will double within five years, the study finds.
The increase was seen across all age groups and for nearly all types of physicians, the report said.
The only types of doctors who did not write more prescriptions were general surgeons, cardiologists and dermatologists.
Antidepressant use mushrooms
Psychiatrists were responsible for the largest jump in prescriptions, more than doubling their rate --- primarily for antidepressants --- from 82 to 178 drugs per 100 visits.
Increases in the number of antidepressants prescribed accounted for 13.5 percent of the overall increase in drugs ordered during the study period.
Since 1997, when the Food and Drug Administration began allowing direct prescription advertising to consumers, the number of prescriptions for advertized drugs has jumped, the study found.
"Doctors wrote 34 percent more prescriptions in 1999 than in 1998 for the 25 [direct-to-consumer] promoted drugs that contributed most to overall drug spending, while they wrote only 5 percent more prescriptions for all other prescriptions drugs," Burt wrote.
One example was for the cholesterol-reducing medicine Lipitor.
Its manufacturer, Pfizer, increased consumer advertising "sixfold between 1998 and 1999 and saw prescriptions increase by 50 percent," Burt wrote.
"I wouldn't call it the main culprit [in accounting for the increase in medications], but it's certainly responsible for a lot of the increase," she said.
"Patients see something on TV and say, 'I didn't know I could get help for this.
Maybe I'll check it out.'
"
Still undetermined, she said, is whether direct advertising to consumers "motivates patients to come to the doctor or motivates doctors to prescribe more drugs at the patient's request."
The study found that six types of drug therapies accounted for 80 percent of the increase in drugs prescribed: central nervous system drugs, hormones, respiratory drugs, pain relief drugs, metabolics/ nutrients (including cholesterol medications and vitamins and minerals) and cardiovascular-renal drugs.
Among the elderly, hematologic agents such as blood pressure medications increased 187 percent from 1985 to 1999.
For patients 45- 64, the largest increase was for metabolics, including lipid- lowering drugs.
For children, the largest increase was for central nervous system drugs.
Patients were nearly 40 percent more likely to get multiple prescriptions in 1999 than in 1985.
The aging U.S. population is more prone to multiple ailments.
The percentage of patients with three or more ailments increased from about 8 percent in 1985 to more than 19 percent in 1999.
Ritalin prescriptions skyrocket
Older patients with multiple problems accounted for about two- thirds of the increase in medications, Burt said in an interview.
But an aging population was not the sole cause for the increase.
After accounting for patients' increased age, infirmities and sources of payment, there was still a 43 percent increase in the number of multiple prescriptions written between 1985 and 1999.
Part of the increase can be attributed to changes in medical practice --- particularly health maintenance organizations --- that encourage the use of multiple drugs.
Many older patients are living in assisted-living facilities, where they are able to remain independent of medication, Burt said.
In the past, those patients may have lived in nursing homes.
Medications given in nursing homes and hospitals were not part of the study.
Burt also found a huge jump --- 327 percent --- in prescriptions for central nervous system drugs for children.
"Among the most frequently mentioned drugs in this class for children's visits in 1999 was Ritalin for treating attention deficit hyperactivity disorder," Burt wrote.
New drugs also have spurred an increase in prescriptions.
Popular drugs such as Lipitor, which debuted in 1997, Claritin (1993) and Zocor (1992) helped account for part of the increase.
Patients also had more insurance coverage that paid for prescriptions in 1999 than in 1985, the study found.
Previous studies have shown that there is a direct connection between the purchase of prescription drugs and drug coverage, Burt said.
Choosing Caesarean ; The pluses and minuses of such a delivery
Christian Toto, THE WASHINGTON TIMES 1,443 words 9 July 2002 The Washington Times B01 English (Copyright 2002)
Twenty years ago, an obstetrician wouldn't allow a pregnant patient to schedule a Caesarean delivery.
Doctors only resorted to the surgical procedure in the case of a complicated birth.
Today, with advances in anaesthesia, antibiotics and surgical techniques, some mothers are opting for Caesarean births without even trying to give birth in the traditional manner.
That change in thinking is one reason Caesarean, or "C-section" deliveries are now performed in the United States in nearly one out of every four births.
Dr. Bruce Flamm, an obstetrician at Kaiser Permanente Medical Centers in Riverside, Calif., says "Caesareans on demand" bespeak a seismic shift in both medical advances and the public's perception of a surgery that meant a death sentence for turn-of-the-20th- century moms.
The numbers bear him out.
According to a Feb. 12 report by the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention's National Center for Health Statistics, Caesarean birth rates increased for the fourth year in a row in 2000 to nearly 23 percent of all births, the highest percentage since 1989.
The increase represented a 4 percent jump in the rate of primary Caesarean deliveries and a 12 percent drop in the number of vaginal births after previous Caesareans, known as VBACs.
Recently, doctors have reported complications with VBAC deliveries, which has fueled their decrease.
In a Caesarean delivery, a horizontal incision known as a transverse cut is made in the area below the navel, typically following where the top of a standard bikini bottom would begin, says Dr. John Larsen, professor and chairman of George Washington University Hospital's department of obstetrics and gynecology.
The incision length varies, depending on the size of the woman and the baby, though a 20-centimeter cut is common.
The doctor cuts through the skin and the fatty layer underneath, then the abdominal muscles are separated, not cut, to reach the uterus.
Then, the baby and the placenta are taken out and the mother is sewn back up.
Caesarean births are most often performed when the labor is unusually long, if the baby is too large or if it is emerging either feet or buttocks first.
The procedure also comes into play if the baby shows signs of distress, such as a low heart rate.
While today's Caesarean birth is far safer than those of yore, the procedure isn't without health risks.
The Centers for Disease Control and Prevention report says Caesarean births represented 81 percent of cases of placenta previa, in which the implantation of the placenta at least partially covers the cervix.
The condition is spurred, in part, by previous surgery on the uterus.
The procedure also carries the potential complications concurrent with any surgery - difficulties with anaesthesia and infection - and mothers are left sore for weeks, if not months, following the procedure.
Dr. Larsen says the Caesarean rates at George Washington University Hospital have hovered around 17 percent for the last few years.
What has increased, though, is the number of repeat Caesarean sections as more mothers shy away from vaginal births following Caesareans.
Some patients are concerned about VBACs, he says.
Studies have suggested giving birth vaginally after a Caesarean delivery puts the mother at risk of a ruptured uterus.
A 1996 edition of the New England Journal of Medicine reported that the rates of uterine rupture, as well as hysterectomy and injury during surgery increase for women who give birth vaginally following a caesarean birth.
Dr. Fredric Frigoletto, chief of obstetrics at Massachusetts General Hospital and professor of obstetrics and gynecology at Harvard Medical School, adds that evidence emerged in the late 1990s that VBACs included risk of infant death, blood loss and permanent damage to the fetus.
The media carried word of these developments, which helped fuel the rise in repeated Caesarean section deliveries, Dr. Frigoletto says.
A statement by the American College of Obstetricians and Gynecologists also played a role in the upswing in Caesarean births.
The group issued guidelines in July 1999 which said if a mother wanted to have a VBAC, she had to be somewhere with facilities "immediately" available for an emergency Caesarean.
That meant the mother-to-be no longer could give birth at home.
While doctors generally agree on the need for Caesarean sections, given certain conditions such as a breech birth, Dr. Larsen says planned Caesarean sections are another matter.
"Some say it's too new it's a concept that hasn't really been tested.
But it's right on the edge," Dr. Larsen says.
"It's just a matter of explaining the pluses and minuses and people making an informed choice."
Caesarean births have been performed for decades, but as recently as 1970 the Caesarean rate stood at under 5 percent, Dr. Flamm says.
Some mothers aren't pleased with the increase.
Anita Woods, vice president of the International Caesarean Awareness Network, bristles at the notion that some women and their doctors are greenlighting planned Caesarean sections.
"There's an emotional element in recovery [from Caesarean child birth]," says Ms. Woods, whose Redondo Beach, Calif., group helps women either recovering from or seeking to prevent Caesarean births.
Even a planned Caesarean can be traumatic, she argues.
"To have that child surgically yanked from you can be devastating."
Theresa Fry, a 24-year-old first time mother from Reston delivered her first son, David, via Caesarean section delivery three months ago.
Mrs. Fry says she is just beginning to bounce back from the surgery.
"I had great difficulty moving or picking anything up, including my baby, for a few weeks," says Mrs. Fry, who still feels some soreness from the operation.
Before her delivery, her doctors discovered she had a small leak of amniotic fluid.
The doctors tried to induce her labor naturally to avoid a possible infection.
That, plus the position of the baby, convinced her doctors to opt for a Caesarean delivery, she says.
If possible, she says, her second child will be born via a vaginal birth.
Tammi McKinley, a mother of two from Arlington, had her first child by Caesarean delivery and her second at home by the traditional method.
"One of the worst parts [of the Caesarean birth] is that you don't get your baby right away," she says.
"She didn't come to me until she was three or fours hours old," she says.
"That was very, very distressing."
She understood the risk of potential uterine rupture that faces women choosing vaginal births after a Caesarean birth.
"It's less than 1 percent," she says.
"It wasn't a big concern.
Lots of times, it happens before you go into labor.
I was willing to take that risk."
Dr. Flamm says Caesarean rates cross socio-economic groups.
Women older than 35 encounter more difficulties during childbirth that require Caesarean procedures.
Plus, older mothers more frequently are undergoing infertility treatments than younger women, which increases the chances of needing a Caesarean section birth.
The procedure has become more palatable to the patient in recent years.
A mother can opt for an epidural, a local anaesthetic that eases the pain of labor.
Or she can be hooked up to a device that allows her to control a limited amount of painkillers to assuage any discomfort following the birth.
Dr. Flamm says another factor bumping up Caesarean figures is a guerrilla campaign, fueled partly through the Internet, in which vaginal births are blamed for damaging the bladder or rectum, leading to incontinence.
"There's precious little data to support that," he says.
"Most women 65 years old have had a vaginal birth.
That's not cause and effect.
It's a vast jump to a conclusion."
Word of mouth may be playing a serious role in the increase in Caesarean births, he suggests.
"{A mother-to-be's] friend may say, 'I had a vaginal birth years ago and it was tough then I had a c-section and they put a narcotic in my IV I never had any pain,'" Dr. Flamm says.
"A lot women don't want to go through labor," he says.
"I can't say I blame them."
Caption: In their Reston home, Theresa Fry holds her 4-month-old son David Fry, who was delivered by Caesarean section.
[Photo by Jessica Tefft/The Washington Times]; Four-month-old David Fry stands up with the help of his mom and dad, Theresa and Matthew Fry.
Mrs. Fry says she is just beginning to bounce back from her Caesarean section delivery.
[Photo by Jessica Tefft/The Washington Times]
Medicine overuse reversed
Washington Post 281 words 12 July 2002 The Cincinnati Post FINAL 7A English (Copyright 2002)
Antibiotic prescriptions for children fell by 40 percent over the course of the 1990s, reversing an upward trend that had fueled the emergence of hard-to-treat, drug-resistant bacteria, researchers reported Tuesday.
The dramatic reversal was seen across the spectrum of common ailments of childhood, including ear infections, sore throats, bronchitis and miscellaneous respiratory infections.
It was seen in all ways that drug prescribing is gauged - total number of prescriptions, prescriptions per child and prescriptions per trip to the doctor.
The change follows numerous public health campaigns aimed at doctors and parents, widespread media coverage of 'super-bugs' and a few documented examples of death from bacterial infections that once would have been easily cured.
'It's a dramatic decline,' said Linda F. McCaig, an epidemiologist at the National Center for Health Statistics, the organization that regularly surveys the prescribing behavior of American physicians.
'It's encouraging that parents and physicians may be getting the message about how to use antibiotics appropriately.'
The national survey results appear in Wednesday's Journal of the American Medical Association.
Accompanying them is a report on a successful 1997 campaign to lower antibiotic use in Knoxville, Tenn., the American city with the highest per capita use of prescription drugs in the country.
That campaign featured a number of strategies, including lectures to doctors and handouts to parents of newborns.
'We think this can serve as a model for community-wide interventions in other places,' said Allen Craig, Tennessee's state epidemiologist.
Neither the national nor the local study measured the effects on children's health - good or bad, or none at all - from the decline in antibiotic use.
Staying power High-tech coating on implants is helping rebuilt knees last longer
By Joe Kovac Jr.
Telegraph Staff Writer 709 words 29 July 2002 Macon Telegraph sz 1 English (c) Copyright 2002, Macon Telegraph.
All Rights Reserved.
Dr. P. Jeffrey Jarrett encounters plenty of painful limps.
He's an orthopedic surgeon who specializes in knee, hip and shoulder replacements.
But mostly it is knees he sees.
Jarrett says, "The thing I ask patients is, 'Is this a nuisance or a disability?'"
If patients can live with giving up physical activity they enjoy, say, tennis, taking it easy is, in some cases, an option.
If, however, the pain of a worn-out knee is too debilitating, surgery or a total knee replacement can sometimes help.
Now an ultra-smooth ceramic coating on the metallic replacement component that clamps onto the bottom of the femur - the body's biggest, strongest bone - is expected to make rebuilt knees last longer.
The now widely used cobalt-chrome implants, while still viable, have a life span of about 15 years.
For older patients, that's sufficient.
But with the specially coated implant, friction in the joint that wears down implants may be reduced enough - the manufacturer reports roughly an 85 percent wear reduction - so implants last longer.
That makes replacement surgery an option for younger patients.
"From the surgeon's point of view," Jarrett says, "the most important factor is the longevity of the knee."
Because artificial knees wear out, knee replacement has traditionally been delayed if patients aren't older than 60 so that repeat replacement surgeries aren't required.
About 300,000 Americans a year undergo knee-replacement surgery, according to the American Academy of Orthopedic Surgeons.
Osteoarthritis is a common culprit
.
Joint-replacement surgery rates have more than doubled over the past decade.
Annually in the U.S., knee replacements outnumber hip-replacement operations by a more than 2-to-1 margin.
Replacement knee parts with the advanced coating, a glistening high-tech ceramic derivative with a black-pearl sheen, don't feel any different.
And recuperation time is the same, anywhere from six to 12 months.
But the artificial hinge, which pivots atop a platform of medical-grade plastic attached to the tips of a replacement patient's lower leg bones, doesn't appear to scrub away as much plastic - in wear tests, at least.
'Go a little longer'
Jarrett, a surgeon at Houston Medical Center in Warner Robins, began using the upgraded components in April.
In Georgia, he is one of the few doctors outside Atlanta who is using oxinium implants, as they are called.
"I've been here 13 years and I've had a couple of my early knee replacements wear out and need revision," Jarrett says.
"I thought it would be nice if we could find something that would offer patients an opportunity to go a little longer between operations.
Because it's not as easy to do a revision as it is to do a primary total knee replacement."
It is not uncommon anymore for patients in their early 40s to have an arthritic knee because of sports injuries or ligament damage that, in the past, went unrepaired.
Still, figures from the National Center for Health Statistics show that more than two-thirds of all total knee replacements are performed on patients 65 and older.
In younger patients with degenerating knees, doctors may suggest physical therapy to strengthen muscles around the joint.
Cortisone injections can be used as well as anti-inflammatories - ibuprofen - and pain relievers - acetaminophen - as can prescription COX-2 inhibitors - Celebrex and Vioxx.
Heating a bad knee before exercise and icing it afterward can also help, as can massage therapy and weight loss.
Also, braces can shift a patient's weight from one side of the knee to the other to reduce load on the deteriorating joint.
A recently introduced treatment called discosupplementation involves injecting lubricating fluid into patients' bothersome knees.
By some published accounts, patients have reported long-term relief.
So the new, super-slick knee-bone component Jarrett offers is but one option.
"This isn't a panacea," the surgeon says.
"It isn't that it's a thousand times better than anything on the market.
What we're looking for is something that has the potential to provide benefit to a younger, more active patient."
Americans made 823 million doctor visits in 2000, report says
238 words 5 June 2002 14:13 Associated Press Newswires English Copyright 2002.
The Associated Press.
All Rights Reserved.
ATLANTA (AP) - Americans made more than 823 million visits to the doctor in 2000, a figure that is steadily rising as baby boomers age and the general population swells, the government said Wednesday.
The figure was up about 9 percent from 1999, according to the National Center for Health Statistics, which compiles the report each year.
High blood pressure was the most frequent diagnosis in office visits, followed by upper respiratory infections.
Visits for diabetes are also on the rise, a trend health officials have tied to a more obese and less active population.
In about two-thirds of doctor visits in 2000, the patient was prescribed at least one drug, and a total of 1.3 billion drugs were prescribed in all, the center said.
The most frequently prescribed drug was Claritin, the popular anti-allergy medication made by Schering-Plough Corp., followed by Pfizer's cholesterol-lowering drug Lipitor.
The NCHS report also made note of a steady increase in the number of drugs prescribed, citing health-minded baby boomers and the growing population of seniors who have chronic conditions that need a variety of medications.
Prescriptions of heart and kidney drugs, hormones and nutrient supplements all have increased more than 20 percent over the past several years, the NCHS report said.
Necessity or barbarity? ; A growing number of Jewish families question their religion's most sacred ritual - circumcision
BOB IVRY, STAFF WRITER 1,634 words 9 June 2002 The Record, Bergen County, NJ All Editions.=.Sunday F01 English (Copyright 2002 North Jersey Media Group Inc.)
During her recent pregnancy, Rachel struggled for a way to balance the weight of 2,800 years of religious tradition with the overwhelming protective emotions she felt for her unborn boy.
Rachel and her husband are Jewish, and every male born to their families - as far back as the biblical Abraham, presumably -had been circumcised.
But Rachel made up her mind that she wouldn't have that done to her son.
"I didn't want my baby cut," says Rachel, a North Jersey resident who asked that her real name not be used.
"There's something deeply corrupted about it.
It's a traumatic and barbaric thing."
Her husband's stance kept Rachel awake at night.
He disagreed.
He wanted his son, as she tells it, to "look like him."
"It's a very loaded issue," Rachel says.
"People are not aware of the feelings they have about circumcision."
While the number of hospital circumcisions in the United States has risen slightly over the last two decades, a growing number of Jewish families are questioning their religion's most sacrosanct ritual - cutting the foreskin off an 8-day-old baby's penis.
"There's been a noticeable increase in interest the last three or four years," says Ronald Goldman of the Circumcision Resource Center in Boston.
"Lots of people don't want to make it public, but we get hundreds of contacts from Jewish families."
In most cases, the apostasy is initiated by the mother.
The force of her emotions is often pitted against the combined influence of her husband, the baby's grandparents, the religious community, and the formidable power of centuries-old, Bible-sanctioned practice.
"Women are tormented," says Laurie Evans, a Jewish anti- circumcision activist who lives in Westchester County, N.Y.
"They don't want to renounce their religion, but they want to protect their children."
The ritual, called a bris or b'rit milah, dates to the beginning of Judaism.
It is performed by a specially trained rabbi, called a mohel, as part of a religious ceremony, often in the parents' home, and is followed by a feast.
The bris is so central to Jewish life that, by Jewish law, it supersedes observance of the Sabbath or Yom Kippur, Judaism's holiest days.
"There is no more sacred rite in Judaism," says Rabbi Stephen Wylen of Temple Beth Tikvah, a Reform synagogue in Wayne.
"To be Jewish and not to be circumcised is to be outside the fold."
Genesis 17:10-14 mandates that a Jewish boy be circumcised on the eighth day after his birth.
"This is my covenant, which you shall keep, between me and you and your descendants after you: Every male among you shall be circumcised," God commands Abraham, the Jewish patriarch.
"Any uncircumcised male who is not circumcised in the flesh of his foreskin shall be cut off from his people; he has broken my covenant."
Twenty-eight centuries later, the threat of shunning - as well as the fear of disappointing generations of ancestors, some of whom died defending their loyalty to Judaism --still weighs heavily on Jewish parents.-
Leah, another Jewish mother against circumcision who requested anonymity, says that during her pregnancy she was a "crazy woman with hormones" who faced the opposition of her husband, who "didn't want to go against God," and her father-in-law, who told her that if the baby wasn't circumcised, "something negative would happen to the boy."
"You don't want to be so arrogant as to question God," Leah says.
"I want my family to be Jewish, and I want my son to identify himself as Jewish.
But it was my baby's sex organ.
I couldn't let anyone hurt him."
Leah says the birth of a healthy boy and her insistence the baby not be cut stopped familial debate on the subject - the procedure wasn't done - and eight months later, "we don't talk about it."
But her husband's stance had surprised her.
"He gave religious reasons for having our son circumcised," she says.
"And it's funny, because he really doesn't go to synagogue.
He's not that religious."
In fact, activists say circumcision is often the only Jewish ritual many secular Jewish fathers feel compelled to conduct.
"They don't observe the Sabbath, they eat pork, they even marry non-Jewish women, but they insist on a circumcision," Evans says.
"I don't get it."
Wylen says that while an uncircumcised boy can still be a Jew, "it's shameful if you're Jewish not to circumcise."
"God made the world imperfect," Wylen says.
"He gave us the responsibility to perfect it."
Without a circumcised penis, "one doesn't represent the perfection of the human body that's required to enter the covenant with God."
Adam, a North Jersey father who spoke on condition of anonymity, says his uncircumcised 11-year-old son, a Hebrew school student preparing for his bar mitzvah, is unaware his body is different from other Jewish boys'.
"He showers all the time in the gym locker room and nobody says anything to him about it," Adam says.
"It's never been an issue."
But Rabbi Michael Goldstein of the Glen Rock Jewish Center, a Conservative congregation, says an uncircumcised boy studying for his bar mitzvah is "not a desirable thing."
"I don't know if I'd allow it," Goldstein says.
"I don't think I'd let it get to that stage.
I'd have significant, serious conversations with the family long before we reached the point where the child was preparing to become a bar mitzvah.
I'd be trying to convince the parents to have the boy circumcised."
Many of the Jewish couples questioning ritual circumcision would agree with the rabbis that the decision to have a bris is not an intellectual one.
For the observant Jew, "it's a practice based in belief," Goldstein says.
For Rachel and Leah, their maternal impulse to protect their newborns was beyond argument.
"I feel sickened by the idea," Rachel says.
"Female circumcision makes the front page of The New York Times, but [male] circumcision is accepted as common practice."
In 1999, the American Academy of Pediatrics, citing evidence that the procedure has little or no medical benefit, halted its longtime advocacy of routine hospital circumcision.
The pediatricians' group also suggested for the first time that infants receive anesthetic medication before they are circumcised --a practice that today is usually skipped in the hospital and during the bris.
In a bris, the child is held by his godfather while family and friends look on.
The mohel may dip his finger in wine and feed the wine to the child -- a traditional method of helping the baby deal with pain.
Prayers are recited and the mohel usually explains the significance of the event.
Then the cutting begins.
The mohel pulls forward the foreskin with a hemostat -a pair of surgical pliers - -then slides a specially designed clamp called a "mogen" along the head of the penis and onto the foreskin.
Using the mogen as a guide, the mohel then slices enough of the foreskin to expose the head of the penis and the junction where it meets the shaft.
The boy bleeds, and the wound is dabbed with gauze and bandaged.
In most cases it takes less than two days for the cut to heal.
"Two things are required in a ritual circumcision," says Rabbi Gerald Chirnomas, a Boonton mohel who estimates he's performed 13,000 ceremonies.
"The first, of course, is the removal of the foreskin.
And the second, which many people don't know, is the shedding of blood, which is mandated by the Bible."
Chirnomas cites Ezekiel 16:6: "Live by your blood."
Hospital circumcision differs in instrumentation as well as spiritual significance.
A device called a Gomco clamp is usually used in hospital procedures, which critics say simply takes too long.
Hospital circumcision remains the most commonly performed surgery in the United States.
Circumcision's contemporary secular roots can be traced to the Victorian era, when it was believed to be a cure for masturbation.
And while most of the world eschews the practice, 65.3 percent of American hospital newborns were circumcised in 1999, according to the National Center for Health Statistics.
In 1979, the figure was 64.3 percent.
Though Rachel decided against a bris without the influence of statistics or the recommendations of medical organizations, she had no idea if her husband would agree with her.
"I left the decision up to him," Rachel says.
"It was difficult for me, but he appreciated it."
Rachel's husband never told her what his decision was.
It became clear to Rachel only after he phoned his mother to announce the boy's birth.
"I knew the question was coming, right after my husband told her it was a boy," Rachel says.
It was a question that's been asked by Jewish grandmothers for 2,800 years: When's the bris?
There wouldn't be a bris, Rachel's husband told his mother.
And when his mother asked him why, Rachel's husband answered, "It's not for us."
"I'm delighted," Rachel says.
"I always go back to the idea that in this generation, a loving father can make a decision he wasn't allowed to make for himself."
Caption: 2 COLOR PHOTOS - CHRIS PEDOTA / STAFF PHOTOGRAPHER - 1 - Rabbi Gerald Chirnomas, a mohel, holding a kiddush cup, which contains wine during the ceremony.
The cup's figures depict a mohel conducting a circumcision.; 2 - Above, Chirnomas displays the mogen, a clamp for the foreskin.
Sore point ; The routine childhood tonsillectomy is a thing of the past.
As a result, more adults are undergoing the procedure when swollen tonsils require surgery.
And for them, it's an excruciatingly painful process.
John Pope Staff writer 874 words 13 June 2002 The Times-Picayune 01 English Copyright 2002, The Times-Picayune.
All rights reserved.
For much of the 20th century, children marked certain inalienable rites of passage.
The first haircut.
The first day of school.
The tonsillectomy.
The ice cream afterward.
"When I came up as a kid in the '40s, it was almost routine that you'd have your tonsils out," said Dr. Thomas Gonsoulin, an ear, nose and throat specialist at Tulane University Health Sciences Center.
But with the development of antibiotics to fight tonsil-related infections, what was once a commonplace procedure has become somewhat rare.
More and more people have grown up with those masses of tissue flanking the passage to the throat.
After decades, the tonsils simply can wear out.
They lose their effectiveness and may even wind up harboring the bacteria they are supposed to eliminate.
Then the tonsils become not disease fighters, but burdensome afflictions.
Infected tonsils can swell and remain swollen after the infection is gone, blocking the airway and getting in the way of swallowing and breathing.
At this point, doctors say, the tonsils have to go.
The operation is brief, generally lasting about 30 minutes.
But the recovery period can last up to two excruciating weeks for adults.
While most children can revel in post-tonsillectomy treats such as Popsicles and ice cream, for adults, recovery is extremely painful.
With a throat that has been scraped raw, it even hurts to take painkillers.
Doctors don't agree on what makes convalescence such a nightmare for post-pediatric patients, but tonsil experts concur with Dr. Alan Kominsky, an ear, nose and throat specialist at the Cleveland Clinic: "Your tonsils have been through a lot by the time you're an adult."
In the days before the discovery of antibiotics, doctors didn't hesitate to remove tonsils, not only because their removal relieved pain, but also because the doctors felt they were reducing the risk of damaging the heart and kidneys, said Dr. Ricardo Sorensen, chief of pediatrics at Louisiana State University Health Sciences Center.
When fighting a strep infection, the tonsils send out antibodies targeting the infection, but some tissues in the heart and kidneys resemble components of strep bacteria and can be attacked by the antibodies.
"It's a strange situation," said Sorensen, 60, who still has his tonsils.
So, as a preventive measure at the least, it was expected that most children would have their tonsils removed, Gonsoulin said.
With the advent of antibiotics, treatment of tonsil infections is easier, Sorensen said, and more people are growing up with their tonsils.
In 1999, the latest year for which the National Center for Health Statistics had information, 9,000 people under 15 underwent tonsillectomies and adenoidectomies, compared with more than 500,000 in 1965.
Adenoids, like tonsils, are masses of lymphatic tissue.
They are at the back of the nasal passage and are normally removed along with tonsils when the surgery is performed on children, but they shrink into insignificance by adolescence and generally don't cause trouble after that.
So, after age 15, usually just the tonsils are removed.
Tonsil swelling, infection and airway obstruction all can lead the adult patient to the operating room.
"By the time you've reached adulthood, you've had many more infections, more irritation and, perhaps, more scar tissue in the beds of your tonsils from recurrent infections and inflammations," Kominsky said.
This, in turn, can cause airway obstructions, making it difficult for some adults with tonsils to breathe or sleep, said Dr. Ralph Wetmore, chairman of the tonsil and adenoid committee of the American Academy of Otolaryngology -- Head and Neck Surgery.
About three fourths of tonsillectomies are performed because of airway obstruction, he said.
In 1999, 6,000 people 15 and older had their tonsils taken out.
By the time the tonsils are ready to be removed in an adult, they are often enlarged, infected and possibly even harboring food fragments.
They are battle-toughened -- and look it, said Kominsky, 42, who still has his.
So removing them can be traumatic for the surrounding tissue.
Kominsky's theory on why adult tonsillectomies are so painful is that the scar tissue and nerve fibers in adults make removal troublesome.
"They're much more sensitive to pain," he said.
"Infants do feel pain, but their nerves are not as highly developed or as mature as adults', whose sensitivity is much greater."
Wetmore believes that the pain is a result of adults' tonsils being bigger and more scarred, requiring doctors to remove more tissue.
"The risk of bleeding is higher in adults for the same reason," he said.
"There's a bigger blood supply, so there's a greater risk of bleeding.
There's evidence in the literature to support that."
And there's one reason for the discomfort that doesn't apply solely to tonsillectomy patients: aging.
"Almost every surgical procedure isn't tolerated as well in adults," Sorensen said.
"Children are extremely adaptable."
THE HIGH COST OF HYPE Series: DRUG COSTS SECOND OF TWO EDITORIALS
502 words 14 June 2002 St. Louis Post-Dispatch FIVE STAR LIFT C.18 English (Copyright 2002)
DRUG COSTS
THE latest arthritis drugs were hailed as breakthroughs when they appeared on pharmacy shelves three years ago.
The medications -- sold under the brand names Celebrex, Viox and Bextra -- were soon best sellers.
Patients are always willing to spend a little more for the latest drugs.
But when it comes to relieving arthritis pain, the latest drugs aren't best.
While they are two to three times more expensive than older drugs like ibuprofen and naproxen that are available as generics, the new drugs are no better at relieving pain, according to recent studies.
In theory, companies shouldn't be able to charge two or three times as much for products that are, at best, marginal improvements over the competition.
A free market should prevent that.
But in practice, it happens every day.
Over-the-counter drugs like Benadryl relieve allergy symptoms at least as well as newer blockbuster drugs like Allegra and Claritin.
But the newer allergy drugs are much more expensive.
In coming weeks, the issue of prescription drug pricing will move to the forefront.
Congress is expected to begin working on a Medicare prescription drug benefit.
It will also hear testimony on bills to speed the introduction of less expensive generic medications.
Members of Congress will be seeking a simple solution to skyrocketing drug spending, which doubled between 1995 and 2000 and is expected to double again within the next few years.
Instead, they will discover a complex market that often works in mysterious ways.
Take the latest arthritis drugs.
The biggest advantage of these newer medications, which are called Cox-2 inhibitors, is that they are less likely to cause ulcers than the older drugs.
For patients who are older or have had previous gastrointestinal problems, that's important.
But as Post- Dispatch reporter Judy VandeWater discovered, the vast majority of those taking Cox-2 inhibitors don't fit that profile.
Two trends explain why people buy expensive drugs they don't need.
One is the rapid rise in prescription drug coverage.
In 1990, private insurance accounted for about one-quarter of the nation's prescription drug expenditures.
In 2000, it paid for about 44 percent.
People with drug coverage tend to fill more prescriptions.
The other trend is drug marketing, which in recent years has become ubiquitous.
That includes ads aimed at patients and more sophisticated efforts directed at doctors.
A report released last year by the National Center for Health Statistics found that 80 percent of newly released, heavily marketed drugs -- including Celebrex -- were on the list of best-selling medications.
Just 10 percent of drugs that were not heavily advertised made the list.
America's elderly shouldn't have to go bankrupt paying for medicines they need.
Neither should American taxpayers.
But it will take more than congressional hearings and a prescription drug benefit to reign in runaway drug spending.
Right now, that's a prescription no one seems to have.
Docs spare antibiotics, spoil 'superbugs'
M.A.J. MCKENNA STAFF 495 words 19 June 2002 Atlanta Journal - Constitution Home A.1 English (Copyright, The Atlanta Journal and Constitution - 2002)
Doctors are getting the message about not overprescribing antibiotics, according to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention in Atlanta.
Antibiotic prescriptions for children and teenagers went down by more than one-third from 1989 to 2000, even though the number of visits to doctors remained the same, the agency reports in today's Journal of the American Medical Association.
Inappropriate use of antibiotics is one of the main reasons for the development of bacteria that are immune to common drugs.
Inappropriate use includes taking the drugs for viral infections such as colds, which cannot be helped by antibiotics, not taking a full course of antibiotics or taking those prescribed for someone else.
Persuading doctors not to write unnecessary prescriptions is one of the CDC's chief strategies for keeping drug-resistant bacteria at bay.
The study examined prescription records collected from about 3,500 physicians in private practice between 1989 and 2000.
It found a 35 percent decrease in prescriptions for antibiotics, compared with a 48 percent increase during the 1980s, as found in an earlier survey.
The study "definitely encourages me that we are on the right track," said the CDC's Dr. Richard Besser.
"There was a lot of feeling that it would be next to impossible to change behavior, but these data support the idea that people are getting the message."
The researchers examined records from visits to doctors' offices because that is where most unnecessary antibiotics are prescribed.
Most prescriptions written for children in doctors' offices are for respiratory infections --- but most respiratory infections are not caused by bacteria and cannot be affected by antibiotics.
Nonprofit groups and the CDC launched educational campaigns nearly a decade ago, but still envision much work ahead.
"We are still seeing some inappropriate prescribing of antibiotics for common colds and bronchitis, which is usually caused by a virus," said Linda McCaig of the National Center for Health Statistics, the lead author of the study.
Research has traced a substantial amount of misprescribing to a combination of parents who pressure doctors for antibiotics and doctors who are unable to spend much time with patients.
Alerting parents and doctors to the dangers of inappropriate prescriptions can relieve those demands, the CDC reports today in a second JAMA article.
The agency funded an education campaign in Knoxville and Knox County, Tenn., from May 1997 through April 1998.
At the time, Tennessee had the highest rate of use of all types of prescriptions in the United States, according to sales data, and high rates of drug resistance had been found in bacterial samples from Knox County.
Over the yearlong study, prescriptions written for children decreased by 11 percent in the county, a decline not duplicated elsewhere in Tennessee.
The studies come as the CDC launches its annual conference promoting appropriate antibiotic use, which opens Thursday in Atlanta.
Antibiotics no longer viewed as a doctor's cure-all, study says
ANGELA STEWART STAR-LEDGER STAFF 627 words 19 June 2002 The Star-Ledger Newark, NJ FINAL 011 English (c) 2002.
The Star-Ledger.
All rights reserved.
American doctors wrote a third fewer antibiotic prescriptions for children and adolescents who came to their offices during the 1990s, according to a new study published yesterday.
The drop was attributed to heightened awareness of antibiotic resistance, the fact that the medicines become ineffective when overused.
The research, appearing in today's edition of the Journal of the American Medical Association, found that while doctors wrote 46 million antibiotic prescriptions - many for respiratory tract infections - in children 15 years and under in 1989, the number had dropped to 30 million by the year 2000.
"It is encouraging, since we know that antibiotic resistance increases with antibiotic use.
Maybe we can help stop the problem where it is," said Linda McCaig, a researcher with the National Center for Health Statistics, who served as lead investigator on the study.
The JAMA report was based on data provided by 2,500 to 3,500 office-based doctors on more than 13,000 pediatric visits from 1989-1990 through 1999-2000.
Jeffrey Boscamp, chairman of pediatrics at Hackensack University Medical Center, said the study results show that doctors and parents are starting finally to come to terms with the fact that using antibiotics "is not a completely benign thing" and that there is a heavy societal price to be paid for their overuse.
"This is really about changing people's expectations and making them understand that for a viral infection it was just not the right thing to prescribe," he said.
According to the JAMA article, antibiotic prescribing rates for children by office-based physicians ran rampant from 1980 and 1992, increasing by 48 percent and contributing to the problem of antibiotic resistance.
Experts say antibiotics that could effectively knock out infectious bacteria a few decades ago are now only marginally effective or don't work at all because the bugs have become immune to them.
The once common practice of doctors prescribing antibiotics for children suffering from respiratory tract infections or ear infections - although the doctor knows there is a good chance the sickness is being caused by a virus and that the antibiotic wouldn't do any good - contributed heavily to the problem.
"Many parents want some sort of prescription to validate the office visit, when in reality the child's sickness is self-limited and will run its course whether you give antibiotics or not," said Kendall Sprott, vice chairman of pediatrics at Children's Hospital of New Jersey in Newark.
To combat the problem of inappropriate use, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention and other public health groups launched aggressive public awareness campaigns aimed at discouraging overuse of the popular medications.
The nation's largest health plans have also tried to encourage responsible antibiotic use by doctors and parents through a campaign called Save Antibiotic Strength.
"In New Jersey, especially, we have a lot of pharmaceutical companies that do a lot of direct consumer advertising.
We want parents to understand that if their child has a virus, they don't need an antibiotic because it will go away," said Saira Jan, associate director of pharmacy for Horizon Blue Cross Blue Shield of New Jersey, which is a member of a group known as the Council for Affordable Quality Healthcare.
Some parents say they have noticed that their pediatricians are being much more careful when it comes to prescribing the medications.
"My pediatrician talks to me more about whether or not an antibiotic would be appropriate based on the symptoms and whether the illness is bacterial or viral," said Joanna Mattero, a 37-year-old mother of five from Wharton, who is expecting her sixth child any day now.
ANTIBIOTIC RELIANCE DECLINES IN DECADE
WILLIAM HATHAWAY; Courant Staff Writer; Courant Staff Writer Hilary Waldman contributed to this story.
441 words 19 June 2002 The Hartford Courant 7 SPORTS FINAL A3 English (Copyright The Hartford Courant 2002)
Moms and dads are much less likely to leave the pediatrician's office today with a prescription for antibiotics than they were a decade ago, according to a study appearing in today's issue of the Journal of the American Medical Association.
Yet despite the reported 40 percent reduction in antibiotic prescriptions written for adolescents and children under 15, drug- resistant organisms are infecting more children, experts caution.
"Once you create a monster, it's hard to get the monster back into the bottle," said Dr. Juan C. Salazar, a pediatric infectious- disease specialist at Connecticut Children's Medical Center.
Doctors, under pressure from parents, historically have prescribed drugs for children with cold-like symptoms, even though most pediatric illnesses are caused by viruses, which are impervious to antibiotics.
From 1980 to 1992, the antibiotic prescription rates for children increased by 48 percent, according to statistics quoted in today's JAMA article.
The prescription of unneeded antibiotics and the failure of parents to get their kids to complete the course of antibiotic treatments can create new strains of microorganisms resistant to many forms of penicillin and, increasingly, to newer generations of antibiotics.
"Every time we use antibiotics, we are putting evolutionary pressure on the bugs to fight back," said Dr. Brian Cooper, head of the infectious diseases section at Hartford Hospital.
That is why government health officials, medical groups, and insurance companies launched a broad-based campaign to reduce the number of antibiotic prescriptions written in the United States.
The JAMA study, conducted by the National Center for Health Statistics of the National Institutes of Health, suggests the message is starting to get through.
The researchers compared data from doctor visits made in 1989-90 with visits made in 1999-2000.
A decade ago, prescriptions were written for 838 of every 1,000 children seen.
But in 1999-2000, prescriptions were written for 503 of every 1,000, a 40 percent decline.
When researchers calculated by prescriptions written per doctor visit, the prescription rate declined by 29 percent.
Yet experts concur the efforts have proved insufficient to stem the tide of drug resistant organisms, which can be easily transmitted from child to child.
For instance, Salazar said daycare centers are fertile breeding grounds for antibiotic resistant organisms such as streptococcus pneumoniae, a cause of chest colds, earaches and more serious ailments.
"Test cultures from the noses of children in daycare centers, and 50 to 80 percent of them will have [streptococcus pneumoniae]
NCHS Home | NHCS Home | New NHCS Releases | More About Us NHCS in the News | Ask the Expert | email us | Related Links NAMCS | NHAMCS | NSAS | NHDS | NNHS | NHHCS | NEHIS | NHPI CDC/NCHS Privacy Policy Notice | Accessibility | Search NCHS Data Definitions | Contact us
CDC Home | Search | Health Topics A-Z
This page last reviewed October 07, 2002
H H S Health and Human Services logo and link U.S. DEPARTMENT OF HEALTH AND HUMAN SERVICES Centers for Disease Control and Prevention National Center for Health Statistics Division of Data Services Hyattsville, MD 20782 (301) 458-4636
