Skip common site navigation and headers United States Environmental Protection Agency Jobs Through Recycling Recent Additions | Contact Us | Print Version Search: __________ Run Search Begin Hierarchical Links EPA Home 
rule
Southwest Public Recycling Association Results Chart
Back to top
Call-out Quote: SPRA encouraged recycling and reuse of materials in three rural communities in each of the following states: Arizona, Colorado, New Mexico, and Utah.
T he Southwest Public Recycling Association (SPRA) is a nonprofit organization whose mission is to promote, strengthen, and provide leadership in waste reduction, reuse, recycling, and composting in the Rocky Mountain southwest.
With its 1995 Jobs Through Recycling (JTR) grant, SPRA initiated the Four Corner States JTR Project to encourage recycling and reuse of materials in three rural communities in each of the following states: Arizona, Colorado, New Mexico, and Utah.
SPRA organized a JTR steering committee and together they worked closely with each state's economic development, natural resource, energy conservation, and recycling agencies to build both local and regional infrastructure for recycling.
Back to top
SUMMARY OF ACCOMPLISHMENTS
During the grant period, SPRA accomplished the following goals through the Four Corner States JTR Project: * Supported demonstration projects in 12 communities in Arizona, Colorado, New Mexico, and Utah.
These projects dealt with collecting and processing recyclables, composting, manufacturing recycled glass tiles and recycled-content fuel pellets, and planning an industrial park specifically for recycling businesses.
Call-Out Quote: SPRA organized workshops for key players in the community at the outset to explain project opportunities, gain support, and encourage networking.
* Developed a rural recycling economic development model that can be used in the region and throughout the United States.
At the local level, the JTR project helped develop links between economic development professionals and recycling officials and businesses.
The rural economic development model includes the following: + Involvement of a varied group of community members and leaders.
+ Use of surveys to identify opportunities.
+ Selection of a project through a priority criteria assessment.
+ Assistance from outside experts for technical guidance.
* Facilitated communication and coordination among the recycling economic development efforts in the project region.
Steering committee meetings encouraged relationship building and networking among the state environmental and economic development officials.
SPRA also compiled a directory that included each of the project steering committee members.
In addition, SPRA held workshops to bring communities together, particularly with the Colorado compost projects.
The Silver City and Moab communities, for example, were able to use a lot of the same research and market information due to the similarity of their demonstration projects.
Call-Out Quote: Be creative in adapting to a loss of leadership or other hurdles or delays that occur during the course of a project.
* Organized seven workshops, at least one in each state.
These workshops provided information about recycling best practices and general information on how rural communities can support recycling businesses and create jobs.
In all, approximately 225 community members and key project stakeholders received training and information on recycling HDPE, glass, or composting.
Back to top
RURAL COMMUNITY PROJECTS MODEL Through the JTR project, SPRA developed a unique model for conducting demonstration projects in rural areas.
At the beginning of each project, SPRA, along with the state officials on the JTR project steering committee, chose 12 rural communities in Arizona, Colorado, New Mexico, and Utah.
Each state developed its own set of criteria to select communities.
Common criteria included commitment of local leadership, community interest in the project, existing recycling infrastructure, and population.
After selecting the communities, SPRA staff developed a profile of each community, detailing the economic base and existing recycling and solid waste management infrastructure.
To select and implement a project, SPRA helped establish JTR project steering committees in each community.
These committees were comprised of local community and business leaders, economic development and solid waste officials, private citizens, and state officials.
During project implementation, SPRA staff provided direct technical assistance or brought in outside expertise to each of the communities.
Back to top
DEMONSTRATION PROJECT DESCRIPTIONS
* Arizona + Douglas, Arizona + Safford, Arizona + St. Johns, Arizona * Colorado + Lamar/Southeast Colorado + Sterling/Yuma County, Colorado * New Mexico + Clovis, New Mexico + Grants/Milan, New Mexico + Silver City, New Mexico * Utah + Cedar City, Utah + Logan, Utah + Moab, Utah
Back to top
CHALLENGES OVERCOME
* Gaining support from local officials.
A big challenge for many projects is obtaining local assistance with bonding, zoning, and funding issues to get projects off the ground.
Successful JTR projects overcame this challenge by using a local grassroots champion to help gain the support of mayors, city council members, and city managers.
In Douglas, Arizona, for example, SPRA worked closely with the Douglas Environmental Health Steering Committee, which had a good relationship with the mayor and city council, in order to gain support for the local processing center.
* Lack of community support.
Without local community support, projects can face a "not in my backyard" mentality regarding zoning or siting a new business or recycling operation.
To address this barrier, SPRA involved community and business leaders early in each project.
As one approach, SPRA organized workshops for key players in the community at the outset.
Workshops allowed SPRA to explain project opportunities, gain support, and encourage networking.
As a complementary step, SPRA also put together and distributed publications on the benefits of recycling.
* Limited staffing to implement projects.
Local JTR project steering committee members participated on a voluntary basis.
As a result, if these volunteers were unable to commit sufficient time to a project, it often struggled.
To address this challenge, SPRA staff played a critical role in organizing meetings, networking on a formal and informal basis with participants in existing efforts in the region, and encouraging the participation of all committee members.
* Limited funding was a pervasive problem.
One of the greatest challenges faced by all of the projects was securing project funding--whether for new equipment or technical feasibility studies.
Recognizing this challenge, SPRA helped locate funding sources and developed promising proposals and grant applications for each demonstration project.
Back to top
LESSONS LEARNED
* A diverse steering committee promotes success.
Consider including elected officials, local business representatives, and community leaders on a local steering committee.
Local committees that included this diversity were generally able to bring added resources to the project and more easily identify key partnerships than communities that did not have such a mix.
In an Arizona JTR community, for example, the local bank manager was on the local steering committee.
As a result, the manager learned the financial potential of a local recycling business and the role the bank could play in financing the company.
* Adapt to new circumstances and solve problems creatively.
Be creative in adapting to a loss of leadership or other hurdles or delays that occur during the course of a project.
The most successful local projects took advantage of unanticipated issues and used them as opportunities to improve the project.
The Recycle Town project in Logan, for example, could have stalled while the city decided if they were going to implement a curbside collection program.
Instead, SPRA and the local steering committee chose to shift their focus to providing technical and financial assistance to companies interested in locating in Recycle Town.
* Develop a clear project vision with obtainable goals.
Local JTR steering committees controlled which project they wanted to pursue.
Steering committees that had a central goal and focus were often the most successful.
This, generally, was the result of choosing the project through a well-led consensus process and carefully weighing the pros and cons of the different options.
Back to top
Jobs Through Success
"The assistance SPRA provided made it possible for our business to hit the ground running."
JIM DUKE President, Cacaloco Compost
T he Glenwood Springs, Colorado, local JTR project committee chose to focus its efforts on expanding the operations of a startup composting company, Cacaloco Compost.
During the course of the JTR project, Cacaloco transitioned from a small manure composting business to a large, high-quality operation producing compost from recovered wood, paper, food waste, and other organics.
The JTR project, lead by local JTR partner Valley Resource Management (VRM) and SPRA, provided essential technical assistance to Cacaloco.
Specifically, the project provided funding for a compost market analysis, equipment purchases, and site engineering.
In addition, SPRA helped conduct a best practices workshop, produced operations and training manuals, and provided onsite technical assistance.
SPRA also provided financing assistance.
"It's hard to find financing as a startup, high-risk business," relates Jim Duke, president of Cacaloco Compost.
"Having the support of respected local and regional groups impressed other investors.
Their assistance lent credibility to our operation," concludes Duke.
One major challenge was securing a steady source of wood for the operation.
To address this, the local JTR steering committee convinced the operator of the city-run landfill to implement a differential tip fee to encourage haulers to recover clean wood waste.
Tip fees were changed from $8.00 per cubic yard for all materials to $3.30 per cubic yard for separated wood or yard waste and $12.30 for all other materials.
As a result, there was a dramatic increase in the number of construction haulers bringing C 
To take advantage of the new wood supply, Cacaloco set up operations at the landfill.
The company currently uses 1,000 yards per month of wood, paper, food waste, and other organics to manufacture its compost and is anticipating a major increase in production in the immediate future.
"At the center of this project is a highly motivated and technically savvy entrepreneur," said Tresi Houpt, executive director of VRM.
"That is one of the most important components of a successful demonstration project."
With operations now fully in place, Cacaloco can concentrate on increasing its compost production.
Last year, Cacaloco manufactured 4,000 yards of compost and over the next year, Duke expects Cacaloco's compost production to quadruple.
Back to top
PARTNERS
* State economic development agencies--SPRA partnered with economic development agencies from Arizona, Colorado, New Mexico, and Utah to assist communities with their recycling market development projects.
* State natural resource and environmental agencies--Arizona, Colorado, New Mexico, and Utah's natural resource and environmental agencies also were key partners in developing and administrating the community recycling projects.
* Recycling Technical Assistance Program (ReTAP)--SPRA signed a partnership agreement with CWC's ReTAP program to assist participating state agencies, local communities, and businesses in realizing the cost and performance advantages of using recycled materials.
ReTAP held a 'train the trainer' workshop for JTR project staff as well as community workshops on recycling best practices.
* Other experts--SPRA also offered workshops and technical assistance in coordination with Gainer 
Back to top
PUBLICATIONS
Rural Recycling Economic Development Model Materials * Community Profile Information Gathering Instrument * Community Profiles for the 12 JTR Communities * Critical Assessment of Opportunity Assessment Method
Workshop and Technical Assistance Manuals * Economic Development 101 Workshop Handbook * Composting Best Practices Workshop Manual * Glass Best Practices Workshop Manual * HDPE Best Practices Workshop Manual * Compost Facility Cost Worksheets * Facility Operations Manual for a Small Scale Open Windrow Composting Operation * Quality Control for Recyclable Materials
Rule
Back to top
Begin Site Footer
EPA Home | Privacy and Security Notice | Contact Us
