TESTIMONY FOR UNDER SECRETARY OF STATE STUART E. EIZENSTAT
HOUSE BANKING COMMITTEE On the U.S. Government Supplementary Report on Nazi Assets
June 4, 1998
Mr. Chairman.
I would like to thank the Committee for giving me the opportunity to discuss with you a subject that has captured the world's attention due in some measure to the pioneering work of this Committee.
I particularly want to single out the efforts and the leadership of Chairman Leach and the Committee beginning with your first hearing on this issue in 1996.
You have been a leader from the outset in raising the consciousness of America and the world on Holocaust assets issues.
You exhibited leadership in convening a very useful hearing last June in the wake of our preliminary report with historians from many of the affected countries to comment on our findings.
Your efforts continued with last February's pathbreaking hearing in February which focused on art and insurance.
And today's hearing, with the gathering of such distinguished panelists, is yet another example of this Committee's work to ensure that this complex and emotional issue receives both the proper attention and consideration by the U.S. Congress in an appropriately bipartisan fashion.
This supplementary report that we released this week, like our preliminary study completed in May 1997, reflects a solemn commitment by the United States to confront the largely hidden history of Holocaust-related assets after five decades of neglect.
I would like to acknowledge the tireless work and dedication of the State Department Historian Dr. William Slany and my Senior Advisor Bennett Freeman in preparing this report.
I would also like to acknowledge the work of the World Jewish Congress, the World Jewish Restitution Organization, the American Jewish Congress, the Jewish Agency, American Gathering of Holocaust Survivors and Eli Rosenbaum and Dr. Barry White of the Justice Department.
Our preliminary study was prepared by Dr. Slany in cooperation with ten other agencies of the U.S. Government and released in May 1997.
Our most significant findings were the overall movement of looted gold flowing to and through Switzerland from Germany; the fact that the Swiss National Bank must have known that some portion of the gold it was receiving from the Reichsbank was looted from occupied countries; and that the gold received by the Swiss National Bank from the Reichsbank included some stolen from Holocaust victims, although there is no evidence that the Swiss National Bank knew this fact.
These findings were confirmed by the bold and probing gold report that Switzerland's Bergier Commission presented initially at the London Nazi Gold Conference in December 1997 and now by its more conclusive report released on May 25, 1998.
SCOPE OF THIS STUDY
Before highlighting for you the major new substantive findings of the report, let me first explain the relationship between the new, supplementary report and the preliminary study we released last May.
This supplemental study is the substantively appropriate follow-up to the first report.
The preliminary report focused on how Nazi Germany financed its war effort using looted gold.
Switzerland figured so prominently because our focus was on looted gold and the key role it played in the German war effort.
This report focuses on the uses to which that looted gold was put - that is, the ability of the Nazis to use the Swiss francs they obtained in exchange for the gold they looted to purchase, in turn, critical war supplies from the other neutral countries necessary to sustain the war effort.
In this way, by illuminating the trade as well as the financing side of the equation, our two reports together provide a comprehensive view of the important part the wartime neutrals cumulatively played in the structure of the German war economy.
Further research has allowed us to provide a more detailed analysis of the economic roles played by other wartime neutrals - Argentina, Portugal, Spain, Sweden and Turkey - and the factors that shaped those roles.
We have focused on these countries' trading links with both the Axis and the Allies, as well as on their handling of looted assets----especially gold.
Let me begin by highlighting our findings in this respect.
NEUTRALS SUPPLYING GERMAN WAR EFFORT
This report makes clear that whatever their motivations, and however acceptable by the standards of the time for neutrals, the cumulative trade of the World War II European neutral countries helped to sustain the Nazi war effort by supplying key materials to Germany essential to their conduct of the War -- in many cases well past the point where, from the Allied perspective at the time, there was a genuine threat of German attack.
As you can see from Chart 1 (Appendix) on the Neutral Countries' Supply of Germany's Major Resources,
Portugal and Spain together provided Germany with almost 100 percent of Germany's wartime supply of vitally-needed wolfram, the essential mineral in processing tungsten for steel alloys used in machine tools and armaments, especially armor-piercing shells.
The strategic significance of wolfram was not lost on the Portuguese.
Prime Minister Salazar himself acknowledged in early 1944 that denying wolfram to Germany "would reduce her power of endurance, and the war would be accordingly shortened."
Sweden provided Germany's wartime industry with a major portion -- as Chart 1 shows, in some war years up to 90-100 percent -- of its requisite iron ore (including a high proportion of the high-grade ore needed for the production of the specially hardened steel used in German weapons and armored vehicles) and ball-bearings.
Turkey conducted a robust commerce (in chart 1) with both sides that raised its gold reserves from 27 tons to 216 by the end of 1945.
In 1943, for example, Turkey provided essentially 100 percent of German requirements.
Chart 1 shows that in 1943 Turkey's exports supplied Germany with up to 100 percent of its annual requirements.
According to Hitler's Armaments Minister Albert Speer, the German war machine would have ground to a halt without chromite ore.
Indeed, Speer wrote in his memoirs that he told Hitler in November 1943: "Should supplies from Turkey be cut off, the stockpile of chromium is sufficient for only 5-6 months.
The manufacture of planes, tanks, motor vehicles, tank shells, U-boats, almost the entire gamut of artillery would have to cease from one to three months after this deadline, since by then the reserves in the distribution channels would be used up."
Implicitly or explicitly, the neutrals resisted Allied economic diplomacy and expressed fear of German reprisal if their economic relations were curtailed.
This invocation of force majeure by the neutrals could not be easily countered by the Allies in the early years of the War when their vulnerability was all too apparent.
But the invincibility of the German war machine was belied during 1943 with a series of major defeats that foreshadowed the Allied victory.
The neutral nations recognized the turn of the tide and the receding danger of German attack or reprisal, and began, at Allied demand, to curtail trade and other measures that supported the German war effort.
By late 1943, the Allies were less willing to accept neutral claims of the threat of force majeure as a reason to justify their continuing economic interaction with the Nazi regime.
Chart 2 (appendix), which presents a Timeline of Trade, Belligerency and Postwar Gold and Asset Negotiations and Agreements between the Allies and the neutrals, summarizes the key information in our report about the international legal and economic relationships of the neutrals.
The first three columns summarize these major exports of the neutrals to Germany, the other contributions of the neutrals to the German war effort, and, in this third column, those major contributions of the neutrals to the allied war effort.
The next three columns in the timeline show, based on the information presented in the report, how the allies perceived the diminution of German military threat to the neutrals in the course of the war, how [in this next column] this is related to the significant concessions the neutrals eventually made to the allies, and [in the adjoining column]
Another column indicates that two of the neutrals, Argentina and turkey, actually declared war on Germany in the closing months of the war.
The final four columns show the dates when the various neutrals began the gold restitution and assets negotiations with the allies, when they were completed, and when gold and assets were actually delivered to the allies.
The details of the results of these negotiations are presented in this chart.
COMPLEXITY OF NEUTRALITY
The report also sheds light on the complexities of "neutrality" - the different forms that neutrality took in different countries for different reasons - in ways that should dispel any monolithic concept of neutrality during World War II.
The wartime neutrals often faced similar pressures and counter-pressures but reacted to them in varied ways, reflecting their specific wartime circumstances, the attitudes of their leaders, and the more enduring features of their own economies and geography.
There was no such thing as a uniform or absolute neutrality during World War II.
The ideological leaning of Franco's regime in Spain was clear and unmistakable; Franco's dispatch of the Blue Division to join the Wehrmacht at the Russian front underscores this pro-Axis tilt.
So, too, leading members of the Argentine military regimes were also openly sympathetic to the Axis.
Sweden's permission for German troops to regularly transit its territory and to protect German shipping in the Baltic were hardly "neutral" acts; neither was Portugal's granting access to the British to bases in the Azores, even though it was a welcome and important contribution to the Allied war effort.
Different factors shaped the "neutrality" of Argentina, Portugal, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, and Turkey, ranging from long-standing policies of avoiding entanglements in European wars to the fear of invasion and the desire to reap economic rewards.
These interests, in turn, produced decisions and actions which were at various times both consistent and inconsistent with their claims of neutrality.
These inconsistent decisions and actions were at times helpful to Nazi Germany and at other times helpful to the Allies.
They were often based on their own strictly legal interpretations of what was permissible under existing international law, as distinct from moral considerations of what was right or wrong.
All these seemingly inconsistent decisions and actions co-existed and contributed to the complex phenomenon of neutrality during World War II----a war which was in many ways different from previous wars because of the unprecedented scope of the assault on human values and the horrors of the Holocaust.
There are a number of questions that should be addressed today by all the nations involved in World War II, including the wartime neutrals, questions which can help them come to terms with their role in the War.
For example, at what point during World War II did it become evident that Nazi aggression was not just another in an endless series of European wars, but was qualitatively different in its brutal treatment of civilians and its threat to basic human values? At what point did the threat of a Nazi invasion recede sufficiently so that with little risk, trade with Germany in critical commodities could have been sharply curtailed or stopped? If neutrality was defended during the War as a way of self-defense, why was there so little cooperation with the Allies after the War in returning looted Nazi assets which had come into the possession of the wartime neutrals or in liquidating German assets for the benefit of stateless refugees and the reconstruction of war-torn Europe? These are difficult questions to which there are no easy or certain answers, with or without the benefit of hindsight.
There appears to have been a clear preponderance of sympathy for the Allied cause in several of these countries, and significant elements of sympathy in the others.
Consistent with this mixed pattern of actions was the refuge offered by the neutral nations to more than 250,000 Jews fleeing the Holocaust.
Acts of humanity and even heroism rose above the harshness or insensitivity of wartime refugee policies and reflected well on their governments and peoples: * An estimated 100,000 refugees, mostly Jews, fled through or into the Iberian peninsula.
Spain allowed 20,000 to 30,000 refugees to cross the French border from the fall of France until the summer of 1942, and another 7,500 refugees entered Spain by the end of 1944.
The Portuguese Government allowed Jewish organizations to relocate from occupied Europe to Lisbon during the War.
During 1941 and 1942 the Portuguese Government allowed 5,000 refugees to pass through Portugal to the United States.
* The Swedish Government provided refuge for about 7,000 Danish Jews who fled to the safety of Swedish shores.
Sweden's protection, spearheaded by the personal heroism of Raoul Wallenberg, was extended to 20,000 to 30,000 Jews who faced extermination in the last phase of the Holocaust.
* Turkey, which had protected Jews since their expulsion from Spain in 1492, had, it is estimated, more than 100,000 Jewish refugees pass through its borders during the War.
* Argentina received a large number of Jewish refugees between 1933 and 1945.
Many of these 25,000 to 45,000 refugees reached Argentina before and during the War, more than any other country in the Western Hemisphere (including the United States).
* Switzerland admitted over 50,000 Jewish refugees from 1933 until the end of the War, of whom some 30,000 remained and survived in Switzerland during the War.
NAZI GOLD
Now let me address the new findings in this report that bear on the issue of Nazi Gold as distinct from the broader role of the wartime neutrals that I have just highlighted.
We have arrived at new figures of looted gold.
Our first report estimated that Switzerland received as much as $414 million in total (looted and non-looted) gold from Nazi Germany.
These estimates were confirmed by the recently released Bergier Report which estimated that some $440 million in total gold went through Switzerland.
These figures, taken together, now give us a higher, more definitive range on total gold that flowed through Switzerland.
One other new finding is presented as a separate annex prepared by the U.S. Justice Department's Office of Special Investigations.
New sources have come to light that provide additional information about the Melmer account at the Reichsbank, in which the SS deposited the gold and other valuables that it looted from individual citizens and from its victims at killing centers and concentration camps.
These sources provide the most detailed data currently available for the value of the gold in the Melmer account and yield an estimate for the total value of this gold ($4.6 million in wartime value, $40.5 million in today's gold values) that is markedly higher than previous estimates -- indeed, two times the Melmer estimates in the Bergier Report.
These new, more definitive figures are based in part on our assessment of the records of the DeGussa company and Reischbank microfilm found in Vienna.
Of particular importance is the analysis of the postwar study by Albert Thoms, the head of the Reischbank's Precious Metals Department, that details the Melmer Shipment of SS loot to the Reischbank.
The Thoms' study lists in gruesome detail in 29 columns the loot of victims under such headings as Gold Bars, gold and silver coins, (Purses, knives and forks, jewels, gold and diamond rings, watches, Dental Gold, broken gold, etc.).
If the analysis of the Thoms Report is correct, the total value that the Reischbank credited to the SS for the gold in its loot shipments was between $3.9 million and $5.4 million.
The Justice Department historians make the conservative estimate for the gold in the loot shipment at $4.65 million.
And this does not include the estimated $3.9 million in gold bullion and coins forwarded to the Reischbank as a result of Operation Reinhard, the Nazi program to exploit Jewish property and labor and murder millions of Jews in killing centers in eastern Poland.
This supplemental study further reveals that victim gold from the Melmer account was also included in gold that the Dresdner Bank and the Deutsche Bank -- both German commercial banks -- sold on the Turkish free market as part of a scheme to supply the Reichsbank with foreign currency, and to help Axis diplomats and agents finance their operations in Turkey.
Some of the nearly $1 million in victim gold from the Melmer account obtained by Dresdner Bank and Deutsche Bank likely was part of the gold sold by those banks on the Turkish free market.
Nazi Germany financed a substantial portion of its war effort by paying for its wartime imports from the neutral nations in gold, much of it looted from occupied Europe and some of it stolen from the millions of victims of the Holocaust.
Most of this looted gold was sent to the Swiss National Bank, which converted it into Swiss francs or deposited it in the accounts of other central banks.
In this trade, more than $300 million ($2.6 billion in today's values) in Nazi gold reached Portugal, Spain, Sweden, and Turkey during the War.
We arrived at this figure by adding up all the allied estimates of the gold the individual neutral countries received from Germany.
Chart 3 (Appendix) on Allied assets and gold presents these estimates.
Three-quarters of this amount was transferred from Germany through the Swiss National Bank, the principal gold trading center on the continent.
This flow of gold from Germany to the neutrals persisted through the War despite Allied warnings in January 1943 and February 1944 against accepting transfers of assets from Nazi Germany that had been looted from occupied countries.
The European neutral countries continued to accept looted gold from the Reichsbank even after 1942 when it became clear that the Reichsbank had long since exhausted its own prewar gold reserve and was using the reserves of the looted central banks of the countries overrun by Nazi forces.
The Allies estimated that Germany financed its imports from Spain and Portugal with as much as $204 million in looted gold
; more than $20 million in gold financed German trade with Sweden.
Almost all of the gold that reached Turkey was traded through the free commercial market, not through the Turkish Government.
Chart 3 also includes Allied estimates of looted gold that reached each neutral country.
Postwar Negotiations
The next new set of findings I want to highlight is the postwar negotiations that the United States, Britain, and France conducted with the wartime neutrals were protracted and failed to meet fully their original goals: restitution of the looted gold and the liquidation of German external assets to fund the reconstruction of postwar occupied Europe and to provide relief for Jewish and other non-repatriable refugees.
This resulted from the intransigence of the neutrals after the War, conflicts within Allied ranks and between the State and Treasury Departments, as well as from competing priorities stemming from the onset of the Cold War.
Less than $20 million ($14.9 million from Sweden alone) of the up to $240 million in looted gold acquired by the wartime neutrals, apart from Switzerland, was returned to the Tripartite Gold Commission to meet the claims from the central banks of 15 countries.
Chart 3 also summarizes the terms of the various accords that the allies and the neutral countries reached after the war regarding the restitution of gold and the liquidation of German external assets.
Ustasha Gold
Finally, the report deals with the question of Ustasha Gold.
We became aware that the U.S. Government possessed important documents bearing on Ustasha gold in particular.
The chapter raises questions about aspects of the Vatican's record during and immediately after the War, to which answers may only exist in Vatican archives.
The Ustasha regime in Nazi Germany's wartime puppet state of Croatia systematically and mercilessly robbed, murdered, or deported its Serbian, Sinti-Romany, and Jewish populations.
Gold and other valuables of the victims became a part of the Ustasha treasury, which may have been as much as $80 million.
Portions of this treasury appear to have been transferred to Switzerland in the last year of the War.
Very little of it was accounted for in the postwar arrangements made by Yugoslavia with the Allies and Switzerland.
With the defeat in May 1945 of Hitler and his satellites, including puppet Croatia, the leaders of the Ustasha regime fled to Italy, where they found sanctuary at the pontifical College of San Girolamo in Rome.
This College was most likely funded at least in part by the remnants of the Ustasha treasury, and may have operated with at least the tacit acquiescence of some Vatican officials.
It helped fugitive Croatian war criminals escape to the Western Hemisphere in the early postwar years, and cooperated with the "rat line" being used by the U.S. Army Counter Intelligence Corps after the War to assist the escape from Europe of anti-Communists including the Nazi war criminal Klaus Barbie.
The record of the terrible legacy of the Ustasha assembled for this study is very incomplete.
A full accounting should be made now to achieve a complete understanding of these issues.
The opening of relevant archives in Croatia, Serbia, and the Vatican and cooperative international research will be essential in this effort.
OTHER HISTORICAL RESEARCH EFFORTS
These conclusions are based largely on the limited perspective of our almost exclusive reliance on U.S. documents (as well as captured Nazi documents in possession of the U.S.) which our interagency team has located, declassified, and evaluated.
We hope that each country with a stake in these issues will intensify its efforts to examine its own record and confront its own history on its own terms and in its own way.
It is essential that these studies move forward quickly so that a more comprehensive historical record of the looting and ultimate disposition of Holocaust-era assets can finally be completed.
I want to salute those countries who are already undertaking such efforts - not only Switzerland with its Bergier Commission - but also the commissions which have been established, in Argentina, Portugal, Spain, Sweden, Turkey and Croatia - to address these issues which are the focus of our report.
It is our hope that our two studies combined with these and other efforts underway in other countries will complete the historical record on these complex and painful issues.
We share a common commitment -- not only to come to terms with the past, but to galvanize the urgent quest for justice for Holocaust victims and survivors.
U.S. HOLOCAUST ASSETS HISTORICAL COMMISSION
This second and final report that I will personally direct will not end our search for truth and our quest for justice.
Under your leadership Chairman Leach, you have introduced and been the principal sponsor in the House of Representatives HR 3662 that would establish a U.S. Holocaust Assets Historical Commission - the counterpart to the bill introduced in the Senate by Senator D'Amato.
We urge this Committee and the House to act as soon as possible on this legislation which has the strong support of the President.
This legislation was introduced in Congress on April 1 to create a Presidential Commission to examine the fate of Holocaust assets in the United States.
The bill was introduced with bipartisan support and the strong backing of the Clinton Administration.
The substantive mandate of the Commission will focus on two key areas: first, to conduct original research on the collection and disposition of Holocaust-era assets that came under the control of the U.S. Government after Hitler came to power in 1933 (assets such as gold, gems, bank accounts, financial instruments, and art works); and second, to review research being conducted more broadly in the public and private sectors.
The Commission will be charged with issuing a final report to the President summarizing its findings and making recommendations no later than December 31, 1999.
Establishing a strong Commission that can meet its mandate by this deadline will send a message that the United States Government is determined to address the fate of Holocaust assets here at home.
WASHINGTON CONFERENCE ON HOLOCAUST-ERA ASSETS
Mr. Chairman, we will also maintain our historical research efforts in other ways as well.
In order to build on the landmark London Nazi Gold Conference held last December, and continue the international search for truth, the Department of State and the U.S. Holocaust Memorial Museum will co-host from November 30 to December 3 the Washington Conference on Holocaust-Era Assets.
The objective will be to review our progress on the gold issue, to renew the drive to open archives and to share research on other assets, especially on artworks and insurance.
As at London, the Washington Conference will not be a forum for governmental decision-making.
But we plan to use the conference and our preparations to work with a wide range of governments and NGO's to help shape a non-binding international consensus on principles and processes for redressing injustices in these categories of assets.
We hope that this consensus can give new impetus to the encouraging initiatives already underway in many countries and that this intergovernmental forum can be a catalyst for many other related efforts to address this great unfinished business of the twentieth century.
Mr. Chairman, your personal leadership and the activity of this Committee have played an important role in encouraging the international community to make significant progress in exploring issues of Holocaust-era assets.
The hearing conducted in February, which shed much light on the art and insurance issues, was itself a landmark event in focusing long-overdue attention on these areas.
I personally appreciate your contribution, and as we prepare for this important international conference, we want to work very closely with you, this Committee, and your staff, as well as with other interested Members of Congress.
Mr. Chairman, the examination of the complicated issues of Holocaust-era assets is a difficult undertaking.
While archival research and international conferences have provided the framework for achieving a greater understanding of the fate of Holocaust assets, these issues have naturally had a vast public political impact beyond the academic and diplomatic arenas.
They have come to command the attention of the world and touch the conscience of humanity.
Mr. Chairman, you and the Committee are an essential part of this historic effort.
Thank you very much for your consideration.
I will be happy to take your questions.
###
