[image002.jpg] "Two Cents Makes Sense" Testimony of the American Road and Transportation Builders Association presented by T. Peter Ruane, President and CEO
before the
Subcommittee on Highways and Transit
Committee on Transportation and Infrastructure
July 16, 2002
"Two Cents Makes Sense"
Testimony of
the American Road and Transportation Builders Association
before the
Subcommittee on Highways and Transit
Committee on Transportation and Infrastructure
July 16, 2002
Mr. Chairman, Congressman Borski, members of the Subcommittee, thank you very much for providing the American Road and Transportation Builders Association (ARTBA) an opportunity to present its proposal for financing the federal highway and mass transit programs when the Transportation Equity Act for the 21^st Century (TEA-21) is reauthorized next year.
I am Pete Ruane, President and CEO of ARTBA.
I am accompanied this morning by Dr. William Buechner, ARTBA's vice president for economics and research.
Dr. Buechner heads a team of economic experts at ARTBA that conducted all of the analysis that appears in this testimony.
Our team of economists has given this association a unique analytical capability that has helped ARTBA provide critical information on federal transportation investment to this Committee and the Congress many times in the past and we hope ARTBA's professional analysis capability will continue to be useful to you as Congress moves ahead on TEA-21 reauthorization.
ARTBA celebrates its 100^th anniversary this year.
Based in Washington, D.C., ARTBA was organized in 1902 by a visionary Michigan public official, Horatio S. Earle, for the purpose of advocating federal legislation to create a "National Capital Connecting Highway System."
That vision was realized with the enactment of the Interstate Highway construction program and Highway Trust Fund in 1956.
ARTBA has more than 5,000 members and provides a consensus voice representing all sectors of the transportation construction industry before Congress, the White House and the federal agencies.
Our members' work contributes $200 billion annually to the nation's Gross Domestic Product and generates more than 2.5 million jobs for American workers.
A brief overview of ARTBA's recommendations
Mr. Chairman, let me begin with a brief overview of ARTBA's testimony.
In March 2001, ARTBA issued its blueprint for reauthorization of the surface transportation programs.
Our major recommendation was for a $50 billion annual federal highway program between FY 2004 and FY 2009, based on data from the U.S. Department of Transportation's 1999 Report on Conditions and Performance of the Nation's Highways, Bridges and Transit, which would be funded at least in part through an increase in federal motor fuel excise taxes.
My testimony today expands on our earlier report.
These are the critical elements of ARTBA's recommendations for financing the federal highway and mass transit programs after TEA-21:
* ARTBA strongly believes that TEA-21 reauthorization legislation should preserve the successes of TEA-21, including:
· The commitment that all highway user fee revenues are to be invested solely in highway and mass transit improvements;
· Annual funding guarantees in the authorization legislation;
· Budgetary protections for the highway and mass transit programs, including the separate budget categories and the point of order in the House Rules that can be raised against legislation that would reduce the guaranteed funding.
* The improvements we propose today to TEA-21 are evolutionary, not revolutionary.
* President Bush has directed the departments and agencies of the federal government to set performance goals and achieve meaningful results.
The goal for the federal highway program should be a level of federal investment that, at minimum, maintains current structural, safety and traffic mobility conditions on the nation's highways and bridges.
A similar goal should be set for the mass transit program.
* The goal for the federal highway program would require an annual federal investment of $60 billion, based on data that we anticipate will be released this summer by the U.S. Department of Transportation and the American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials on the capital investment required just to maintain current structural, safety and traffic congestion conditions on our nation's highway system.
Federal investment in mass transit should also increase, and a program of up to $14 billion would be possible under the proposal we offer today.
* The most practical way to achieve a $60 billion federal highway investment is to provide steady, predictable and manageable increases during the next six years, with the program increasing in $5 billion annual increments from $35 billion in FY 2004 to $60 billion in FY 2009.
* Under the current financing conventions for the federal highway and mass transit program, the user fees must be collected in advance and then are "warehoused" for as much as seven years before the cash is actually needed to cover program outlays.
This is inefficient cash management and is not consistent with the President's instruction to federal agencies to improve how the government manages its money.
* Improving cash management for the federal highway and mass transit programs would make it possible to finance growth in the federal highway program to $60 billion by FY 2009 with an annual increase in the federal motor fuels tax rates of just over 2 cents per gallon per year -- or less.
If other potential revenue sources were tapped, such as transferring 2.5 cents per gallon of the tax on gasohol into the Highway Trust Fund that is currently going into the general fund, reimbursing the Highway Trust Fund for the cost of the 5.1 cent per gallon gasohol subsidy, crediting interest on the Highway Trust Fund balance, for example, the annual increase would be even less than 2 cents.
* We believe permanently indexing the motor fuels excise to the annual Consumer Price Index (CPI) to maintain the purchasing power of the highway user fees should be part of the proposed two-cent annual increase.
* Revenues into the Highway Trust Fund would be set at the level needed to cover outlays, not obligations.
If the trust fund were to experience a deficit during any fiscal year, the motor fuels tax rate would be automatically adjusted the following year to make the trust fund whole.
This would address, in a positive way, the political challenges caused by the current RABA (revenue-aligned budget authority) mechanism.
* The highway and mass transit programs would automatically be budget neutral, adding neither to the deficit or surplus in the federal budget.
* The programs would be entirely self-financing.
* The annual adjustment in the motor fuels excise tax should be viewed as a user fee adjustment, not a tax increase.
* The annual cost of the annual user fee adjustment to the average household with two cars or light trucks would be about $25 per year or six cents per day, or approximately one percent of the projected annual increase in household incomes between FY 2004 and FY 2009.
A 2-cent per gallon annual increase is less than the weekly fluctuation in retail motor fuel prices during 2001 and 2002.
* Investment in highways and mass transit at the levels in the ARTBA recommendation would set the stage for strong economic growth well into the 21^st century.
Conditions on the nation's highways
Mr. Chairman, I want to begin my statement with the latest information on structural, safety and congestion conditions on the nation's highways and bridges.
* More than 40,000 people die and 3 million are injured each year on the nation's roads.
Vehicle crashes are the leading cause of death for Americans 6 to 28 years old.
* Poor road conditions and outdated alignments are a factor in an estimated 15,000 of these deaths.
* The annual economic cost of motor vehicle crashes is $160 billion per year in lost wages, health care and insurance.
* The carnage is proportionally much greater on two-lane roads, which carry less than half of all vehicle miles traveled each year but account for 77 percent of all fatal crashes.
* According to the Texas Transportation Institute[1], the average annual peak traffic delay per highway traveler climbed from 45 hours in 1994 to 62 hours in 2000, a 38 percent increase in just six years.
* A study by the U.S.
General Accounting Office[2] reported that rush hour travel times on urban interstates increased 12 percent between 1990 and 2000.
* FHWA data show that congestion is worsening on all major U.S. roads, with the problem now spreading from urban interstates to rural interstates, where traffic density is growing faster than on any other class of road.
* Increased truck traffic is also contributing to congestion and the cost of maintaining America's highways and bridges.
The GAO found that all 50 states expect truck traffic to increase over the next decade, which will significantly contribute to a decline in pavement conditions over the next 10 years.
The Federal Highway Administration (FHWA) estimates that freight movement by truck will increase 28 percent between 2001 and 2010, compared to 17 percent for passenger traffic.
* According to the Texas Transportation Institute, "To keep congestion from growing between 1999 and 2000 would have required 1,780 new lane-miles of freeway and 2,590 new lane-miles of streets -- or -- an average of 6.2 million additional new trips per day taken by carpool or transit -- or -- operational improvements that allowed 3% more travel to be handled on existing systems -- or -- some combination of these.
These events did not happen and traffic congestion increased."
* Traffic congestion now costs Americans over $67 billion each year -- the value of 3.6 billion hours of delay and 5.7 billion gallons of excess motor fuel consumed.
* 32 percent of major U.S. roads are classified in either "poor" or "mediocre" condition.
* 28 percent of the nation's bridges are classified as either "structurally deficient" or "functionally obsolete."
* Driving on poor roads cause $49 billion in extra vehicle repair and operating costs annually -- $259 per motorist each year.
Federal investments in roads, bridges and mass transit that are designed to improve motorist, trucker, biker and pedestrian safety should be considered not just capital investments, but public health investments!
Setting a performance goal for federal surface transportation investment
When President Bush took office at the beginning of 2001, he set a major goal for the U.S. government of "Governing with Accountability."
Part of this initiative was a requirement for each federal agency to set performance goals and be judged on how well they met their goals.
The Bush administration is focused on performance and results.
This means setting measurable goals that mean something to the American people.
It means getting results.
As President Bush said in the FY 2002 Budget of the U.S. Government, his first budget submission, "it is important for spending to produce meaningful results."
Treasury Secretary Paul O'Neill expanded on this in his comments on the President's FY 2003 budget:
"The best organizations in the world are 40 to 50 percent better than their closest competitors--they set their goals by what is theoretically possible, not as a small improvement over last year's performance level.
We need to apply this same thought process to our leadership responsibilities in all of the departments and agencies of the federal government, so that we deliver value to the American people."
With the Transportation Equity Act for the 21^st Century (TEA-21) scheduled for reauthorization in September 2003, it is time to apply the President's directive to the federal surface transportation programs by setting performance goals for these programs and funding them as efficiently as possible.
Prior to TEA-21, funding for the federal highway and mass transit programs was driven by the budget.
Both programs were part of the domestic discretionary budget category, and the annual investment level was set by what the overall domestic discretionary cap could afford.
There was no link to the revenues coming into the Highway Trust Fund and there was no link to what the nation needed.
As a result, road and bridge conditions deteriorated throughout the 1980s and into the early 1990's and traffic congestion got worse.
TEA-21 made a fundamental improvement on this process by assuring that all Highway Trust Fund revenues would be spent for transportation investment.
Highway and mass transit investment levels under TEA-21 were revenue-driven.
The strong growth of Highway Trust Fund revenues during the 1990s meant strong growth of federal transportation investment.
But a revenue-driven program will not be adequate to meet the nation's future highway and mass transit needs and is not consistent with the President's emphasis on performance and results.
It is time to follow the President's directive and set meaningful performance goals for the federal highway and mass transit programs.
In March 2001, the American Road and Transportation Builders Association published its proposals for improving the federal highway and mass transit programs in a 72-page report entitled "A Blueprint for Year 2003 Reauthorization of the Federal Surface Transportation Programs."
The core recommendation of our March 2001 reauthorization blueprint was that federal investment in highway improvements needed to grow to an average of $50 billion per year during the next six years, fiscal years 2004-2009.
This figure was not based on a wish list or political considerations.
It was not made up.
It was taken from the U.S. Department of Transportation's 1999 Conditions and Performance Report for the Nation's Highways, Bridges and Transit, and is the minimum amount of federal investment necessary just to maintain existing structural conditions, safety and traffic congestion levels on our nation's highways and bridges over the next six years.
When U.S. DOT released that report almost two years ago, all of its publicity emphasized the report's finding that investment by all levels of government would be just enough by FY 2003 to maintain existing structural conditions on the nation's roads and bridges.
Average pavement conditions would be maintained--some getting worse and some getting better, but the average remaining constant--while the backlog of needed bridge improvements would also just be maintained.
No longer would the physical condition of the nation's highways be deteriorating.
Lost in the self-congratulations when the report came out was the news that the level of investment projected for FY 2003 was far short of the amount needed to maintain existing traffic congestion and traffic flow conditions as well as existing safety conditions on the nation's highways.
Fortunately, the 1999 Conditions and Performance report also provided Federal Highway Administration (FHWA) data that could be used to compute the investment level that would be required to maintain existing traffic congestion and mobility conditions, as well as the amount that would be needed to improve these conditions.
ARTBA's economics and research team was able to use these FHWA data, plus inflation projections from the FY 2002 Budget of the U.S. Government, to show that maintaining existing structural, safety and traffic conditions on the nation's highways and bridges would require an average annual federal investment in highway improvements of $50 billion over the next six years.
Since the 1999 Conditions and Performance Report was issued -- and it was based on 1997 data -- the pressure on our nation's highways and bridges has continued to grow.
Between 1997 and 2001, the total output of goods and services in the U.S. economy grew more than 14 percent in constant dollars.
Since trucks carry almost three-quarters of all products shipped in the United States, this means highway truck traffic has risen substantially since the last Conditions and Performance report.
During those four years, the nation's population grew more than 6 percent, adding more than 17 million people whose main form of travel is, and will remain, the nation's highways.
The number of motor vehicles grew more than 9 percent to almost 230 million, while the number of vehicle miles traveled on the nation's highways also grew more than 9 percent.
All of this occurred in just four years, and all of it generates a need for more capacity and more repair work on our highways and bridges.
The U.S. DOT is scheduled to release a new Conditions and Performance report with updated investment recommendations during the summer of 2002.
The American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials (AASHTO) is scheduled to release its "Bottom Line" report, based on the same data, on Labor Day.
We anticipate that both reports will provide data that suggest the federal share of investment required just to maintain current structural, safety and congestion conditions on the nation's highways and bridges will, in fact, be $55 - $60 billion per year.
Transportation and the economy.
Equally important is the impact of transportation investment on the performance of the U.S. economy.
On June 25, 2002, ARTBA, the National Chamber Foundation and the American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials sponsored a National Conference on Transportation and the Economy here in Washington, DC.
The purpose of this conference was to document the importance of transportation investment to the performance of the American economy.
Speakers representing a wide variety of backgrounds--respected academics, business leaders, Members of Congress, state governors, and consultants--all presented a very clear message.
U.S. economic growth depends on a healthy nationwide transportation system.
But problems with the system--growing congestion, deteriorating quality, inadequate intermodal connectors, freight delays and operational deficiencies--are already impeding economic growth in many parts of the country.
And the problem will only worsen if we stay on our current path.
A highway investment program to maintain structural, safety and traffic mobility conditions on the nation's highways and support strong economic growth in the 21^st century
The reauthorization proposal ARTBA offers today -- a refinement of our March 2001 recommendations -- would move transportation investment in the United States during the next six years to a level that will not only stabilize traffic congestion, but also enable the American economy to achieve its growth potential well into the 21^st century.
This is what President Bush meant when he required each federal agency to establish performance goals and measure results.
The only meaningful performance goal for the federal surface transportation programs is a level of investment that at least maintains current physical and structural conditions on the nation's highways, bridges and transit systems, maintains or improves safety conditions, and maintains traffic congestion and mobility conditions.
To achieve this goal would require a federal highway program that grows to $60 billion by FY 2009, as explained earlier.
It would also require a substantial increase in funding for the mass transit program -- to $13 or $14 billion by FY 2009 -- although the U.S. DOT's Conditions and Performance report is less specific for mass transit that it is for highways and bridges.
During my testimony today, I will provide details on a proposal that builds on the funding improvements enacted in TEA-21 while offering an "evolutionary, not revolutionary" approach to financing the federal highway and mass transit programs in the future.
A federal highway investment program for the next six years
[image004.gif] The most practical way to achieve a $60 billion federal highway investment is to provide steady, predictable and manageable increases during the next six years as shown in Figure 1.
With steady and predictable funding increases, state Departments of Transportation and highway and bridge construction contractors can plan to expand state highway and bridge construction and preservation programs in a way that makes wisest use of the increased federal resources.
Financing this level of investment will require more revenues than highway users are currently projected to pay into the Highway Trust Fund during the next six years.
Based on information such as current highway user fees, expected population growth, number of drivers, vehicle miles traveled and other factors, the Congressional Budget Office and the U.S. Department of the Treasury currently project that revenues into the Highway Account will grow from $30 billion in FY 2004 to just under $35 billion in FY 2009, (see Figure 2).
[image006.gif]
Comparing Figures 1 and 2 shows that projected revenue growth between now and FY 2009 will be far less than needed to meet federal highway investment requirements during the next six years.
Nearly two years ago, ARTBA proposed a number of options for enhancing Highway Account revenues.
These include:
* spending down the current cash balance;
* indexing the motor fuels excise taxes for inflation;
* crediting the Highway Account with gasohol tax revenues that currently go into the General Fund; * ending the gasohol subsidy or reimbursing the Highway Trust Fund from the General Fund for the cost of the subsidy;
* crediting interest on the Highway Trust Fund balances;
* eliminating fuel tax evasion; and
* expanding innovative financing programs.
Table 1 provides the latest revenue estimates for each of these options.
These figures were computed by ARTBA's economics and research team based on the most recent available data from the U.S. Department of the Treasury, the Congressional Budget Office and other government agencies.
Details are attached as an appendix to this statement.
[image008.gif]
If all of these revenue enhancements were enacted by Congress, they would add $5 billion to projected Highway Account revenues in FY 2004.
This would gradually rise to $9 billion in FY 2009.
This would allow the program to grow to $44 billion by FY 2009, far short of the $60 billion needed just to maintain current structural, safety and traffic conditions.
This is shown in Figures 3a and 3b.
Whether Congress will, in fact, adopt any, or all, of these options is at this point a matter of conjecture.
What is abundantly clear is that a minimally-adequate federal highway program after TEA-21 will require significant new revenues, beyond these seven options.
[image011.gif] [image012.gif]
The main sources of funds for federal highway investment are the fees paid by highway users in the form of excise taxes on motor fuels--gasoline, diesel fuel and gasohol.
Each penny of the motor fuels excise taxes currently generates about $1.7 billion per year, with about $1.4 billion being deposited into the Highway Account of the Highway Trust Fund and $260 million deposited into the Mass Transit Account.
Between now and FY 2009, these amounts will grow as freight and personal travel grows.
An estimate of Highway Account revenues for each cent per gallon for the reauthorization period is shown in Table 1.
ARTBA has endorsed an increase in highway user fees as needed to maintain current structural, safety and traffic mobility conditions on the nation's highways and bridges.
But highway users should not be asked to pay any more than absolutely necessary.
The proposal I want to outline this morning is designed to provide the necessary level of federal highway investment during the next six years at the minimum cost to highway users -- meeting the "Governing with Accountability" goals set by President Bush for the U.S. government.
Expanding federal highway investment by building on the successes of TEA-21 and making improvements
TEA-21 does not need revolutionary changes.
Much as TEA-21 built on and improved ISTEA, the next bill should build on the successes of TEA-21 but make changes where improvements are needed.
As Transportation Secretary Norman Mineta has said, reauthorization legislation should be "evolutionary, not revolutionary."
Preserve TEA-21 successes
ARTBA strongly believes that TEA-21 reauthorization legislation should preserve the successes of TEA-21, including:
· The commitment that all highway user fee revenues are to be invested solely in highway and mass transit improvements;
· Annual funding guarantees in the authorization legislation;
· Budgetary protections for the highway and mass transit programs, including the separate budget categories and the point of order in the House Rules that can be raised against legislation that would reduce the guaranteed funding.
But there is one element of TEA-21 that needs to be reformed, and that is the way in which highway user fee revenues are managed!
A major goal of TEA-21 was to assure that all revenues into the Highway Account of the Highway Trust Fund would be used for highway investment.
To do this, Congress under TEA-21 established a direct dollar-for-dollar link between revenues into the Highway Account and the amount of federal funds that would be guaranteed each year for highway improvements.
The amount deposited into the Highway Account one year would be spent for highway improvements the next year.
This dollar-for-dollar link between revenues and program funding proved highly successful in increasing federal highway investment under TEA-21, since a strong economy and increased travel meant large annual increases in user fee deposits into the Highway Trust Fund.
Improve asset management
The TEA-21 convention linking each year's funding to the previous year's revenues means billions of highway user fee dollars are being collected and then "warehoused" for at least a year before they are apportioned among the states and invested in highway and bridge improvements.
Then, as Figure 4 shows, it may take as many as 7 years after the funds are obligated before the construction work is completed and payments have to be made from the Highway Trust Fund.
[image014.gif]
All this time, highway user fee revenues are "warehoused" in the Highway Trust Fund without being productive.
Under TEA-21, they don't even earn interest! No business would mismanage its assets this way.
Neither should the federal government.
Those who pay highway user fees deserve to have their tax receipts managed as efficiently as possible.
The "Governing with Accountability" discussion in the Budget of the U.S. Government for FY 2003 says "The President has called for a government that focuses on priorities and executes them well."
This means "improvements in the management of programs can result in greater results for less money by realizing the same productivity gains commonly expected in the private sector."
The budget lists five initiatives of the Bush Administration designed to achieve this goal, including "improve how the government manages its money."
By managing Highway Trust Fund assets better and using them more efficiently, highway user fee revenues could support a substantially larger federal highway program than under TEA-21!
Under the TEA-21 funding method, a $60 billion highway program would require--depending on the degree of utilization of other funding options--a large upfront increase in the federal motor fuels tax and a total increase over the next six years of more than 16 cents per gallon.
Much of the resulting revenues, however, would be unproductively "warehoused", since they would be collected years before they were actually needed.
In fact, a program that grew from $35 billion in FY 2004 to $60 billion in FY 2009 would require $48 billion of excess revenues under the TEA-21 model, and the cash balance in the Highway Account of the Highway Trust Fund would grow from $13.5 billion at the end of FY 2003 to $61.5 billion by the end of FY 2009!!
Locking highway user fees in a "warehouse" for up to seven years is not consistent with President Bush's goal of improving the financial management of the U.S. government.
Better asset management, as my testimony calls for this morning, could fund a federal highway program of up to $60 billion with a significantly smaller, phased-in motor fuels tax increase by using Highway Account revenues more efficiently than under TEA-21.
Enact true "Pay-as-You-Go" funding
Based on years of analysis, the White House Office of Management and Budget and the CBO have determined that federal highway funds spend out over a period extending seven years (see Figure 4).
Of every dollar obligated during a fiscal year, only 27 cents will have to actually be paid out of the Highway Account during the first year.
The next year, 42 cents will be paid, followed by 17 cents the third year and smaller amounts in following years.
As a result of the extended spend-out of highway program funds, outlays from the Highway Account tend to ramp up slower and a year or two later than the initial apportionment of funds.
Federal highway program funding for FY 2004 through FY 2009 shown in Figure 1 (p.8) would generate outlays as shown in Figure 5, below, based on CBO January 2002 baseline data for the Highway Account.
[image016.gif]
True "pay-as-you-go" funding would replace the current requirement that revenues be deposited in the Highway Account and warehoused a year before being apportioned to the states with a requirement in the reauthorization legislation that user fee revenues collected each year should be just sufficient to cover the amount paid out of the Highway Account.
Adopting true "pay-as-you-go" funding would mean:
· The required gas tax increase would be much less than under the current TEA-21 procedure, since revenues would only need to cover outlays instead of obligations;
· The gas tax could be ramped up gradually, imposing only a small cost each year.
Using true "pay-as-you-go" funding, a federal highway program that grows from $35 billion in FY 2004 to $60 billion in FY 2009 could be fully financed with a motor fuels tax increase of just over 2 cents per gallon per year from FY 2004 through FY 2009 (see Figure 6).
This annual increase would incorporate indexing of the motor fuels tax for inflation, which would amount to a half-cent annual increase, plus an additional annual increase of just over 1.5 cents per gallon.
· If 20 percent of the motor fuels tax increase were deposited into the Mass Transit Account, as has been the convention since 1982, funding for the mass transit program could grow to about $13 billion by FY 2009.
[image018.gif]
To the extent that other revenues sources could be tapped, the necessary gas tax increase would be even smaller! Some examples include:
* The Senate energy legislation (S. 517) would deposit into the Highway Account 2.5 cents per gallon of the excise tax on gasohol currently going into the general fund.
This would generate about $550 million to $650 million in revenues per year.
* The CBO and Treasury appear to be underestimating future Highway Account revenues; more realistic projections would add at least $1 billion per year.
These two possibilities alone would reduce the gas tax increase required in FY 2004 to less than one cent per gallon and the average increase the remaining years to 2 cents per gallon.
Enact a "Revenue RABA" provision
The necessary user fee increases in Figure 6 were calculated using the most recent Highway Trust Fund projections by the U.S. Department of the Treasury and the Congressional Budget Office.
When TEA-21 is reauthorized, even more recent data will be available.
New calculations may indicate user fee increases slightly higher or lower than those in Figure 6.
But even after the new legislation is enacted, changes can occur in the economy that might result in revenues accruing faster or slower than initially anticipated.
To assure that user fee revenues into the Highway Trust Fund are sufficient to cover outlays from the fund and that the highway and mass transit programs will not contribute to the federal deficit during the next six years, ARTBA also recommends adoption of a "revenue RABA" provision in the reauthorization legislation.
A "revenue RABA" provision would serve the same function as RABA does in TEA-21 but on the revenue side.
Under a "revenue RABA" provision, if revenues into the Highway Trust Fund during any fiscal year were to fall short of outlays, then the following year the statutory motor fuels tax level would be automatically increased by the amount required to offset the deficit and make the trust fund whole.
Conversely, if revenues were to exceed outlays during a fiscal year, then for the following fiscal year, the motor fuels tax level would be automatically decreased by the amount needed to offset the resulting surplus.
If a revenue shortfall occurs during any year, the amount would temporarily be covered by drawing down the cash balance in the Highway Trust Fund.
Based on the CBO January baseline, the balance in the Highway Account will be about $13.5 billion at the end of FY 2003.
The balance in the Mass Transit Account will be about 4.9 billion.
The funds would then be restored the following year.
This means:
* The highway and mass transit programs would automatically be budget neutral, adding neither to the deficit nor surplus in the federal budget;
* The programs would be entirely self-financing;
* There would be no incentive for Congress to reduce highway or mass transit funding, since any reduction in outlays would be matched by a reduction in revenues leaving no funds to use for other purposes;
* The potential political upheaval and angst the current RABA mechanism can produce would be eliminated.
Impact of ARTBA proposal on state highway investment programs
By FY 2009, ARTBA's proposal for a $60 billion federal highway program would provide each state more than double the amount they are expected to receive under the program in FY 2003.
Table 2 shows the projected state-by-state distribution of funds for the next six years assuming that the program structure and apportionment formulas in the reauthorization legislation remain similar to TEA-21.
The data in this table are based on a minimum return to each state of 90.5 percent, as is currently the law under TEA-21.
Table 3 shows how much each state would receive each year if the minimum return were increased to 95 percent, as some donor states have suggested.
It is important to note that under the ARTBA proposal no state would receive less than an 85 percent increase in federal highway funds between FY 2003 and FY 2009.
Under either formula, 17 states would receive more than $1 billion of federal highway funds by FY 2009 compared to only five states in FY 2003.
Maintenance of effort
A key component of financing highway, bridge and mass transit improvements is the partnership between federal, state and local governments to develop and maintain the nation's surface transportation network.
It is critical for all partners to make an appropriate commitment to transportation investment.
Unfortunately, a number of states let their own funds for highway and bridge investment lag upon realizing the increased federal funds they would receive under TEA-21.
To ensure increased federal surface transportation investment actually results in more funds for transportation improvement projects, the reauthorization of TEA-21 should include a "maintenance of effort" provision that makes increased apportioned federal funds contingent on individual state highway and transit program investment levels consistent with, at least, their prior year investment.
The 2-cents per gallon annual increase in the motor fuels tax rate would incorporate indexing for inflation
The purpose of permanently indexing the federal motor fuels tax rates to inflation is to preserve the purchasing power of highway user fees.
Without an annual increase, the purchasing power of user fee revenues declines as prices go up, which means less and less real construction and preservation work can be performed on the nation's highways and bridges.
A number of states have indexed their own motor fuel user fees to inflation, and that has helped stabilize the purchasing power of their highway construction programs, as Tom Walker, the executive director of the Wisconsin Transportation Builders Association has testified this morning.
Based on the inflation projections in the FY 2003 Budget of the U.S. Government, indexing the federal motor fuels tax rates would raise them half a cent each year from FY 2004 through FY 2009, or a total of 3 cents per gallon.
[image020.gif] [image022.gif]
While indexing alone would help maintain current structural conditions on our nation's highways and bridges, unfortunately, it would not provide enough new revenue to do anything to address the growing safety concerns, congestion and impaired mobility that has become the major issue in recent years for American commuters and travelers.
For this reason, the federal motor fuels taxes need to be increased just over 2 cents each year from FY 2004 through FY 2009, and then permanently indexed to the Consumer Price Index after that.
Impact of a 2-cent-per-gallon user fee increase on the nation's households
No increase -- aside from an increase in pay -- is ever welcome.
But the cost of an increase in the federal highway user fees needs to be put into perspective.
Cost per household
[image024.gif] According to the latest data from the Federal Highway Administration, the average car or light truck travels just under 11,900 miles per year and gets just over 20 miles per gallon, for an annual fuel use of 591 gallons per vehicle.
A 2 cent-per-gallon increase in the federal motor fuels tax would thus cost about $12.00 per vehicle.
The average household in the United States owns two cars or light trucks, for a total cost of about $25.00 per year or about 6 cents per day!
By comparison, data from the FY 2003 Budget of the United States Government and the U.S. Bureau of the Census indicate that wage and salary income for the average household is expected to grow more than $2,000 per year during each fiscal year 2004 - 2009.
The motor fuel tax increase thus would be barely one percent of projected household income growth.
This comparison is shown in Figure 7.
The burden would be even smaller if other income sources such as proprietors' income, profits, interest and rents were also included.
Average weekly change in retail price of gasoline
During the past year and a half, the retail price of gasoline has fluctuated by an average of 2.5 cents per week.
That is, the annual increase in the federal motor fuels user fee to fund a $60 billion federal highway program would be less than what motorist have become used to each week (see Figure 8)! In 14 instances, the retail price of gasoline either increased or decreased by 5 cents per gallon or more.
In 39 of the 75 weeks shown in the chart-or more than half of the time during the past year and a half-the retail price of gasoline fluctuated at least 2 cents from one week to the next.
[image026.gif]
How expensive is gasoline?
At the beginning of July, the average price of all grades of gasoline was $1.43.
This is certainly higher than the price of gasoline three years ago.
But over the past 20 years, the price of gasoline has barely risen at all, as Figure 9 below shows.
Over that same period, prices of many other products have increased far more than the price of gasoline.
The chart shows two essentials that have far outstripped gasoline - electricity and bread.
The chart also shows that the overall Consumer Price Index--which measures prices of all goods and services purchased by consumers--has more than doubled during the past 20 years.
Even with a 2 cent per gallon increase during 2004 - 2009, the price of gasoline will remain one of the great bargains of the American economy.
[image028.gif]
prospects for a motor fuels user fee increase
The Bush administration has gone on record as opposing tax increases, but it has frequently supported increases in user fees.
In the FY 2002 Budget of the U.S. Government, the administration proposed $2.3 billion of new user fees to offset discretionary spending and $4.9 billion of new user fees to pay for mandatory spending, for a total of $7.2 billion of new user fees.
U.S. Department of Transportation programs would benefit from $650 million of these fees.
In the FY 2003 budget, the administration proposed $8.8 billion of user fees to pay for discretionary spending and $1.6 billion to pay for mandatory spending, for a total of $10.4 billion of new user fees.
Programs administered by the U.S. Department of Transportation would utilize $2.1 billion of these proposed fees.
In 1982, when Transportation Secretary Drew Lewis and Office of Management and Budget Director David Stockman were presenting the pros and cons of raising the federal motor fuels tax of a nickel to finance expanded highway and mass transit investment, President Reagan ended the debate and decided in favor of the increase with the comment: "It's not a tax, it's a user fee."
President Reagan clearly saw the difference between a tax and a user fee, and approved a user fee increase when it was required to increase federal investment in highways and mass transit.
The last time the federal motor fuels user fee was increased solely for transportation investment purposes was 20 years ago, in 1982.
It has been almost 10 years since federal highway user fees were set at their current level.
With growing congestion threatening the American economy, the current administration and Congress should also be able to distinguish between a tax and a user fee.
The politics of a highway user fee increase
Some political speculators have suggested that an increase in the federal gasoline tax to meet the nation's staggering highway and mass transit capital investment needs as part of TEA-21 reauthorization in 2003 is "politically undoable."
Their theory is that those who would advocate or support such an increase would do so at great political risk.
They also cite their own partisan perceptions.
A survey of state legislative actions on the motor fuel excise over the past six years (1997-2002) conducted by the American Road 
Since 1997, 10 state legislatures--Arkansas, Kansas, Maine (2), Michigan, North Dakota, Pennsylvania, South Dakota (2), Utah, Vermont and Wyoming--voted to raise their state gas tax for transportation investment purposes a total 12 times.
The increases ranged from 2.6 cents per gallon (Maine) to 5 cents per gallon (Utah).
The average of all of the state highway use fee hikes was 3.7 cents per gallon.
Connecticut lowered their gas tax by 7 cents from 32 to 25 cents a gallon, effective July 1, 2000.
The Maine legislature not only raised and indexed their annual motor fuels excise to the annual Consumer Price Index (CPI), it also increased the state's car registration fee to raise additional revenue for transportation investment.
One state's increase was phased in over 3 years (Utah) and one was put in place for only 17 months, then increase again two years later (South Dakota).
Successful state gas tax increase votes occurred in 8 states with Republican governors, one with a Democratic governor, and one with an Independent governor.
While most of the votes to enact highway user fee increases were solidly bipartisan, success of such measures in Republican-controlled states is noteworthy.
In 6 of the states that approved highway user fee hikes--Kansas, North Dakota, Pennsylvania, South Dakota, Utah and Wyoming--Republicans controlled not only the governor's seat, but also both houses of the state legislature.
Although there were several close votes in several state legislatures on this issue, on average, a state motor fuel excise increase was approved by a 71 percent voting majority.
It should also be noted that over the time frame studied, the motor fuels excise also increased annually in five states--Florida, Nebraska, New York, North Carolina and Wisconsin--without legislative action.
These states have enacted laws that automatically index the excise to some measure of annual inflation to help maintain the design and construction purchasing power of their state highway user fee.
Thus, in total, between legislative actions and indexing, the motor fuels excise was increased in 15 states over the past six years.
Summary
The following are the major elements of the ARTBA proposal:
* Congress would set guaranteed funding levels in reauthorization legislation for federal highway investment growing from $35 billion in FY 2004 to $60 billion in FY 2009.
These amounts are based on the investment required to maintain existing structure, safety and traffic congestion conditions on the nation's highways and bridges.
Guaranteed funding levels would also be set for federal investment in mass transit.
* Reauthorization legislation would require that revenues into the Highway Account each year be sufficient to cover projected outlays resulting from the guaranteed highway funding.
The same requirement would apply to revenues into the Mass Transit Account.
* Based on current revenue and outlay estimates, the legislation would include an annual 2 cent per gallon increase in the federal motor fuels tax rates from FY 2004 to FY 2009.
Newer revenue estimates or use of other funding options may reduce this figure.
* If revenues into either the Highway or Mass Transit Account during any fiscal year were to fall short of (or exceed) outlays from that account, the following year the statutory motor fuels tax level would be automatically increased (or decreased) by the amount required to offset the deficit (or surplus).
* Under ARTBA's proposal for a $60 billion federal highway program, each state in FY 2009 would receive more than double the amount in FY 2003.
Seventeen states would receive more than $1 billion of federal highway funds by FY 2009 compared to only five states in FY 2003.
Mr. Chairman, again I thank you for the opportunity to testify on future funding for the federal highway and mass transit programs.
I ask that the appendices accompanying my testimony be included in the hearing record.
These appendices contain ARTBA's recommendations on the ethanol subsidy, long-term financing and truck lane proposals.
I would now be happy to answer any questions.
Appendix 1
Revised Revenue Options for TEA-21 Reauthorization
In March 2001, the American Road and Transportation Builders Association published a number of revenue options for TEA-21 reauthorization in its report "A Blueprint for Year 2003 Reauthorization of the Federal Surface Transportation Programs."
Since that time, the U.S. economy, the financial condition of the Highway Trust Fund and other factors have changed.
These changes have altered the outlook for many of the potential revenue sources contained in the original ARTBA report.
The table below provides the latest data on options for financing the federal highway program after TEA-21, followed by a brief discussion of assumptions.
Just as economic conditions have changed, so too have the investment requirements for just maintaining the current physical structure, safety and travel/congestion conditions on the nation's highways and bridges.
ARTBA's 2001 recommendation for a minimum $50 billion federal highway program was based on data from the U.S. Department of Transportation's 1999 Conditions and Performance Report for the Nation's Highways, Bridges and Transit.
The U.S. DOT is scheduled to release a new Conditions and Performance report with updated investment recommendations during the summer of 2002.
The American Association of State Highway and Transportation Officials is scheduled to release its "Bottom Line" report, based on the same data, on Labor Day.
Both reports are expected to show that the federal share of investment required just to maintain current structural, safety and congestion conditions on the nation's highways and bridges will, in fact, be $55 - $60 billion per year.
[image030.gif]
Notes and assumptions:
* Projected Highway Account receipts--Source is the Congressional Budget Office February 2003 baseline projections for the Highway Account of the Highway Trust Fund.
These amounts represent the likely "status quo" revenues available for reauthorization of TEA-21 with no new revenue enhancements.
* Spend down Highway Account balance--Based on the February 2002 CBO baseline and assumption of a $28.9 billion federal highway program for FY 2003, the Highway Account balance will be about $13.2 billion at the end of FY 2003.
Normal growth of the balance averages about $1 billion per year due to the delayed spendout of federal highway obligations, yielding a projected balance of just over $19 billion by the end of FY 2009.
The FHWA recommends a minimum balance of about $7 to $8 billion for cash-flow purposes, yielding $12 billion that could be used for highway financing during the 6-year reauthorization period or an average of $2 billion per year.
* Index motor fuels taxes for inflation--Assumes an inflation rate of 2.4 percent per year, taken from the forecast for the Consumer Price Index in the Budget of the U.S. Government for FY 2003.
Indexing is assumed to apply only to the motor fuels taxes, not to the truck retail tax, the heavy tire tax or the truck use tax.
* Transfer 2.5c/gallon ethanol tax from General Fund--Based on projections of gasohol receipts prepared by the U.S. Treasury in January 2002 for the FY 2003 budget.
Assumes continued oxygenation requirement and phase-out of MTBE.
* Capture 5.1c/gallon ethanol subsidy--Based on projections of gasohol receipts prepared by the U.S. Treasury in January 2002 for the FY 2003 budget.
Assumes continued oxygenation requirement and phase-out of MTBE.
The subsidy is 5.1 cents per gallon for FY 2004 and beyond.
* Credit interest on the HA balance--Assumes $13.2 billion balance in the Highway Account at the end of FY 2003 and that the balance will be spent down as described above to $7 billion by the end of FY 2009.
Assumes interest rate of 6.0 percent applied to the average balance during the fiscal year.
* Eliminate fuel tax evasion--Would be a bonus, but amount cannot be projected because the revenue outcome cannot be legislated.
The amount of revenue currently lost to fuel tax evasion is unknown, but is estimated to be in the range of $1 - $2 billion per year.
Potential recovery would depend on funding for fuel tax evasion prevention activities in TEA-21 reauthorization legislation.
* Innovative financing, public-private ventures--Also a bonus, but cannot be projected.
Would depend on relevant provisions in TEA-21 reauthorization.
* Potential Highway Account revenues from each cent per gallon motor fuels excise increase--Based on projections of gasoline, gasohol and diesel fuel tax receipts prepared by the U.S. Treasury in January 2002 for the FY 2003 budget.
Assumes 80 percent of revenues from each cent increase in motor fuels taxes will be deposited in the Highway Account and 20 percent in the Mass Transit Account.
Appendix 2
Impact of the tax treatment of ethanol on the Highway Trust Fund
In line with our support for the user-fee concept of financing surface transportation improvements, we also believe all energy sources utilized to power motor vehicles that use the nation's highway and bridge system should be taxed to pay for system improvements through the federal Highway Trust Fund.
The current investment needs of our highway system dictates that the excise on such motor vehicle powering sources should be at least equivalent to that currently levied on gasoline.
These views are shared by virtually all state and national organizations representing highway transportation and construction concerns.
The Tax Nexus Between Federal Transportation, Energy, and Environmental Policies.
There exists a unique nexus between federal transportation, energy and environmental policies.
Policy in all three areas has a common thread--the use of federal tax law involving motor fuels to advance national objectives.
Unfortunately, these tax policies are often debated and decided separately and thus in a vacuum--during a transportation bill... an energy bill... or an environmental bill.
As a result, positive impacts for one policy area sometimes contradict--or even undermine--goals and objectives in another policy area.
The federal government first levied a highway user fee on the sale of motor fuels in 1956, when it established the federal Highway Trust Fund.
The original congressional intent in establishing the user fee--an excise on gasoline and diesel fuel--is clear: to ensure that America would have a "pay-as-you-go" system for funding needed highway and bridge improvements.
The principle was--and remains today--that the more you drive, or use the roads, the more you pay to build and maintain them.
This user fee principle was reaffirmed by the Congress in 1998 with the enactment of the Transportation Equity Act for the 21^st Century, or TEA-21.
Unfortunately, current public investment in road, bridge and mass transit improvements financed by highway user fees levied at all levels of government is not sufficient to maintain the physical conditions of the system, much less improve its overall performance for the American public and business community.
Promoting Alternative Fuels and the Highway Trust Fund.
Clearly the intent of Congress in enacting TEA-21 was to make surface transportation investment a federal priority.
But you should be aware as the Congress discusses and debates a new federal energy policy in the weeks ahead that some current federal energy and tax policies work against the goals of TEA-21!
For example, the purpose of the Energy Policy Act of 1992 (EPAct) was to accelerate the use of alternative motor fuels in the transportation sector--certainly a laudable goal from energy independence and perhaps even environmental standpoints.
EPAct's stated goal is to replace 30 percent of petroleum-based motor fuels by the year 2010.
EPAct defines as an alternative motor fuel the following: methanol and denatured ethanol as alcohol fuels (alcohol mixtures that contain no less than 70 percent of the alcohol fuel), natural gas (compressed or liquefied), liquefied petroleum gas, hydrogen, coal-derived liquid fuels, fuels derived from biological materials and electricity (including solar energy).
Under the law, the U.S. Department of Energy can expand this list when new fuels are developed.
What impact would reaching such a laudable goal have on federal funding for highway and mass transit improvements? If the motor fuel sources are not taxed equivalently to gasoline, the impact would be devastating to highway and mass transit programs in all states!
Consider the impact of the current federal tax treatment of ethanol-gasoline motor fuel blend sales.
And I must make clear ARTBA has no brief against the promotion and use of ethanol as a motor fuel beyond the way it impacts the Highway Trust Fund.
Current Federal Tax Treatment of Alternative Fuels.
A motorist purchasing gasoline contributes 18.3 cents per gallon to the Highway Trust Fund through the federal user fee--15.44 cents per gallon to the trust fund's Highway Account and 2.86 cents per gallon to the fund's Mass Transit Account.
(An additional 0.1 cents per gallon is contributed to the Leaking Underground Storage Tank Trust Fund.)
Under current federal law, a motorist purchasing gasohol (with 10 percent ethanol), however, pays a 13.1-cents per gallon excise, or 5.3 cents per gallon less than those who purchase straight gasoline.
A slightly higher excise is applied to gasohol sales with less ethanol.
Of the 13.1 cents per gallon federal excise paid on a gallon of 10 percent gasohol, a user fee of 10.5 cents per gallon goes into the Highway Trust Fund--7.64 cents per gallon to the trust fund's Highway Account and 2.86 cents per gallon to the fund's Mass Transit Account.
Two-and-a-half cents is deposited in the federal General Fund for deficit reduction purposes.
(There is also a 0.1 cents per gallon contribution to the Leaking Underground Storage Tank Trust Fund.)
The combination of the 5.3 cent per gallon tax incentive for 10 percent gasohol and the 2.5 cent per gallon contribution to the general fund reduces deposits in the Highway Trust Fund Highway Account by 7.8 cents per gallon sold.
(It is also worth pointing out that the Mass Transit Account of the Highway Trust Fund receives the same contribution from either the purchase of gasoline or gasohol.
This means the cost of federal policies to promote the use of ethanol fuels comes exclusively at the expense of the Highway Account.)
As a result of TEA-21's provisions that directly link incoming Highway Account revenues to annual federal highway and bridge investment, the ethanol tax incentive has a direct consequence of making less revenue available for investment in needed highway and bridge improvements.
Impact of Alternative Fuel Incentives on Federal Highway Investment.
The most current example of the impact of alternative fuel tax incentives on federal highway investment is the case of ethanol-based motor fuels.
The computations below, based on 2000 ethanol use data reported in the Federal Highway Administration's "2000 Highway Statistics Report," show current federal tax policy on ethanol motor fuel sales results in approximately $1.2 billion per year of foregone Highway Trust Fund Highway Account revenues.
Of the $1.1 billion, roughly $800 million per year is attributable to the 5.3 cents (10 percent ethanol) and 4.1 cents per gallon (less than 10 percent ethanol) tax incentive for gasohol and approximately $400 million is due to the 2.5 cents per gallon of the gasohol excise that is deposited in the federal general fund.
Table 1
10 percent gasohol usage (gallons)
10,383,611,000
5.3 cents per gallon tax incentive
$550,331,383.00
2.5 cents per gallon to General Fund
$259,590,275.00
Lost Highway Account Revenues
$809,921,658.00
Less than 10 percent gasohol usage*
5,950,848,000
4.081 cents per gallon tax incentive
$242,854,106.90
2.5 cents per gallon to General Fund
$148,771,200.00
Lost Highway Account Revenues
$391,625,306.90
Total Lost Highway Account Revenues
$1,201,546,965.90
*According to the U.S. DOT, less than 10 percent gasohol is generally a 7.7 percent blend
Federal tax treatment of ethanol-based motor fuels impacts individual states differently.
TEA-21's highway funding distribution formula requires the apportionment of Interstate Maintenance, Surface Transportation Program and Minimum Guarantee funds to be based, in large part, on a state's contribution to the federal Highway Trust Fund's Highway Account.
States that sell ethanol-based motor fuels are, therefore, at a relative disadvantage to states that don't.
Recent Developments.
There are a wide variety of legislative proposals pending in Congress that would further promote the use of ethanol.
Some of these measures would phase out or ban methyl tertiary butyl ether (MTBE).
The efforts underway in several states to phase out MTBE that could result in increased ethanol fuel use.
In fact the U.S. Treasury Department projects that market demand for ethanol fuel use will increase from 1.7 billion gallons in 2001 to 2.9 billion gallons in 2012.
This means, without any federal action the foregone Highway Trust Fund revenue due to ethanol fuel use will grow to $2.2 billion in the next 10 years.
As the committee is well aware, the House and Senate are currently conferencing national energy policy legislation.
The Senate measure (S. 517) includes a provision that would functionally a mandate a tripling of the amount of ethanol used in the U.S. by 2012.
If this measure is enacted, the ethanol-induced foregone Highway Trust Fund revenues will grow to almost $4 billion by 2012 and average almost $2.7 billion per year.
Recommendations.
The nation is at a critical juncture.
It is clear America needs to reduce its dependence on foreign energy sources that power our U.S. transportation fleet.
It is clear that meeting federal air and water quality standards without compromising American mobility and the economy will require even cleaner transportation vehicles and motor fuels.
It is also clear that America has a growing transportation infrastructure capacity crisis--not just in the road network, but also in our airport, water port, rail and mass transit systems.
If we do not meet our transportation network challenges, we will also compromise American mobility, air and water quality goals and the U.S. economy.
The growing dilution of federal highway user fee revenues is exactly the wrong medicine for the nation's growing transportation needs.
The federal tax treatment of ethanol fuels must be changed to ensure the Highway Trust Fund receives the same contribution from sales of ethanol fuels as from pure gasoline.
ARTBA fully supports the use of alternative fuels and renewable energy, but these pursuits should not short change federal funding for much needed transportation improvements.
Appendix 3
Financing the Federal Highway Program in the Long Term
Environmental and homeland security concerns are pushing the U.S. toward higher gas mileage on cars and trucks in the years ahead and ultimately replacing petroleum-based fuels with hydrogen-based fuels or electricity for propelling motor vehicles.
These trends raise the question whether user fees based on motor fuels taxes will be a viable source of funding for federal highway and mass transit investment in the years ahead.
During the next six years, the current tax base should be adequate.
Only about 7 percent of registered vehicles each year are new, which means it takes 14 years for the entire vehicle fleet to turn over.
Current federal legislation and the pace of research on new fuels suggest it will be years before higher mileage or alternative fuel vehicles become a significant part of the nation's motor vehicle fleet.
To address the long-term viability of funding for the federal transportation programs, the reauthorization of TEA-21 should establish a "National Surface Transportation Infrastructure Financing Commission."
The first part of this provision should initiate an objective inventory of all current federal mechanisms to finance highway and transit infrastructure improvements.
Specifically, this review should quantify the revenues raised and foregone by these various mechanisms and the rate of growth over the last ten years of each specific mechanism.
The Commission should consist of a broad cross-section of qualified experts in the fields of transportation construction, transportation management, public finance and technology.
· 8 members should be appointed by the Secretary of Transportation, in consultation with the Secretary of the Treasury.
· Two members appointed by the Speaker of the House of Representatives.
· Two members appointed by the minority leader of the House of Representatives.
· Two members appointed by the majority leader of the Senate.
· Two members appointed by the minority leader of the Senate.
Using the data from the independent study, the Commission should: assess the current federal system to finance surface transportation infrastructure projects; determine whether the nation's highway and transit infrastructure needs are being met; identify trends in public vehicular choice, fuel use or travel alternatives that dilute, or could potentially dilute, federal transportation infrastructure investments; and make recommendations for specific policy changes to rectify identified shortcomings.
The Commission should hold public hearings to collect input from a variety of stakeholder groups deemed relevant to the Commission's deliberations.
The Commission's final report should be presented to the House Transportation and Infrastructure and Ways and Means Committees, the Senate Environment and Public Works and Finance Committees, and the U.S. Departments of Treasury and Transportation no later than 18 months after receiving the independent review the federal surface transportation infrastructure financing mechanisms.
This proposal has been introduced by Senator Max Baucus as part of S. 2678 in the Senate.
Appendix 4
Use of Interstate Highway Median, Air and Tunnel Right-of-Way for Development of Self-Financed "Truck Only" Lanes and High-Speed/Freight Rail
The dramatic growth in commercial motor vehicle traffic that has accompanied the growing U.S. economy over the last two decades has resulted in a wide variety of benefits.
At the same time, however, increased truck activity, combined with increased passenger vehicle use, has lead to even greater strain on the nation's highway and bridge network.
· In 2000, large trucks accounted for 12.8 percent of traffic on all interstate highways, or one out of every eight vehicles.
On other roads, large trucks account for 5.8 percent of traffic, or one out of every seventeen vehicles.
· Between 1981 and 2000, total miles of interstate highways grew 9.9 percent, while large truck traffic grew 110.8 percent--eleven times faster than highway capacity.
· Large trucks accounted for 7.5 percent of all vehicle miles traveled on U.S. roads in 2000, but were involved in 12.5 percent of highway fatalities.
Crashes involving large trucks were more than twice as likely to result in a fatality than other crashes.
· According to the American Trucking Associations, the total volume of freight shipments will increase from 11.1 billion tons in 1997 to 14.4 billion tons in 2008, with the trucking industry accounting for 64.3 percent of the total.
Total revenue from freight shipments will grow from $504 billion in 1997 to $625 billion by 2008, with 87 percent of the revenues going to the trucking industry.
To address these problems and challenges, the federal government should encourage state and local governments to construct and maintain new, self-financed "truck only" lanes where it can be demonstrated that such facilities would benefit:
· public health and safety;
· the national and regional economies; and
· homeland security.
To foster the development of self-financed "truck only" lanes, the TEA-21 reauthorization should:
1.
Encourage and allow the use of Interstate Highway System median, air and tunnel right-of-ways for construction of "truck only" lanes.
2.
Change federal law to allow the imposition of tolls on the Interstate Highway System to fully cover the cost of right-of-way acquisition, design, construction and maintenance of "truck only" lanes.
3.
Capitalize on public-private partnerships by allowing "truck only" lane projects to qualify for federal tax-exempt bond status--as is currently the case for all non-highway transportation infrastructure projects--and other innovative financing techniques.
4.
"Truck only" projects should have to meet a minimum 50-year design life under heavy truck traffic.
5. Make "truck only" lane projects eligible for federal highway funds through both the National Trade Corridor and Border Infrastructure Development Program and the Congestion Mitigation and Air Quality (CMAQ) Program.
"Truck only" lane projects should only be eligible for CMAQ funds when it can be demonstrated that the project will not cause a region to exceed its transportation emissions budget under the federal Clean Air Act.
"Truck only" lanes should also be eligible to receive other federal highway formula resources as seed money for these projects.
_______________________
[1] David Schrank and Tim Lomax, The 2002 Urban Mobility Report, Texas Transportation Institute, June 2002.
[2] U.S.
General Accounting Office, Highway Infrastructure: Interstate Physical Conditions Have Improved, but Congestion and Other Pressures Continue (GAO-02-571), May 2002.
