#Feedback form alternate home page of Representative Vernon J. Ehlers
Image of Vernon J. Ehlers Image of Vernon J. Ehlers Header image, Congressman Vernon J. Ehlers Illustrated Image of Michigan's Third District Serving Barry, Ionia and Kent Counties Michigan's Third District
Publication From Roll Call February 17, 1998
FOR MORE INFORMATION, Contact Jon Brandt, Press Secretary (202) 225-3831
[Home][Press Center]
Nearly a year ago, the announcement of a cloned sheep ignited an international discussion that continues today.
Since the advent of Dolly, we have been faced with the imminent prospect of the cloning of human beings.
This has raised fundamental moral, ethical, and religious questions about what it means to be human and what restrictions, if any, should be placed on scientific research.
Since that time, ethicists, theologians, scientists, physicians, legislators, and concerned citizens have contributed to the debate in many forums.
After a ninety-day study period, the President's National Bioethics Advisory Commission emphatically stated that "any attempt to clone human beings via somatic cell nuclear transfer techniques is uncertain in its prospects, is unacceptably dangerous to the fetus and, therefore, morally unacceptable."
Last summer, the House Science Committee held hearings on cloning and approved my bill that was in the jurisdiction of the committee.
And, most recently, Senators have engaged in lively floor debate, while House members have continued their thoughtful discussion of the subject in a Commerce Committee hearing, with the intent of striking the delicate balance between scientific research and moral concerns.
As a scientist, I understand the vital role that science plays in enhancing the welfare of individuals and society, and I am extremely reluctant to place any limits on scientific research.
However, while the possibilities of scientific experimentation may seem limitless, there are times when society - through the governmental process - can and should place limits on scientific experimentation.
Such is the case with the cloning of humans.
When a human being is created through cloning, I believe we have crossed the line from experimentation and legitimate scientific work to an activity with profound moral repercussions.
Let us look first at several scientific reasons for banning human cloning.
The dangers associated with the cloning of human beings are numerous.
It is relatively easier to clone sheep or goats than humans, and yet it took 277 tries to produce one cloned sheep; the unsuccessful attempts were merely discarded.
Since then, this method has by no means been perfected and if tried with humans, the difficulty of the procedure would produce even more failed attempts.
We place too high a value on human life to allow humans to be callously discarded during such a process.
Also, cloning threatens the biodiversity of humanity.
Cloning reduces the variety produced through the combination of a mother's and father's genes and, if practiced widely, could cause harm to the strength and survival of our species.
Next, there are social and psychological reasons for banning human cloning.
All of us have had the privilege of receiving a unique combination of genes from our parents.
We revel in the knowledge that we have our own genetic identity.
However, a child cloned from an adult would be denied this experience.
Instead, the child would live in the shadow and expectations of his predecessor.
I am also concerned about the impact on the family structure.
Cloning threatens the very integrity of the family unit and could jeopardize the parent-child relationship.
Finally, there are moral and ethical reasons for banning human cloning.
We esteem humans as a treasured life form and are bound to protect the dignity of human life.
I believe it is wrong to use cloning to experiment with the creation of human life.
However, I believe it is essential that other avenues of genetic research and non-human cloning research continue.
Scientists are making great strides in understanding the underlying causes of diseases, developing potential cures, and pursuing other promising avenues of research.
Contrary to the doomsday rhetoric being disseminated by some industry groups, my bills do not ban such research, only the use of somatic cell nuclear transfer technology to create an embryo and thence a human being.
This other research should and must continue.
There are avenues for this research that do not involve the creation of a human embryo.
Some of these possibilities were included in the National Bioethics Advisory Commission (NBAC) report.
To quote from chapter two of the NBAC report:
Because of ethical and moral concerns raised by the use of embryos for research purposes, it would be far more desirable to explore the direct use of human cells of adult origin to produce specialized cells or tissues for transplantation into patients.
It may not be necessary to reprogram terminally differentiated cells but rather to stimulate proliferation and differentiation of the quiescent stem cells which are known to exist in many adult tissues, including even the nervous system....Another strategy for cell-based therapies would be to identify methods by which somatic cells could be "de-differentiated" and then "re-differentiated" along a particular path.
This would eliminate the need to use cells obtained from embryos.
Such an approach would permit the growth of specialized cells compatible with a specific individual person for transplantation.
Furthermore, I expect that research using pluripotent cells will one day enable us to regenerate cells and tissues.
Last year I introduced two bills to ban human cloning, H.R. 922 and H.R. 923.
H.R. 922 (the "Human Cloning Research Prohibition Act") was approved by the Science Committee last July.
This bill prohibits federal funds from being used for research that includes the use of human somatic cell nuclear transfer technology to produce an embryo; in other words, it bans federal funding of human cloning research.
It also calls for a review of cloning technologies within five years to discuss the impact that this legislation has had on research and to provide an opportunity for recommendations for appropriate changes.
In crafting this legislation, it was extremely important to keep it flexible for future scientific developments and yet still address the crucial moral issues.
My legislation precisely defines and bans only one type of cloning, human somatic cell nuclear transfer, which leads to the production of an identical genetic copy.
It does not ban other types of cloning, such as recombinant DNA technology, also called gene splicing.
It does not ban cell cloning - what scientists refer to as cell-line expansion.
It does not ban research into the cloning of human tissues or organs and does not ban the cloning of plants or other animals besides humans.
I believe that genetic science, including cloning technology, will continue to play a key role in the discovery of cures and treatments for diseases and the improvement of our quality and quantity of agricultural products.
For this reason, the legislation specifically protects the use of cloning technologies to clone animals, tissues, molecules, DNA, and cells other than human embryo cells.
Already the United States lags behind many other nations that have previously instituted bans on human cloning.
Nineteen European nations have signed an agreement to prohibit the genetic replication of human beings.
Now House and Senate members must work together to ban human cloning while allowing beneficial research to continue.
It is the duty of Congress and the President to act promptly to protect the sanctity of human life.
CONGRESSMAN VERNON J. EHLERS · MICHIGAN'S THIRD DISTRICT
