Skip common site navigation and headers United States Environmental Protection Agency Voluntary Diesel Retrofit Program Recent Additions | Contact Us | Print Version Search: __________ Run Search Begin Hierarchical Links EPA Home 
The "Big Dig" construction project area has a very large concentration of heavy-duty diesel equipment.
Under the Clean Air Construction Initiative, the diesel heavy-duty construction equipment is retrofitted with advanced pollution control devices to reduce PM (particulate matter), HC (hydrocarbons), and CO (carbon monoxide) emissions.
The project utilizes new control technology making the health of the community a priority.
Contacts: The Massachusetts Turnpike Authority has construction and environmental information at: www.bigdig.com Exit EPA disclaimer The Northeast States for Coordinated Air Use Management (NESCAUM) is an interstate association of air quality control divisions in the Northeast states.
Information on their Heavy-Duty Engine Workgroup can be found at: NESCAUM Heavy-Duty Engine Workgroup Exit EPA disclaimer EPA Region 1 representative Pete Hagerty can be contacted via electronic mail at: hagerty.peter@epa.gov
Listing of EPA Department/ Manufacturers/Partners/Research Labs involved: EPA Region 1, Massachusetts Turnpike Authority, Massachusetts Department of Environmental Protection, the Central Artery/Tunnel Project, Massachusetts Executive Office of Environmental Affairs, Manufacturers of Emission Control Association, and NESCAUM (all sponsors in the Clean Air Construction Initiative).
Emission Benefit Estimates: This effort is to achieve air emissions reductions that are equivalent to removing 1,300 diesel buses off Boston streets for a full-year.
The project will reduce emissions by 33 tons per year.
Oxidation catalyst will reduce 3 tons of PM, 25 tons of CO and 5 tons of HC per year.
Over 203 tons of pollution will be reduced over a six year period of central artery/tunnel construction.
Types of vehicles targeted: This initiative targets 50 -70 various pieces of equipment for retrofit devices including front-end loaders, bulldozers, backhoes, cranes, air compressors and excavators.
Type of retrofit technology used: The vehicles are retrofitted with oxidation catalysts, particulate filters or both.
These reduce or filter out PM, HC, and CO diesel emissions.
How was the retrofit project funded? Massachusetts Highway Department provides funding to contractors to purchase the emission control devices.
Why was the project done? (SIP credit, environmental justice, etc.)
To deal with the health consequences of PM, NOx, and CO emissions To deal with public "perception" of construction equipment operating in the area To address public concerns in regards to emissions from diesel vehicles and equipment To gather information on the operation, maintenance and longevity of diesel vehicles/equipment
Conclusions drawn from project: Still in progress.
Key Topics: Your Fleet Fleet Assessment Funding Sources Tampering Concerns Example Programs Case Studies: New York City The Big Dig
[ Diesel Retrofit: Glossary | Site Map ]
Begin Site Footer
About Office of Transportation and Air Quality | Definitions | What are Mobile Sources? | Related Internet Resources | Free Viewers and Readers
Begin Site Footer
EPA Home | Privacy and Security Notice | Contact Us
