[npshd.gif] MARINE RESOURCES MANAGEMENT TABLE OF CONTENTS DEFINITIONS POLICY AND PROGRAM OBJECTIVES AUTHORITIES RELATIONSHIP TO OTHER GUIDANCE PROGRAM GUIDANCE * Management Issues * Monitoring REFERENCES MARINE RESOURCES MANAGEMENT Marine resources represent a significant component of the NPS resources management responsibility.
Over 25 parks manage some marine resources.
These resources are significant to global ecology and economy as a source of atmospheric water and oxygen, food, minerals, transportation, and recreation.
Yet, comparatively little is known about marine biota and ecology, physical and chemical processes, and topography.
Coastlines are under increasing development pressure, but systems for baseline monitoring and evaluation of cumulative impacts on marine resources are still relatively undeveloped.
This section discusses management of the portion of these resources under the NPS care.
DEFINITIONS
Benthic Of, relating to, or occurring in the depths of the ocean, or the bottom underlying these depths.
Coral reef A reef consisting primarily of hard corals scattered over a hard bottom.
True coral reefs are formed when several species of coral and red algae secrete layers of limestone to create a consolidated framework.
Intertidal zone The shoreline lying between the lowest low and highest high tides.
The area of the intertidal zone can vary greatly in size, slope, and time exposed depending on the local conditions.
Kelp forest An area of hard bottom substrate dominated by large brown algae known as kelp.
On the Pacific coast the giant kelp, Macrocystis, is often the dominant species and is the best known.
On the Atlantic coast, species of Laminaria are the most important in some areas.
Pelagic Of, relating to, or living in the open sea, especially those portions beyond the outer border of the littoral zone (along the shore) which are above the abyssal (deep) zone and to which light penetrates.
Sea grass Any of several species of salt or brackish water plants that flower and produce seed underwater.
They create dense mats or "meadows" that bind the substratum and prevent it from being washed away or shifted about by the currents.
There are five dominant species: Cuban shoal grass (Halodule wrightii), manatee grass (Syringodium filiforme), turtle grass (Thalassia testudinum), eelgrass (Zostera), and widgeongrass (Ruppia maritima).
POLICY AND PROGRAM OBJECTIVES
The NPS Management Policies calls for management of natural systems based on park management zones.
While there is no mention of a specific marine resources management policy, surface freshwater, groundwater, floodplains, wetlands, shoreline processes, and biological resources are all discussed.
Policy guidance for marine resources is derived from the general discussion of natural resource management: The National Park Service will manage the natural resources of the national park system to maintain, rehabilitate, and perpetuate their inherent integrity.
(4:1)
Objectives for marine resources management are the following.
1.Inventory all ecosystem components.
2.Maintain and restore all components and processes of naturally evolving park marine ecosystems, recognizing that change caused by extreme natural events (e.g., storms, red tide, el Nino) is an integral part of functioning natural systems.
3.Maintain natural genetic diversity of marine ecosystems.
4.Maintain or improve water quality affecting marine ecosystems.
5.Maintain or improve air quality affecting marine ecosystems.
6.Maintain natural marine viewsheds.
7.Protect and restore threatened and endangered species and their critical habitat.
8.Regulate and mitigate human activities to minimize adverse impacts.
9.Determine limits of natural system variation (baseline conditions).
10.Monitor system dynamics to detect abnormal changes in time to affect remedial actions.
11.Educate visitors about the importance and fragility of marine resources, threats to them, and mitigation to lessen impact.
AUTHORITIES
See the discussion of general authorities in Chapter 1.
Other statutory laws that apply more specifically to marine resources management include: the Marine Mammal Protection Act; the Marine Protection, Research and Sanctuaries Act; the Migratory Marine Game-Fish Act; the Outer Continental Shelf Lands Act; and the Coastal Zone Management Act.
The International Convention for the Prevention of Pollution from Ships (MARPOL 73/78 (Annex V) 1987, PL 100-220) is a treaty related to marine resources management.
Other pertinent laws and executive orders include the Clean Air Act; the Federal Water Pollution Control Act (Clean Water Act); the Endangered Species Act; the Fish and Wildlife Coordination Act; the Wilderness Act; the Archaeological and Historic Preservation Act; the Rivers and Harbors Appropriation Act; the Resource Conservation and Recovery Act (RCRA); the Comprehensive Environmental Response, Compensation, and Liability Act (CERCLA or Superfund); Executive Order 11514, Protection and Enhancement of Environmental Quality, as amended; and Executive Order 12088, Federal Compliance with Pollution Control Standards.
RELATIONSHIP TO OTHER GUIDANCE
Existing guidelines that contain material pertinent to the management of marine resources include NPS-2, the Planning Process guideline (management zoning); NPS-12, the Environmental Compliance guideline (impact assessment and mitigation); NPS-28, the Cultural Resources Management guideline; NPS-48, the Concession Management guideline; NPS-53, the Special Park Uses guideline (permitting for scientific activities); and NPS-75, the (draft) Inventory and Monitoring guideline.
In this Guideline, see Chapter 2, Native Animal Management, Freshwater Resources Management, Geologic Resources Management, Paleontological Resources Management, Air Resources Management, Protection of Aesthetic Values, Endangered, Threatened and Rare Species Management, and Hazardous Waste Management; Chapter 3, Fishing, Minerals Management, Rights-of-Way and Easements; Chapter 4, Resource Management Plan, Special Park Designations, and Environmental Compliance.
PROGRAM GUIDANCE
I. Management Issues
Several factors which adversely affect marine resources are beyond human control.
Storm swells and waves overturn and fracture coral colonies and tear loose kelp.
Heavy rainfall carries soil from the land into adjacent waters, resulting in high levels of suspended particles which reduce sunlight reaching photosynthetic organisms and may add toxins to the water column.
Exceptionally low or high water temperatures can kill organisms.
Disease, such as "white band" and "black band" on coral, kill entire portions of an ecosystem.
Damage from human activities can often overlay or add to destruction from natural causes.
This discussion will focus on the identification of issues and threats which can be eliminated, modified, minimized, or mitigated.
Endemic species are not as frequent in the ocean as on land.
Consequently, management of marine resources primarily focuses on management of the entire ecosystem and not single species.
A. Water Pollution
Various forms of water pollution affect individual organisms.
Oil, dissolved toxins and heavy metals, and suspended particulates are widespread problems affecting even the most remote areas.
Non-lethal levels of toxins can build up in tissues of organisms, affecting fecundity and disease resistance and reducing value to recreational and commercial uses.
Fuel discharged from bilges and release of human wastes from boats add to the "unnatural" elements that organisms have to adapt to.
Municipal sewage and storm drain outfalls pose a variety of threats, including increased silt loads, nutrient enrichment, and freshwater influx.
The park should inventory to determine baseline conditions and then monitor to identify sources and trends of any water pollution problems.
B. Fisheries
The NPS Management Policies states that: Commercial fishing will be allowed only where specifically authorized by federal law or treaty right.
(8:4)
In some marine fisheries, limits require the release of smaller sized fish while allowing the retention of larger breeders.
Over a period of time, this practice may adversely affect the genetic diversity and/or integrity of fish stocks.
Superintendents must not allow harvest to reduce the reproductive potential of the population or to radically alter its natural (unfished) age structure.
Areas may be zoned to protect nurseries or breeders from overfishing by recreational or commercial fishing.
See further, Chapter 3, Fishing.
Stocking a water body is adding a supply of raised fish.
The rearing of commercial marine species for direct harvest is mariculture and of any water-dependent species, aquaculture.
The stocking of fish into nonpark marine waters is predominantly conducted by state game and fish departments for increasing finfish numbers.
This technique tends to treat the symptom (reduced numbers) and not the cause of the problem, such as overfishing or loss of habitat.
Potential effects of aquaculture on inshore coastal waters include pollution from affluents, physical alteration of the environment, and the introduction of exotic organisms.
In many coastal areas, materials such as tires, cement blocks, railroad cars, and old oil drilling platforms are being placed offshore as fish attractors and to create destination fishing sites for depressed local economies.
These materials alter bottom currents and increase abundance at lower levels of the food chain.
Artificial obstructions such as these tend to concentrate pelagic and larger-sized bottom fish, making them easier to harvest.
They also disrupt natural recruitment of finfish.
Superintendents should be aware that areas in or near the NPS units are often seen as candidates for these types of manipulative activities because of generally good water quality, easy access from shoreline, and protection of facilities from poachers.
Parks need to take appropriate actions to identify, prevent, or mitigate developments of this kind that would affect park resources.
(See further, Chapter 3, Fishing.)
C. Disturbance
Many marine organisms and even ecosystems are well adapted to harsh physical extremes, but are very sensitive to unnatural perturbations and are slow to recover.
Coastal parks are facing increasing visitor usage, primarily in the form of increased boating and fishing.
Disturbance in the NPS coastal units can be caused by construction, dredging, human presence, trampling, or handling.
Construction of jetties and marinas and shoreline stabilization has wide-ranging effects on both the physical and biotic components of the community.
Careless upper watershed development accelerates runoff of sediments into the water.
Dredging to deepen navigation channels or to obtain sand can lead to removal of organisms and deterioration of downstream areas due to accumulation of sediment particles, which smother corals, seagrass, and other sensitive communities or severely decrease light needed for photosynthesis.
Filling areas with dredge spoil or upland sediment to create more "usable" shoreline is also habitat disruption.
All of these activities can affect substrate type, currents, and wave patterns, which changes community structure.
Marine resource areas may be zoned to designate where various strategies for management and use will best fulfill management objectives and maximize resource protection.
Such zonation will prescribe appropriate visitor uses within the zone.
Considerations for the development of use zones may include the significance or sensitivity of the resources within the zone, the ability of those resources to support a particular visitor use, the compatibility of competing visitor uses within a zone, and the purpose of the park.
Designations of such zones should be tied to the park's published 36 CFR regulations, the general management plan, the statement for management, the resource management plan, and other appropriate standard planning and enforcement documents.
Boats anchoring, striking, or running aground cause considerable damage.
Destruction from anchors and anchor chains is an especially severe problem in some NPS coral reef units, as the fastest growing corals grow only a few centimeters a year.
As an anchored boat moves in the wind and currents, its anchor chain can scour out a large area of the bottom, ripping up corals, sponges, algae, and other organisms.
Fish traps are sometimes dumped directly on corals.
Zoning of anchor site locations can considerably minimize damage from anchoring.
Anchor sites should be identified.
In some areas, setting a minimum depth or distance from shore may be effective.
In other areas, sandy locations should be identified as anchor sites rather than coral communities or seagrass beds.
Installation of mooring buoys in popular areas can dramatically minimize anchor damage.
It may be preferable to have installation and maintenance of buoys under a concessions operation.
Dissemination of information on appropriate anchoring sites and methods is important.
Superintendents should consider exclusion of all boats or boats above a certain size from particularly vulnerable areas.
Human presence may disrupt seabird and pinniped rookeries.
The simple act of approaching too close to breeding seabirds or pinnipeds may cause abandonment of the young.
Even temporary abandonment can cause severe thermal stress or allow exposure to predators.
Disturbance of nonbreeding seabirds and pinnipeds can cause stress to resting animals or injury during a pinniped stampede.
Prolonged human presence may cause abandonment of a site, effectively reducing the habitat of that animal.
These areas should be identified and appropriately zoned and managed to minimize disruption and damage.
Recreation enthusiasts and education groups inadvertently cause damage through trampling, rock turning, and collecting.
Different organisms and community types react differently in terms of tolerance and recovery.
In general, sandy beaches tolerate trampling better than rocky shores.
Hard-shelled organisms can withstand trampling better than soft-bodied organisms, but their recovery may take longer.
Rocks left turned over lead to the death of organisms that were underneath.
Snorkelers inadvertently fracture coral branches by standing on them or colliding with them.
Standing or sitting on corals kills coral tissues.
Visitors sometimes collect hard corals, sea fans, or other reef organisms as souvenirs, while divers occasionally take endangered black corals from deeper waters.
Effective interpretation and enforcement programs can help reduce these problems.
D. Marine Debris
Persistent marine debris is a threat everywhere, causing both direct and indirect impacts.
Marine organisms die or are mutilated through entanglement, ingestion, smothering, and crushing.
Marine debris affects the aesthetics and recreational quality of marine and coastal areas.
Persistent marine debris consists predominantly of plastics entering the water from cruise ships, commercial and recreational fishing vessels, pleasure boats, offshore oil and gas platforms and vessels, and transport freighters.
Sea turtles, sea birds, and fish ingest plastic bags and styrofoam particles and die.
Plastic bags wrap around corals and smother the tissues underneath.
Nylon rope and monofilament line wrap around marine animals, amputating limbs.
Efforts are underway to alleviate the extent of the problem: to create plastics that degrade in sunlight, to compact and incinerate trash at ports, and to create "no-disposal" areas along the coastline and in the Gulf of Mexico.
The NPS is also cooperating with the National Marine Fisheries Service to monitor trends in persistent marine debris nationwide.
Individual parks have the responsibility to conduct regular monitoring and to carry out needed mitigation activities.
E. Offshore Mineral Development
The Minerals Management Service (MMS) in the Department of the Interior is the federal agency in charge of leasing offshore minerals (oil, gas, sulphur) and monitoring their exploration and development.
Federal waters include all subsurface minerals from 12 to 200 miles offshore.
A variety of state agencies manage mineral development close to shore on or below state-owned bottoms.
Both state and federally managed offshore mineral development can have devastating impacts on coastal resources from oil spills, marine debris, pipeline crossings, onshore development of support and processing facilities, degradation of air and water quality, and aesthetic intrusion in the park's viewshed.
There are also impacts from lack of turbidity control during drilling, changes in bottom topography, ocean disposal of tailings and spoils and, of recent concern, contaminated waters.
To be effective in protecting park resources, the superintendent should understand the offshore mineral development permitting process.
The park should be involved on regional technical working groups in order to represent the park's resource protection mandate during planning.
Sensitive areas may be identified as nonconsumptive areas for mineral extraction activities.
The NPS should work with MMS, other advisory agencies, and the oil industry to have coastal parks recognized as special zones to be preserved and protected.
The NPS should encourage spill contingency planning on a regional and local level.
Through this forum, research and studies can also be proposed and selected that assist in park management decisions.
See further, Chapter 2, Hazardous Waste Management and Chapter 3, Minerals Management.
F. Adjacent Land Use
The NPS Management Policies states that: natural shoreline processes...will be allowed to continue....except where control measures are required by law.
(4:20)
Adjacent land use practices can have a significant effect on coastal resources and processes of park units.
The entire sediment budget controlling erosion, deposition, and shoreline migration is held offshore in sand bars and onshore in dunes.
The sediment source is from rivers and terrestrial erosion.
Rivers may be dammed and land made bare outside of parks, thereby affecting park resources.
Groins, jetties, rip-rap, and other shoreline armoring or hardening structures modify natural shoreline sediment transport processes.
Dredging increases sediment loading and potentially introduces toxins into the water column.
Dredging and filling both modify and destroy habitat such as coastal wetlands and seagrass beds.
On the other hand, dredge spoil composed of coarse sandy material can be used to nourish eroding shorelines and to create small islands utilized by colonial waterbirds for nesting, thereby mitigating the loss of beaches to development.
Before implementation of dredging or major construction activities in or outside of the park that could affect coastal resources in the park, the potential impact to the complex coastal processes should be carefully identified, and the least damaging approach should be implemented.
The site should then be monitored to assess and document the impact on the resource.
Runoff from agricultural areas may contain herbicides and fertilizer that alter marine ecosystems.
Urban runoff and sewer outfalls contain hydrocarbons, nutrients, debris, and other substances harmful to marine life.
Urban development concentrates and increases human impacts on adjacent park resources.
G. Exotic Species
Park managers should be alert to the potential introduction of exotic marine species into park waters in ship ballast, on ship hulls, by storm activity, from mariculture/aquaculture activities, and through attachment to marine debris.
H. Scientific Specimen Collection
Collecting marine specimens for scientific purposes must be authorized by the park superintendent in accordance with requirements for 36 CFR 2.50.
The mechanism for scientific sample collections is the Specimen Collection permit, covered in 36 CFR 2.5 and NPS-53, the Special Park Uses guideline.
See also, Chapter 5, Collections, in this Guideline.
II.
Monitoring
Management actions should include baseline inventories to know what the community structure is.
These usually utilize both random and permanent quadrats and transects to identify and enumerate all species present.
Since seasonal and tidal changes may be present, one visit is not sufficient.
Baseline inventories and specific research will determine zones or taxa to be monitored.
Since manpower and funding usually restrict study design, indicator species can be selected to provide a picture of the community health.
Long-term monitoring is important to identify both spatial and temporal patterns and to identify the range of natural dynamics.
Park managers need information about population dynamics to make decisions about potential impacts.
Once long-term monitoring is underway, research identifies causes of perturbations and suggests ways to mitigate impacts.
A. Geophysical Processes
Highly dynamic geological features on barrier islands and other shorelines, such as beach profiles, sediment budgets, and offshore bathymetry (the measure of the depth of water in oceans, seas, and lakes), should be monitored.
The rapid changes these features exhibit after storms, or even during daily tidal fluctuations, makes it imperative to establish a multidisciplinary monitoring program that measures both landform loss and changes while observing the effects of such change on the habitats they comprise.
The most critical information needs are the current state or condition of the beach system and rates of change.
Data of this type can be obtained by ground surveys, maps, charts, and aerial photographs (Dolan et al., 1980).
Understanding the interrelationships of geophysical processes and the effects of these processes on habitats and the species that inhabit them is crucial to the proper management of shoreline resources.
A sample monitoring program is outlined in Exhibit 1.
B. Marine Water Quality Management
The Environmental Protection Agency (EPA) and various state agencies have determined water quality standards for a variety of parameters in order to protect human health and aquatic life.
Before establishing a marine water quality monitoring program, a sampling objective(s) with management implications needs to be established.
1.Determine the need for and uses of water quality data.
What changes, plans, or decisions can be made using the data? 2.Identify the potential sources of water quality degradation.
Evaluate adjacent land use practices for potential impacts.
Identify the potential impacts and possible severity.
3.Conduct a literature survey and correspond with other agencies and researchers to obtain and/or evaluate baseline data characterizing historical and existing marine water quality.
This can be added to the park's data or may be the only data the park can base decisions on.
4.Determine where samples need to be taken.
Where possible, link sample sites to locations used by previous monitoring or used by other agencies.
5.Select water quality parameters and sampling frequencies.
Select methods used to sample and analyze parameters selected.
Select statistical analysis procedures and method of handling data.
Establish a quality control program for calibration of sampling equipment to known standards to meet EPA certification.
6.Evaluate and calculate costs and manpower needs for the most effective implementation (in-house, cooperative or interagency agreement, contractor, CPSU).
See also, Chapter 2, Freshwater Resources Management for further guidance and listing of references.
C. Intertidal Zone
The most common intertidal monitoring methods use permanent quadrats and/or transects.
Baseline inventories will determine zones or taxa to be monitored.
Since intertidal communities are often very diverse and spatially "patchy" in distribution, dominant and indicator species may be monitored to provide a picture of the community health.
Routine sampling, sorting, and classifying of invertebrates will be required to understand seasonality.
Specific management problems will determine whether photoquadrats for dominant species or complete species enumeration should be used.
Size frequencies provide useful information on population dynamics.
D. Kelp Forests
Kelp forests require a variety of monitoring methods because of the diversity of taxa living there.
Specific research projects will be required to design a monitoring program for a specific area.
E. Coral Reefs
A suggested outline of coral reef monitoring procedures is presented below.
More detailed information may be obtained from Virgin Islands National Park.
1.
Monitoring Resource Use
a.Record number of visitors, number and size of boats.
b.Identify most popular anchorages and snorkeling sites.
c.Record number of broken branches or prop scars on colonies in shallow, heavily visited reefs; for example, along underwater snorkeling trails.
d.Monitor anchor damage.
In cases of severe damage, use videotape and still photographs for documentation.
Estimate area of damage.
Use quadrats in areas adjacent to anchor scars to estimate number of coral species and amount of living coral that were destroyed.
2.
Monitoring the Coral Reef Environment
Long-term assessment of coral reefs should ideally take place at three levels.
a.Conduct routine gathering of data on basic environmental parameters such as temperature, salinity, and turbidity (water quality).
b.Track benthic reef organisms with a combination of photographic and transect/quadrat methods and documentation of fish populations.
c.Conduct experimental research following detection of change in abundance or spatial arrangement of reef components.
REFERENCES
References that are helpful in describing marine flora, fauna, and habitats include:
Bateman, Graham (ed.).
1984.
All The World's Animals: Sea Mammals.
Torstar Books, New York.
Britton, Joseph C. and Brian Morton.
1989.
Shore Ecology of the Gulf of Mexico.
University of Texas Press, Austin.
Dern, R. G. and R. Dolan.
1990.
Review of Dredging Effects on Adjacent Park Systems.
Draft NPS Report.
Dolan, R., B. P. Hayden, P. May and S. May.
1980.
The reliability of shoreline change measurements from aerial photographs.
Shore and Beach Vol. 48, No. 4.
Kozloff, Eugene N. 1974.
Seashore Life of Puget Sound, the Strait of Georgia, and the San Juan Archipelago.
University of Washington Press, Seattle.
Levine, Joseph S. 1985.
Undersea Life.
Stewart, Tabori 
Thorson, Gunnar.
1971.
Life in the Sea.
World University Library, McGraw-Hill Book Company, New York.
