WOMEN OF COLOR HEALTH DATA BOOK FACTORS AFFECTING THE HEALTH OF WOMEN OF COLOR Asian Americans Although health issues for Asian Americans and Pacific Islander Americans often are analyzed jointly, in this fact book the groups are separated.
Native Pacific Islanders are considered Native Americans and are discussed with American Indians/Alaska Natives.
(See discussion of Pacific Islanders in section on Native Americans.)
Asian populations are discussed together.
This change is made because native Pacific Islanders are only 5 percent of the Asian and Pacific Islander total and often have health outcomes more akin to those of American Indians/Alaska Natives than to Asian subpopulations.
In addition, native Pacific Islanders are not immigrants to the United States as are Asian populations.
Thus, an effort has been made throughout to disaggregate Asians from Pacific Islanders whenever possible, and to display data for the groups separately.
Aggregate statistics for Asians and Pacific Islanders are used, however, when they are the best available.
Asian Americans are immigrants to the United States (and their descendants) from more than 20 countries who speak more than 100 different languages.
They come from places such as China, India, Japan, the Philippines, Korea, Laos, Cambodia, Vietnam, and Thailand and represent more than 60 different ethnicities (22).
In 1990, the largest subpopulations (in descending order) were persons of Chinese, Filipino, Japanese, Asian Indian, Korean, and Southeast Asian ancestry.
By the year 2000, Filipinos are projected to be the largest Asian subpopulation, followed by Chinese, Vietnamese, Korean, and Japanese Americans, in that order (120).
The numbers of Asians and Pacific Islanders in the United States (both males and females) have grown from 1.5 million in 1970 to more than 7.2 million in 1990, and more than 9 million in 1996, making them the fastest growing minority group in the United States.
The 1990 Census counted 6.9 million persons of Asian ancestry and more than 365,000 Pacific Islanders among the 7.2 million population (21).
Asian and Pacific Islanders are currently more than 3 percent of the total U.S. population and nearly 13 percent of all people of color (1).
Asian and Pacific Islander women represent 13 percent of all women of color and 52 percent of all Asian and Pacific Islander Americans (1).
The majority of Asian Americans--more than 90 percent--reside in metropolitan centers.
The states with the largest shares of Asian and Pacific Islander Americans are California, Hawaii, and Washington.
More than 55 percent of all Asians and Pacific Islanders live in these three states, with the remainder living in New York, New Jersey, Illinois, and Texas (25).
Among all the states, Asians and Pacific Islanders are the largest proportion of the population of Hawaii--62 percent (2).
When growth of the Asian and Pacific Islander population by state is examined between 1980 and 1990, however, the five states with the largest increases--Rhode Island (246 percent), New Hampshire (219 percent), Georgia (210 percent), Wisconsin (195 percent), and Minnesota (194 percent)--are neither West Coast states nor states traditionally considered as homes for large numbers of Asians and Pacific Islanders (24).
Major Subpopulations
The varied histories of the many Asian subpopulations who have immigrated to the United States contribute to the wide, bipolar distribution in their socioeconomic positions and health.
Most Asian immigrants have come to the United States since 1965, when the Supreme Court struck down immigration quotas based on national origin and when only about 1 million Asians were in the United States.
Chinese immigration to this country, however, dates back to the mid-1800s.
With the decline of the African slave trade and the discovery of gold, waves of mostly male Chinese were brought to the United States as cheap, docile laborers to work in the mines and on the railroads in the Western states.
This new servant class became the new "negro" for the white majority and was even referred to as "nagurs" by some (121).
Later labeled the "yellow peril," or disease-ridden and heathen, the Chinese were barred from entering the United States on the basis of race alone by the Chinese Exclusion Act of 1882.
This ban remained in effect until 1943, and it was 1952 before immigrant Chinese were able to become U.S. citizens (23,122).
In the 1960-1985 period, the Chinese population of the United States quadrupled, and immigrants from more diverse ethnic and social strata came to the United States (23,122).
Between 1980 and 1990, the Chinese American population doubled, mostly due to immigration; 63 percent of all Chinese Americans are foreign born (23).
In 1990, more than 1.6 million persons of Chinese descent resided in the United States and constituted 23 percent of the Asian American population (123).
Although Chinese Americans live throughout the United States, the largest concentrations are found in California (more than 700,000) and in New York state (more than 284,000) (124).
Because Chinese Americans are diverse in class, occupation, and regional and linguistic background, in many Chinese American communities, unity is an elusive goal (25).
Differences between foreign-born and American-born, urban residents and suburbanites, old timers and newcomers, northerners and southerners, Catholics and Protestants, Christians and Buddhists, professionals and laborers, and rich and poor frequently override a common ethnic identity (125).
The second largest Asian American subpopulation in the United States is Filipino Americans.
Beginning with U.S. intervention in the Philippine Islands, Filipinos have migrated to both Hawaii and the mainland United States in three major waves (23).
Between 1903 and 1910, a first wave of Filipinos came to the United States to attend educational institutions; a second wave migrated after World War II to work in agriculture in Hawaii and on the mainland United States.
The third wave, consisting of fewer single men, more family groups, and more highly educated people, began after 1965 and continues today (25).
Evidence of this third wave is the 81 percent increase in the Filipino population of the United States between 1980 and 1990.
In 1990, Filipino Americans numbered 1.4 million and were 19 percent of the Asian American population (123).
More than 64 percent of Filipino Americans are foreign born (23).
Immigration from Japan to both Hawaii and the mainland United States began in large numbers around 1885 and peaked between 1900 and 1910.
The National Origins Act barred Japanese and other Asians from entering the United States after 1924 and contributed to the marked distinctions between the first-generation Japanese Americans (Issei) and second (Nisei) and subsequent generations (23,25).
Because first-generation Japanese Americans, many of whom were relocated and interned in prison camps in the United States during World War II, migrated to the United States when Japan had a single language without significant dialects, they have a stronger sense of nationalism than the immigrants constituting later generations (23).
This sense of national identity among the Issei has been posited as the explanation for the strong identity among this particular group of immigrants.
Today's Japanese American population of 847,562 (11 percent of all Asian Americans) resides primarily in California and Hawaii.
More than 70 percent of all Japanese Americans were born in the United States.
The more than 800,000 Asian Indian Americans (11 percent of all Asian Americans) live primarily in the Eastern United States, although nearly 160,000 Asian Indians live in California (21,25,123).
New York state is home to the second largest number (nearly 141,000) of Asian Indians.
In 1992, the majority of births to Asian women in the states of Illinois (home to more than 64,000 Asian Indians) and New Jersey (home to more than 79,000 Asian Indians) were to Asian Indian women (35).
Asian Indians have migrated to the United States in largest numbers since 1965, though some had come to the Western United States in the early 1900s, after initially migrating to British Columbia.
Although they are of differing ethnic groups and backgrounds, most share a common tradition of non-western medical practice (Ayurvedic), and many are highly educated professionals (21,25).
Korean Americans, one of the most homogeneous Asian populations in terms of language, ethnicity, and culture, also are one of the fastest growing Asian subpopulations in the United States (21).
Their population increased more than tenfold between 1970 (70,000 population) and 1990 (800,000 population) to make Korean Americans 11 percent of the current total U.S. Asian population (123,126).
Korean Americans first migrated to the United States in response to unstable conditions such as drought, famine, and epidemics in their homeland in the late 1800s and early 1900s, which sent them to Hawaii and the United States mainland primarily as contract laborers (127).
Others have migrated as a result of United States-Korean interaction during the Korean War (e.g., wives of servicemen; orphans adopted by Americans) (23).
The Korean population of the United States more than doubled between 1980 and 1990, with most of the growth due to immigration; in 1990, more than 80 percent of all Korean Americans were foreign born.
Post-1965 Korean immigrants tend to come to the United States as families, and most tend to be well educated.
Southeast Asians began to migrate to the United States primarily after 1975, as the conflicts in that region in Cambodia, Laos, and Vietnam were winding down.
The majority of refugees of these conflicts to come to the United States were Vietnamese (66 percent), with Cambodians and Laotians each constituting roughly 20 percent of Southeast Asian immigrants (23).
The earlier waves of refugees during the post-1975 period generally were better educated and wealthier than later arrivals, many of whom--especially Hmong (a Chinese-origin population that migrated to Laos and later to Thailand and the United States) and Laotians--were poor, illiterate, and not at all used to western culture at the time of their resettlement.
The trauma of dislocation and resettlement is related to many of the health problems of these Asian subpopulations.
About 615,000 Vietnamese, 149,000 Laotians, 147,000 Cambodians, and more than 90,000 Hmong resided in the United States in 1990 (23).
Most Southeast Asians live in Western states, led by the 46 percent of Vietnamese and the 48 percent of Cambodians living in California (128,129).
Factors Affecting Health
The "model minority" image replaced the negative stereotypes applied to Chinese and other Asian Americans in 1966.
Coming shortly after the 1965 Watts riots in Los Angeles, the identification of a model minority is viewed by some as an attempt to provide proof that the U.S. social system does work for minorities (24,121).
However, Asians often are pitted against other minority groups and are made scapegoats by low-income whites and other minorities who indirectly blame Asians for their failure to succeed and claim that Asians take away their educational and job opportunities.
The "model minority" epithet has direct implications for the health and economic status of Asian Americans.
It tends to trivialize the health problems of Asians, suggesting that they can take care of these problems on their own and overlooks the diversity among Asians and the problems faced by some of the newest refugees (130).
The health problems of Asian Americans are worsened by a complex set of cultural, linguistic, structural, and financial barriers to care.
In 1980, a language other than English was spoken at home by nine out of 10 Asian Americans who were 5 years of age or older (131).
In 1992, 42 percent of the Vietnamese American population 5 years of age and older lived in a linguistically isolated household--that is, a household in which no person age 14 years and older speaks only English, and no person age 14 years and older, who speaks a language other than English, also speaks English "very well" (35).
Nearly three-fifths of Asian Americans are foreign-born, and, in 1992, only 17 percent of all Asian mothers who gave birth in the United States had been born in the United States (35).
If residing illegally in the United States, Asian Americans may not seek out medical care for fear that this will expose their illegal status and result in deportation.
Since many Asians are unable to communicate in English, they are not readily employable.
When employed, it is often in small businesses or sweat-shop-type factories with unsafe and unhealthy working conditions and no fringe benefits such as health insurance.
Three-fifths of all Asian and Pacific Islander women were in the labor force in 1990, with more than a fifth (22 percent) employed in administrative occupations.
One-sixth (17 percent) of Asian and Pacific Islander females had professional specialty occupations, while an additional 16 percent had service occupations (132).
Although only 15 percent of all Asians and Pacific Islanders and only 29 percent of all households headed by Asian and Pacific Islander females reported incomes below the federal poverty level in 1995, these averages mask considerable variation among subpopulations (133).
For example, the percentage of the population below the poverty level ranged from a low of 6 percent among Japanese Americans to a high of 66 percent among Laotians in 1990 (compared to about 13 percent for the entire U.S. population) (37).
The proportion of Vietnamese families reporting incomes below the poverty level in 1990 (24 percent) was more than three times as great as that for Asian Indian families (7 percent) (35).
Hmong and Cambodian Americans reported poverty levels above 45 percent
(23).
Both household and individual incomes for Asian Americans support the finding of disparate poverty rates among the subpopulations.
In 1980, Asian Americans had average household income of $6,900, less than the United States average of $7,400.
At that time, only Indonesian, Chinese, and Japanese Americans had average per capita incomes above the U.S. average (23).
In 1990, the median family income for Asian and Pacific Islanders was $35,900 (higher than the $35,000 median family income for non-Hispanic white Americans), and 37 percent of all Asian and Pacific Islander American households had annual incomes of at least $50,000.
At the same time, more than 5 percent of Asian and Pacific Islander households had incomes of less than $5,000, and nearly 12 percent had incomes of less than $10,000 (134).
The resettlement of more than 1million Indochinese refugees in the 1970s and 1980s made the bimodal distribution even more pronounced because refugees arriving after 1979 have experienced higher rates of unemployment, underemployment, and poverty than other Asian Americans, and other minorities (37).
For example, in 1980, unemployment among the Hmong (20 percent), Laotians (15 percent), and Cambodians (11 percent) all exceeded the U.S. average
(23).
Health insurance coverage varies among Asian American women, as do employment and income levels.
Eighty-one percent of all Asian and Pacific Islander women and 91 percent of Asian and Pacific Islander women ages 65 years and older reported having either private or public health insurance coverage in 1995 (133).
Fourteen percent of Asian and Pacific Islander women reported Medicaid coverage and nearly 7 percent reported Medicare coverage.
Nearly two-thirds (66 percent) of Asian and Pacific Islander women had private health insurance.
Despite high rates of coverage in general, selected subpopulations of Asians lack health insurance, and this lack of health insurance causes some Asian American women to become frequent users of hospital emergency rooms.
One study of Korean American residents in Los Angeles County found that 50 percent of those under 65 years of age and 45 percent of those 65 year of age and older had no health insurance (135).
Although Asian American women overall exhibit healthful lifestyle behaviors, such as a lower smoking prevalence (10 percent) than among other American women (25 percent), there is variation by subpopulation in both healthful behaviors and the prevalence of illness (24).
For example, this 10 percent overall smoking prevalence aggregates higher rates among Japanese American (19 percent of whom reported smoking in one California study) and Filipino Ameri-can (11 percent of whom reported smoking in the same study) with the lower rates of Chinese women (7 percent of whom reported smoking in the California study) (136).
The risk of hypertension also varies by subpopulation.
In another study of the California population, hypertension was found to be more of a problem for Filipino Americans (25 percent) than for either Chinese (16 percent) or Japanese (13 percent) Americans (128).
Only 9 percent of Vietnamese females in California reported hypertension compared to 16 percent of all females in the state population.
The lowest hypertension rate was reported among Korean American females in California, only 3 percent of whom reported the condition (128).
Other conditions, such as tuberculosis, are more common among Asian populations than among other racial/ethnic groups.
The prevalence of tuberculosis among Asian Americans, the highest among all groups, is nearly 4 times that among the general population (24,137).
Hepatitis B and certain genetic abnormalities also are more common among Asian subpopulations.
The lack of knowledge of risk factors or preventive behaviors for various diseases also is a problem for Asian Americans.
One study among Southeast Asian populations in central Ohio revealed that 94 percent of those surveyed did not know what blood pressure is, and 85 percent did not know what could be done to prevent heart disease (128).
The lack of knowledge about cancer risk factors, for example, results in the failure to conduct breast self-examinations or to get screening such as mammography or Pap smears to lessen the incidence of breast or cervical cancer (24).
The failure of Asian women to get regular screenings relates not only to a lack of knowledge of risk factors but also to the belief that cancer is inevitably fatal.
One survey of Vietnamese women in San Francisco found that more than half (52 percent) believed "there is little one can do to prevent cancer" (138).
Although virtually all of the women surveyed (97 percent) had heard of cancer, many did not know common signs, symptoms, and risk factors for either breast or cervical cancer.
Vietnamese women who have migrated to the United States more recently (post 1981) were more likely (76 percent) to have never had the Papanicolaou test for cervical cancer than women who had migrated before 1981 (33 percent) (138).
In a survey of Vietnamese women in western Massachusetts, just over 50 percent of respondents reported having had the Pap test, less than the 57 percent of all U.S. women 18 years and older who reported having had this test in 1991 (139,140).
The failure to get mammograms is of particular concern because of the gradual increase in breast cancer rates among Asian women (especially Chinese, Japanese, and Filipino) over the generations after their migration to the United States, when compared to these same groups of women in Asia.
Overall, Asian American women born in the United States have a breast cancer risk 60 percent higher than Asian American women born in Asia (141).
Prenatal care is another form of preventive care that many Asian American women do not receive.
Nearly half of Cambodian and Laotian American women do not begin prenatal care during their first trimester and have higher risk births because of this (137,142).
Of the five major Indochinese groups in Oregon (Khmer, Hmong, Mien, other Lao, and Vietnamese), Hmong American women had the least favorable birth risk profile (142).
Mean birth weight among Hmong infants born in California between 1985 and 1988 was significantly lower than mean birth weight among white infants (143).
The preterm and low-weight infants born to Hmong, Cambodian, and Laotian mothers in 1992 are reflected in the aggregate rates of 12 percent (preterm) and 7 percent (low birth weight) for births to all women in the category "Remaining Asian or Pacific Islander Total."
These rates are higher than for Vietnamese mothers (10 percent preterm and 6 percent low birth weight), and also higher than for white non-Hispanic mothers (8 percent preterm and 5 percent low birth weight) (35).
Even with health insurance, culturally accepted medical models such as acupuncture and herbal medicines often are not covered services, a fact that further limits access to health care (36).
Asian American women are more likely to report using traditional health practices and medicines than Asian men--69 percent versus 39 percent.
By ethnic group, nearly all Cambodian women (96 percent), nearly a fifth (18 percent) of Laotian women, and nearly two-thirds of Chinese women (64 percent) report using traditional health practices (144).
High non-compliance with western prescription medications among these populations clearly becomes a concern.
Non-English-speaking Chinese hypertensives, for example, exhibit such non-compliance, perhaps in deference to traditional treatments (24).
Fear of difficulties in communicating--compounded by shame, guilt, anger, depression, and other responses to certain stigmatized conditions such as mental retardation, substance abuse, and HIV/AIDS--also may deter Asian Americans from seeking care promptly (37).
Chinese Americans in particular have been documented to underuse mental health services (145).
The traumas due to war (e.g., torture, starvation, rape, forced labor, and witnessing murder), leaving one's homeland, and resettling in another land often result in unique medical conditions, such as the psychosomatic or non-organic blindness reported among Cambodian women 40 years of age and older.
Even if Asian American patients seek care, language barriers make conditions such as this difficult to diagnose and treat (129).
To compound their stresses and trauma, many poor Southeast Asian immigrants resettle in violent, inner-city environments in the United States (146).
Depression is also found among Korean Americans, most of whom are recent immigrants but who migrated to the United States without war-related trauma; this mental health problem is more common among Korean Americans than it is among either Chinese, Japanese, or Filipino Americans (126).
In addition, not all English medical/health terminology can be readily translated into the various Southeast Asian languages, nor can many Southeast Asian expressions describing physical and mental conditions be directly translated for U.S. health care providers.
Cancer, for example, has a counterpart in Cantonese (the word nham, which loosely translates into English as "growth") but is not mentioned as a disease in texts on Chinese medicine.
Thus, it may be difficult for Asian patients to accept their diagnoses as real or to accept western treatment regimens for them (124).
If Asian Americans get to health care providers and translators are available, communication still is not guaranteed and appropriate care still may not be received (147).
For example, differences between the medical systems in the United States and China constitute a further deterrent to Chinese Americans born in China but in need of health care in the United States.
In China, physicians generally prescribe and dispense medication, charging only a nominal fee for their services; the major cost for the visit is the medications (124).
Because the idea of a visit to a medical professional for a checkup without getting prescriptions for medications does not live up to the expectations of many Chinese Americans, they are reluctant to make visits for routine or preventive care.
In addition, 90 percent of the obstetricians and gynecologists in China are female, a fact that makes it very difficult for foreign-born Chinese American women to be examined by or receive care from the predominantly male practitioners in these medical specialties in the United States (124).
Some Korean American women, many of whom have extreme difficulty with English, report using han yak, a Korean medicine, and other over-the-counter Korean home remedies rather than going to physicians in the United States (137).
They avoid going to physicians because of "communication difficulties," "impatient" doctors and nurses, being "treated disrespectfully" because of their ethnicity, and other "bad experiences" (137).
Other cultural characteristics that influence the health of Asian Americans are familism, reverence for authority, and a sense of shame/pride.
Asian cultures--like Hispanic cultures--often emphasize family decisionmaking.
The practice of family decisionmaking may be heightened by necessity, or it may be rendered impotent within the socioeconomic context of U.S. society (135).
The reverence for authority common in Asian societies with hierarchical structures, such as in Korea, for example, may result in a Korean American patient not questioning a physician's diagnosis and treatment and indicating understanding, agreement, and compliance when there is none (37).
This reverence for authority also may combine with gender role differentiation to make Asian women reluctant to report domestic violence to either health providers or law enforcement authorities (146,148).
The strong desire to "keep up appearances" within the community has resulted in low utilization of addiction treatment services for alcoholism and substance abuse by Asian Americans.
Although little research has been done on either alcohol or substance abuse among Asian American women, available research suggests that Asians use and abuse alcohol and other substances less frequently than members of other racial/ethnic groups (120).
Low drinking rates among all Asian American groups seem to be due to high percentages of abstainers among the foreign-born populations (120).
One study of Asian Americans in Los Angeles found that among women, Japanese Americans were the most likely to report being drinkers (73 percent), followed by Chinese (49 percent), and Koreans (25 percent) (149).
High rates of alcohol consumption also have been noted among persons with one Asian and one Caucasian parent (85).
Filipino women are least likely to report the use of alcoholic beverages.
Alcohol use among Asian American women tends to increase with acculturation.
In addition, stressors such as divorce and widowhood are associated with both depression and substance abuse for these women (85).
Although risk factors for and patterns of substance use and abuse have been identified among selected Asian youth populations, prevalence is generally lower than among youth of other racial/ethnic groups (120).
The vast differences between Asian societies and the United States mean that the most basic economic and socio-emotional needs of new immigrants may not be met by existing institutions.
The painful process of acculturation produces high levels of stress and may produce a high prevalence of mental illness among Asian Americans (94).
Some of this mental illness results from frustration at not reaping benefits in the form of high-paying, high-status jobs, commensurate with their expectations based on the level of education attained and the benefits reaped by white Americans with comparable education (150).
Gender stereotyping of Asian women as docile and subservient also constitutes a stressor that may contribute to depression and mental illness (151).
The major mental health problem for Asian Americans, though, is racism--which adversely affects their psycho-economic status, as well as the status of other peoples of color (36).
Return to Table of Contents Continue
