International Information Programs Gateway 04 February 2003 Queen Quet: From the Islands of Marshes and Moss Like Lace By Susan Ellis Washington File Staff Writer Washington, D.C.
-- "We are a sea people as well as a land people.
We look at water as our bloodline and the land itself as part of our family and not just something you buy or sell," explained Marquetta Goodwine, descended from West Africans brought as slaves to a part of America that mirrors their homelands -- an island off the marshy shores of South Carolina and home to the Gullah peoples.
Called St. Helena, it is one of the Sea Islands of the Coastal Low Country, lying off the coasts of North and South Carolina, Georgia and Florida.
To the people known as Gullahs, whose ancestors came from what are now Sierra Leone, Liberia, Angola, Senegal, Guinea and the Caribbean, as well as other African regions, Goodwine is Queen Quet, Chieftess of the Gullah-Geechee Nation.
"My people have been an agricultural people; that's one of the reasons we were enslaved [to bring the knowledge of rice growing to the region]," she told reporters at the Foreign Press Center in Washington, D.C.
January 31.
They were kidnapped "from the entire western seaboard of what we call Africa today, from the Senegambia region down to Angola.
. .during the period we call 'chattel slavery.'
"So a lot of people who are Ibo, Yoruba, Mende - they now come and visit us and they can't believe that they actually left their own country because our landscape is a lot of waterways with marshland, not so many sandy beaches - usually only on the Atlantic side do we have the white sand - everything else is very rich soil."
The foods and handicrafts are also the same as the ones they brought from the African homeland and the language is so similar to that spoken in Sierra Leone that they are mutually understandable.
That fact was brought home to this reporter as she visited St. Helena some 12 years ago with Sierra Leone's then President Moh Moh.
The only people surprised that Moh Moh and the St. Helena residents could converse were the ones who brought the President, Queen Quet said.
"He speaks Krio which is a cousin to the Gullah language.
Linguists call all those Creole languages."
She speaks reverently of Sierra Leone's current President Kabbah, saying the Gullah have "made donations of funds for several years now, especially during the 90s, to various orphanages in Sierra Leone.
President Kabbah and his wife, God bless the day when they came into the country some years ago, and they were doing the reverse of what I do now -- they were coming here to make people more aware of the devastation (in their country).
"A lot of business people wanted to meet with them," she said, "because of their interest in diamonds in Sierra Leone," but the Kabbahs made it very clear that "they were here trying to show that the real jewels are children that now don't have parents because they've been killed.
So this is one of the things we've helped with; to try to get the word out further.
"But to go beyond that, the American dollar was worth a hundred times as much there," Queen Quet pointed out.
"So us sending $50 was going to pay for a child's education for the entire year in their country and where here our students can't buy books for $50.
So this is one of the things that we've done that is concrete and some of the things we want to continue to do: try to help where the countries have some type of peace accord.
Help them with some of the enterprise building or rebuilding there.
So we're still in direct contact with some of the people in Sierra Leone and also in Liberia, because ... they're back in the same type of a cycle again."
Asked if everything looked as it did when the Sierra Leoneans came, she answered "Yes.
Maybe one or two houses more."
However, it's not easy to maintain the traditions, she claimed, because they must "deal with people who want to widen roads, and developers who wanted to get onto the island to make gated communities, and things like that."
Dedicated preservationists like Ted Turner, founder of CNN, have helped, she added.
He bought a large parcel of land at auction, which he will not develop.
"He is from Georgia and, just like myself, he remembers when," she says.
The slaves were placed in isolation on islands in the Southeast of the United States, which are called "the low country of South Carolina and Georgia."
Because of their isolated existence, she says, and since they spoke different languages, they had to find a way to communicate.
This they did by amalgamating the languages.
That amalgamation, along with "some long Elizabethan English words," probably used by the people who had kidnapped them, "became what we call 'Gullah,' our native tongue.
And then we have a dialect of Gullah, which some people here call 'Geechee.'
So this is why we call ourselves the Gullah-Geechee people.
With people who speak English and don't speak Gullah, we end up with that bridge language, Geechee."
Goodwine, who holds graduate degrees in mathematics and computer science, was "enstooled" as the "head" of the nation, with an Assembly of Representatives and a Council of Elders, being the "legs" and "arms," and the people themselves "the body" of the Gullahs, she said.
Her explanation embodies the spiritual nature of her people who have no set religion but follow African traditions of worship with "praise houses" dotted along the landscape, using "the shout" in worship, and other African features.
Her role, she explains, is to bring the message to an international audience as well as to Americans, "for us to be recognized on an international platform as being a unique, linguistic minority as it's called within the United Nations."
Here she speaks in Gullah, of which only the words "stomach full" are recognizable.
She translates:
"So you see when you come to where we are and you want something to eat, we'll send you to get some of our delicacies -- turtle eggs -- and then we'll cook it until your stomach is completely full."
The assembled reporters came from Austria, Germany and Scotland, as well as the United States, and expressed lively interest in visiting Gullah-Geechee land.
To the reporter from German public radio, she advised him to "get out to the islands," and not to be fooled by Charleston County, South Carolina, where tourists see buildings and concrete and ask "Where are the Gullah?"
In St. Helena, to name but one of the islands, "you can actually see people living their culture; it's not staged for you."
The Gullah Route Experience Tour, arranged by the Gullah-Geechee Sea Island Coalition, has customized itineraries for people who want to see the entire nation or are only spending a day.
"So get in touch with the coalition," she advised, to take "a living history tour where you get to actually go around the community and interact with the people.
You can target exactly what your interests are and the coalition can tell you the best place in the nation to go."
There's something for nearly everyone to see, she said.
"If you drive through the area you'll see Praise Houses, which are our traditional houses of worship and you don't have a set structure: the spirit just moves and that's how you get songs which are spirituals.
The Negro spirituals stemmed out of our enslavement.
You will see Methodist churches, you may see a mosque, and then there are other things in our day-to-day life that for us are sacred but, if you weren't spiritually connected the same way, you wouldn't pay it any attention.
It wouldn't have any meaning for you.
"And then someone else may come over from the Caribbean and say 'OK, dat's how you do the ting there, too.'
And again, for them, it's a spiritual connection.
So for us, it's not about what you do in a building; it's about what you do with your temple every day, every moment."
Queen Quet is particularly anxious that people inquire about land trusts -- pieces of land the Gullah want to preserve adjoining their territories to which interested parties can contribute.
The Gullah-Geechee Sea Island Coalition can be found on the Internet or emailed at: gullgeeco@aol.com.
(The Washington File is a product of the Office of International Information Programs, U.S. Department of State.
Web site: http://usinfo.state.gov) __________________________________________________________________
This site is produced and maintained by the U.S. Department of State's Office of International Information Programs (usinfo.state.gov).
Links to other Internet sites should not be construed as an endorsement of the views contained therein.
Back To Top blue rule IIP Home | Index to This Site | Webmaster | Search This Site | Archives | U.S. Department of State
Sorry, you need a JavaScript capable browser to get the best from this page
