CHAPTER 4 ENVIRONMENTAL SETTING, IMPACTS, AND MITIGATION 4.1 LAND USE AND PLANNING 4.1.1 REGIONAL SETTING Existing Land Uses The four PG
Generally, the three fossil-fueled plants (Potrero, Pittsburg, and Contra Costa) are located in urban portions of the San Francisco Bay Area, and the geothermal plant (the Geysers) is located in rural portions of Sonoma and Lake Counties.
San Francisco County
The Potrero Power Plant is located in the southeastern portion of the City and County of San Francisco.
San Francisco is the fourth largest city in California, with an economy based on finance, insurance, tourism, law, communications, trade, and high-technology sectors.
San Francisco is a densely populated, urbanized county, in which primarily industrial, commercial and recreational uses are located along the Bay waterfront.
Contra Costa County
The Pittsburg and Contra Costa Power Plants are located in the northern portion of east Contra Costa County.
Contra Costa is one of nine counties that comprise the San Francisco Bay Area.
The county is rapidly urbanizing with an economy based on the manufacturing, insurance, communications and trade sectors.
The east county area is primarily rural, with agricultural, recreational and open space uses.
Low-density urbanized portions of the east county are located along the Countys northern border that is defined by the confluence of the San Joaquin and Sacramento Rivers, which flow into Suisun Bay, San Pablo Bay, and the San Francisco Bay.
The waterfront area is primarily occupied by industrial, commercial, residential and recreational uses.
Sonoma and Lake Counties
The Geysers Geothermal Power Plant includes a series of geysers dispersed throughout the northeastern portion of Sonoma County and the southwestern portion of Lake County.
Sonoma County, with an economy based on retail, services, manufacturing, tourism and agriculture, is one of the nine San Francisco Bay Area counties.
Sonoma is urbanizing, primarily along the U.S. Highway 101, a northwest-southeast corridor that runs through the center of the county.
Lake County is a rural county that is located east of Sonoma County.
Lake Countys economy is primarily based on tourism, resource extraction and agriculture.
Applicable Plans and Policies
San Francisco Bay Conservation and Development Commission
The San Francisco Bay Conservation and Development Commission (BCDC) regulates flows into the Bay and development within 100 feet of the Bay shoreline.
BCDC was created by the State of Californias McAteer-Petris Act (California Government Code Section 66600 et seq.) in 1965, giving BCDC authority to permit or deny any project in or over the water, or within a 100-foot shoreline band around the Bay.
These include the following geographic areas: (1) all Bay water areas and some tributaries up to the line of highest tidal action ("Bay jurisdiction"); (2) all shoreline located within 100 feet of the Bay ("shoreline band"); (3) salt ponds and managed wetlands; and (4) Suisun Marsh.
Shoreline band permits can only be denied on grounds of failing to provide maximum feasible public access.
BCDCs jurisdiction extends into Contra Costa County as far east as Stake Point on Suisun Bay (Cooper, 1998).
This is about six miles west of the Pittsburg Power Plant and, thus, BCDC has jurisdiction over planning activities around the San Francisco power plants, but not the Contra Costa County power plants.
Bay Trail
The Association of Bay Area Governments (ABAG) has a regional plan for developing a recreational trail ring around the San Francisco and San Pablo Bays (Association of Bay Area Governments, 1989).
The plan was prepared by ABAG pursuant to Senate Bill 100, which mandated that the Bay Trail: (1) provide connections to existing park and recreation facilities; (2) create links to existing and proposed transportation facilities; and (3) be planned in such a way as to avoid adverse effects on environmentally sensitive areas.
Plans for the Bay Trail cover the nine Bay Area counties, including the southeastern portion of San Francisco near Potrero Power Plant.
The trail, however, does not extend east of the Benicia-Martinez Bridge to Suisun Bay, and thus does not include the Pittsburg or Contra Costa Power Plant areas.
4.1.2 LOCAL SETTING
Existing Land Uses
Potrero Power Plant
The Potrero Power Plant is in the Central Waterfront district, in the southeastern section of the City and County of San Francisco.
The Central Waterfront is a primarily industrial area, with residential uses to the northwest; the power plant is located in the southeastern portion of the community.
The plant is located on 1201 Illinois Street, between 22^nd and 23^rd Streets, and is adjacent to San Francisco Bay (see Figure 4.1-1).
The surrounding area is characterized by heavy industrial uses to the north, light industrial and commercial uses immediately to the south, and residential areas to the west.
Contra Costa Power Plant
Located adjacent to the City of Antioch, the Contra Costa Power Plant is in an unincorporated portion of Contra Costa County (see Figure 4.1-2).
The plant is located east of Antioch, separated from the city primarily by industrial uses.
The plant is located on Wilbur Avenue, about three miles from downtown Antioch, and is bounded on the north by the San Joaquin River.
The plant is surrounded by industrial and agricultural uses, and undeveloped land to the west and south.
To the east are industrial, transportation, recreational and maritime uses.
PG
The property subject to the lease will be retained by PG
Pittsburg Power Plant
The Pittsburg Power Plant is located near the City of Pittsburg, in an unincorporated portion of Contra Costa County (see Figure 4.1-3).
The plant is located at 696 West 10^th Street, approximately three-quarters of a mile west of downtown Pittsburg, and is bounded on the north by Suisun Bay.
The surrounding area is characterized by residential, commercial, industrial and recreational uses to the east and south, and open space, including wetlands, to the west.
A parochial elementary school is located about one-half mile southeast of the plant.
In addition, PG
The property subject to the lease will be retained by PG
Geysers Power Plant
The Geysers Geothermal Power Plant consists of 14 units, of which twelve are located in rural northeastern Sonoma County (see Figure 2.11) and two are located in rural southwest Lake County near the unincorporated town of Cobb.
The units are interspersed in the Mayacmas Mountains, roughly 30 miles north of the City of Santa Rosa.
The primary access to the Geysers is on Geysers Road in Sonoma County and Socrates Mine Road in Lake County.
The area is mostly uninhabited and the principal land use is the exploration, development and utilization of geothermal energy.
Other uses include recreational (primarily hunting clubs) and mining (e.g., gold, mercury).
Applicable Plans and Policies
Potrero Power Plant
Land use planning activities in the vicinity of the Potrero Power Plant are guided by the San Francisco General Plan and the San Francisco Planning Code.
In addition, the Waterfront Land Use Plan directs planning activities on the adjacent Port property.
General Plan.
The Central Waterfront Area Plan of the General Plan addresses land use and planning near the Potrero Power Plant.
A primary land use policy of the Central Waterfront Area Plan is to encourage the intensification and expansion of industrial and maritime uses.
The plan strives to preserve and protect land in the Central Waterfront as an industrial resource for San Francisco.
The Potrero Power Plant is located in the Central Basin subarea of the plan, which seeks to assure that any power plant expansion on the PG
Although no specific open space or recreational proposals are identified, one objective of the Central Waterfront Area Plan is to provide public access and recreational opportunities along the shoreline.
This includes maintaining and improving the quality of existing shoreline recreational areas at Central Basin and Warm Water Cove.
With respect to the General Plan, ABAG currently proposes that the Bay Trail extend along Illinois Street which is located west of the Potrero Power Plant property.
See Section 4.15, Recreation, for a discussion of open space and recreational trails related to the Potrero Power Plant.
Zoning.
Most of the land in the Central Waterfront district is zoned M-2 (Heavy Industry), with some exceptions.
The power plant is located within an M-2 District, a district with the fewest land use restrictions (see Figure 4.1-4).
The district is suitable for heavy industries that are dependent upon water or rail access, or large utility lines.
The area north and south of the power plant is also an M-2 District.
To the west of the power plant, zoning is primarily M-2, with pockets of M-1 (Light Industry), P (Public), NC-2 (Small-Scale Neighborhood Commercial), RH-2 (Two-Family Residential, House) and RM-3 (Moderate Density Residential, Mixed) districts.
The Potrero Hill neighborhood (RH-2) is located west of the elevated I-280 freeway, about three-quarters of a mile from the plant.
Waterfront Land Use Plan.
The Potrero Power Plant is located adjacent to property owned by the Port of San Francisco.
The Port of San Franciscos Waterfront Land Use Plan specifies goals and objectives for land uses along the Citys waterfront.
The Southern Waterfront subarea of the plan is adjacent to, but does not include, the Potrero Power Plant property.
South of the power plant, the plan indicates that land near Piers 80 and 90 should be available for maritime or non-maritime uses, including light industrial and research and development activities.
In addition, a power plant is also an acceptable use.
Contra Costa Power Plant
The Contra Costa General Plan guides land use planning and policy in the unincorporated portions of the county.
In addition, because the plant is located within the sphere of influence of Antioch, the Antioch General Plan also influences planning activities in the vicinity of the plant.
Contra Costa County General Plan.
As the Contra Costa Power Plant is located within an unincorporated portion of the county, the Contra Costa General Plan takes precedence for land use planning.
The Countys General Plan designates the site for HI (Heavy Industrial) uses.
The HI designation allows for activities requiring large areas of land with convenient truck and rail access, which are typically not compatible with residential uses in close proximity.
Operations in HI-designated areas are characterized by noise or other conditions requiring spatial separation from residential or incompatible land uses.
Various land uses are allowed in the vicinity of the power plant.
HI, DR (Delta Recreation and Resources) and PR (Parks and Recreation) uses are permitted to the east, while HI and OS (Open Space) uses are allowed to the west.
A mix of uses are designated to the south, including OS, CO (Commercial), LI (Light Industrial) and SL (Low [1.0 to 2.9 du/acre] Single Family Residential) uses (Contra Costa County, 1996).
Contra Costa County Zoning.
The power plant property is zoned for HI (Heavy Industrial) uses (see Figure 4.1-5).
Antioch General Plan.
A key industrial sector goal of the Antioch General Plan is to support the maintenance and rehabilitation of industrial facilities and their surrounding areas in order to preserve jobs.
The Contra Costa Power Plant is located adjacent to the San Joaquin River and north of the Union Pacific (UP) Railroad right-of-way, in an area designated for Heavy Industrial uses by the Antioch General Plan.
Land south of the UP Railroad is designated for Light Industrial uses, with pockets of medium low density (6 du/acre) residential uses (City of Antioch, 1988).
Pittsburg Power Plant
Because the Pittsburg Power Plant is located within an unincorporated portion of the county, the Contra Costa General Plan governs land use planning and policy issues in the vicinity of the plant.
Land use planning activities in nearby Pittsburg are guided by the Pittsburg General Plan.
The power plant is within the sphere of influence of the City of Pittsburg.
Contra Costa County General Plan.
The Contra Costa General Plan, which guides land use in unincorporated portions of the county, designates the power plant site for HI (Heavy Industrial) and OS (Open Space) uses.
The HI designation applies to roughly the eastern half of the site (including the power plant facility), while OS applies to the western half.
HI uses also dominate land to the south and OS to the west.
The County Plan designates CR (Commercial Recreation), MM (Medium [12.0 to 20.9 du/acre] Multiple Family Residential), SH (High [5.0 to 7.2 du/acre]
Contra Costa County Zoning.
The power plant property is zoned for HI (Heavy Industrial) and OS (Open Space) uses (see Figure 4.1-6).
The HI designation applies to roughly the eastern half of the site, which includes the power plant facility, and the OS designation applies to the western half.
Pittsburg General Plan.
The Pittsburg Power Plant is located within the Northwest River Area, as defined in the Pittsburg General Plan, which allows for existing industrial uses to be continued and expanded.
Land use on the Pittsburg Power Plant property is designated as UT (Utility), which includes power plant, sewer and water district uses.
The Northwest River Area also designates Open Space as an acceptable use, primarily for the preservation of wetlands.
The plan seeks to balance industrial development with recreational and water-oriented residential uses (City of Pittsburg, 1988).
Geysers Power Plant
The Geysers are located in unincorporated portions of the Sonoma and Lake Counties, and therefore the respective General Plans guide land use planning for plant facilities located in each county.
Sonoma County General Plan.
The Geysers are located in the Cloverdale/Northeast County subarea as indicated in the Sonoma County General Plan.
The Geysers property is designated as RRD (Resources and Rural Development), which permits geothermal resource management and enhancement activities.
The RRD land use category seeks to protect land for geothermal use and other resource activities (Sonoma County, 1991).
Sonoma County Zoning.
Zoning for the Cloverdale/Northeast County is consistent with the General Plan, designating a RRD (Resource and Rural Development) for the area around the Geysers.
Lake County General Plan.
One of the objectives of the Lake County General Plan is to promote and manage geothermal development that will maintain and enhance the Countys environment and quality of life and provide an alternative energy supply.
Through the Geothermal Resources Element of the General Plan, the County intends to promote the development of geothermal resources, provided that such use allows maximum protection of the resources and the environment, protects public health and safety, and is compatible with the current and projected land use patterns.
In addition, the General Plan encourages compatible, comprehensive, multi-use activities in geothermal production areas (Lake County, 1981).
The land use designation of the property containing the geothermal facilities is RL (Rural Lands), which allows for a minimum lot size of 20 acres.
This category is for rural areas that have limited agricultural potential, and are characterized by steep topography, fire hazards and limited access.
Uses include, but are not limited to, animal raising, crop production, transmission facilities, single family residential and, with a conditional use permit, manufacturing and processing operations.
Geothermal power generation is allowed and encouraged, especially where industrial and agricultural applications could directly use geothermal resources as a heat source instead of fossil fuels (i.e., greenhouse operations, food processing).
Lake County Zoning.
Most of the land surrounding the two Lake County geothermal power plants is designated RL-BF (Rural Lands Frozen).
The BF (i.e., Frozen) designation indicates that property cannot be subdivided and the RL designation requires that parcels be at least 20 acres (Everhart, 1998).
4.1.3 SIGNIFICANCE CRITERIA
Appendix G of the California Environmental Quality Act (CEQA) Guidelines (Governors Office, 1997) states that a project would normally have a significant effect on the environment if it were to conflict with adopted environmental plans and goals of the community where it is located, disrupt or divide the physical arrangement of an established community, or convert prime agricultural land to a non-agricultural use or impair the agricultural productivity of prime agricultural land.
In addition to this land use section, if the project would result in other impacts having land use implications, the effects may be addressed in other sections and cross-referenced as necessary.
Specific project issues that may have effects on surrounding land uses are discussed in Section 4.2 Population and Housing; Section 4.4 Water; Section 4.5 Air Quality; Section 4.6 Transportation and Circulation; Section 4.10 Noise; Section 4.13 Aesthetics; Section 4.14 Cultural Resources; and Section 4.15 Recreation.
4.1.4 IMPACTS AND MITIGATION MEASURES
Impact 4.1-1: The proposed project is consistent with adopted general plan policies, land use designations and zoning, and thus would not conflict with adopted environmental plans and goals of the community where it is located.
(Less than Significant)
Under the terms of divestiture, PG
As a result, the new power plant owners would be subject to local environmental permits (e.g., water and air quality), and local land use agreements (e.g., easements and deed restrictions).
Furthermore, PG
Potrero Power Plant
Land use on the Potrero Power Plant site is consistent with the Heavy Industry land use designation and the M-2 (Heavy Industry) District zoning.
The Potrero Power Plant is currently a "must run" facility and expected to remain in operation, and continuation of the existing use would not conflict with the General Plan designation or zoning for the site.
Any significant changes in plant operations would be subject to additional future environmental review and permitting.
Therefore, the proposal would not conflict with the General Plan designation, zoning or adopted environmental plans.
Section 4.15, Recreation, provides a discussion of plans for recreational trails near the Potrero Power Plant.
Contra Costa Power Plant
The Contra Costa Power Plant site is currently designated for HI (Heavy Industrial) uses and existing uses are consistent with the General Plan and zoning designations of the county.
The plant is currently a "must run" facility and expected to remain in operation under either a new owner or PG
Therefore, the project would not conflict with the General Plan designation, zoning or adopted environmental plans for the site.
Furthermore, significant changes in plant operations would be subject to additional future environmental review and permitting.
Therefore, the impact of the project would be less than significant.
Pittsburg Power Plant
The Pittsburg Power Plant site is currently designated for HI (Heavy Industrial) and OS (Open Space) uses.
Existing uses are consistent with these county General Plan and zoning designations.
Under either a new owner or PG
Operation as a power plant would not conflict with the General Plan designation or zoning for the site.
Furthermore, any significant plant operations changes would require additional environmental review and permitting.
Thus, the proposal would not conflict with the General Plan designation, zoning or adopted environmental plans.
As proposed, the Pittsburg and Contra Costa Power Plants would be bundled together as a package as part of the competitive auction process.
PG
The enhancement site is on PG
Upon completion of the habitat enhancement activities, this Montezuma Enhancement Site will be subject to a conservation easement granted in perpetuity to the California Department of Fish and Game.
If the bundled power plants are purchased by a new owner, an interest in Montezuma Enhancement Site will be transferred to the new owner.
PG
Refer also to Section 4.7, Biological Resources, for a discussion of the Montezuma Enhancement Site.
Geysers Power Plant
The Geysers Power Plant is located within areas zoned for geothermal activities for both Sonoma and Lake Counties.
In Sonoma County, the General Plan and zoning designations of the RRD (Resources and Rural Development) permit geothermal resource management.
In Lake County, the General Plan and zoning designation, RL-BF, permits the management of geothermal development.
In addition, under the terms of the proposed Purchase and Sales Agreement between PG
Thus, the proposal would not conflict with the General Plan designation, zoning or adopted environmental plans, and any significant changes in plant operations would be subject to future environmental review and permitting.
Therefore, the project would have a less than significant impact.
Mitigation Measures Proposed as Part of Project
None.
Mitigation Measures Identified in This Report
None required.
_________________________
Impact 4.1-2: The four power plants being considered for divestiture are existing land uses that would remain in the same locations.
Therefore, the project would not disrupt or divide the physical arrangement of any established community.
(Less than Significant)
Potrero Power Plant
The Potrero Point Power Plant is surrounded by other existing industrial uses in the Central Waterfront.
The plant has been in operation since the 1960s and is located east of Third Street and adjacent to San Francisco Bay.
The plant is geographically isolated from the nearby Potrero Hill residential community by other industrial uses and Third Street, a six-lane arterial road.
While divestiture could result in increased electricity generation at the plant and minor on-site alterations (such as fences), the project would not result in the physical expansion of plant facilities off-site or in the expansion of existing plant facilities.
Therefore, the project would not disrupt or divide the physical arrangement of an established community and would have a less than significant impact.
Contra Costa Power Plant
The Contra Costa Power Plant, in operation since the 1950s, is in a low-density area and primarily surrounded by other existing industrial uses.
The plant is adjacent to the San Joaquin River on the north, and is isolated from residential uses to the south by other industrial and open space uses, the Atchison, Topeka and Santa Fe Railroad right-of-way and Wilbur Avenue.
A recreational vehicle park and a yacht club are located directly east of the site and adjacent to the Antioch Bridge.
While divestiture could result in increased electricity generation at the plant and minor on-site alterations, the project would not be expected to result in physical expansion of the plant facilities on or off-site.
Therefore, the project would not disrupt or divide the physical arrangement of an established community and would have a less than significant impact.
Pittsburg Power Plant
The Pittsburg Power Plant is located adjacent to downtown Pittsburg to the east, Suisun Bay on the north, open space and wetlands to the west, and industrial and residential uses to the south.
The 280 acre operational site is encompassed within a total site area of 2,140 acres that provides a buffer and isolates the plant from nearby uses.
This includes property not proposed to be sold that is leased by PG
The power plant has been in operation since the 1950s.
While divestiture could result in increased electricity generation at the plant and minor on-site alterations, the project would not be expected to result in physical expansion of the plant facilities on or off-site.
Therefore, the project would not disrupt or divide the physical arrangement of an established community and would have a less than significant impact.
Geysers Power Plant
The power generating units of the Geysers Power Plant are interspersed throughout rural portions of Sonoma and Lake Counties.
The Lake County units are near the unincorporated town of Cobb.
The Geysers have been in operation for more than ten years, with many starting up in the 1970s.
The Geysers are located in the Mayacmas Mountains and are not in the midst of any existing communities.
While divestiture could result in increased electricity generation at the plant and minor on-site alterations, the project would not be expected to result in physical expansion of the plant facilities on or off-site.
Therefore, the project would not disrupt or divide the physical arrangement of an established community and would have a less than significant impact.
Mitigation Measures Proposed as Part of Project
None.
Mitigation Measures Identified in This Report
None required.
_________________________
Impact 4.1-3: The project would not convert prime agricultural land to non-agricultural uses, or impair the agricultural productivity of prime agricultural land.
(Less than Significant)
Potrero Power Plant
San Francisco and the Central Waterfront are urbanized areas.
There are no substantial agricultural resources in the vicinity of the plant.
Therefore, the proposed project would not convert prime agricultural land to non-agricultural use, or impair the agricultural productivity of prime agricultural land.
There would be a less than significant impact on agricultural uses for the Potrero Power Plant.
Contra Costa Power Plant
PG
However, the property subject to the lease, currently used for a vineyard, will be retained by PG
Furthermore, the property is within the urban limit line and is not designated as Agricultural Core or Agricultural Land by the General Plan.
Therefore, the proposed project would not convert prime agricultural land to non-agricultural use, or impair the agricultural productivity of prime agricultural land.
The effect of the project on agricultural uses would be less than significant.
Pittsburg Power Plant
PG
PG
In addition, the property is within Contra Costa Countys urban limit line and is not designated as Agricultural Core or Agricultural Land by the General Plan.
The project would not convert prime agricultural land to non-agricultural use, or impair the agricultural productivity of prime agricultural land and would, therefore, have a less than significant impact.
Geysers Power Plant
The Geysers units are located in the rural Mayacmas Mountains in Sonoma and Lake Counties.
In addition to geothermal energy activities, mining and recreational uses are located in the vicinity.
No agricultural activities were identified.
The project would not convert prime agricultural land to non-agricultural use, or impair the agricultural productivity of prime agricultural land and would, therefore, have a less than significant impact.
Mitigation Measures Proposed as Part of Project
None.
Mitigation Measures Identified in This Report
None required.
_________________________
References Land Use and Planning
Antioch, City of, Antioch General Plan, December 1988.
Association of Bay Area Governments, The Bay Trail: Planning for a Recreational Ring Around San Francisco Bay, July, 1989.
Contra Costa County, Contra Costa County General Plan, July 1996.
Cooper, Rick, Permit Analyst, San Francisco Bay Conservation and Development Commission, telephone communication, March 25, 1998.
Everhart, Brian, Permit Coordinator, Lake County Planning Department, telephone communication, March 27, 1998.
Governors Office of Planning and Research, CEQA Statutes and Guidelines, 1997.
Lake County, Lake County General Plan, November 1981.
PG
PG
Pittsburg, City of, Pittsburg General Plan, September 1988.
San Francisco, City and County of, San Francisco General Plan, Central Waterfront Plan, September 27, 1990.
Sonoma County, Sonoma County General Plan, April 9, 1991.
TOP Back to Previous Section (Approach to Environmental Analysis) Forward to Next Section (Population and Housing) Back to DEIR Table of Contents PG
