[uscg-rod-s.gif] Engine Monitoring Display Project Number: 9207.10 Project Manager: Mr. Walt Lincoln
Problem Statement: Next to personnel costs, fuel is the single largest expense associated with Coast Guard cutters.
Recent reductions in operations due to fuel budget overruns have highlighted the need for reducing fuel consumption.
The problem is to find ways to reduce fuel use without impacting mission effectiveness.
Coast Guard cutters with controllable pitch propellers currently use a pre-determined pitch schedule to select a pitch setting at each ordered throttle position.
This pre-determined setting may waste fuel if it is not appropriate to current operating conditions.
The problem is to provide information which can enable the EO to select a more fuel efficient combination of throttle and pitch settings which will still provide the ordered speed.
Project Objective: The objective is to save fuel, by providing a real-time graphical display of the engine operating map showing curves of constant fuel consumption, constant pitch and constant speed.
Manual pitch control can then be used to maintain a desired speed with the most efficient throttle/pitch settings for the current operating conditions.
Technical Approach: Select a suitable demonstration cutter (probably a 225' WLB or 378' WHEC).
Since torque meters are expensive and overly sensitive, work with ELC and engine manufacturers to identify alternative indirect measures of HP (e.g. fuel rate, rack position or manifold intake pressure).
Demonstrate a prototype system and collect feedback from potential users.
Using as many existing ship sensors as possible, provide other needed sensors and install fuel meters.
These will be connected to a notebook computer graphical display that will provide real time information to the EO, and will allow selected test data to be archived for later analysis.
Conduct shipboard testing to establish a baseline operating condition, demonstrate the system, and collect EO suggestions for improving user acceptability.
Provide technical documentation for the prototype system, and report trials results, along with estimates of potential savings vs. current practices.
If results are favorable, establish a plan to demonstrate system on other classes, and work with sponsor to obtain funds for fleet-wide implementation on selected classes.
Benefit(s): The Fuel Map Display will enable the EO to monitor the present engine operating point, and to select the combination of throttle and pitch setting that which will achieve a desired speed with minimum fuel consumption.
The display will also enable comparison of the present operating point with that achievable in trials conditions, thus quantifying the impact of cumulative hull/propeller fouling and engine degradation on fuel consumption.
Benefits include reduced fuel consumption (~10%), and improved engine, hull and propeller maintenance practices.
Back Home Investment Areas Top of Page
[resear19.gif]
Shore-side Alternative Energy Evaluation
Project Number: 9207.8 Project Manager: LCDR James Hurley
Problem Statement: Faced with a situation in which budget trends in terms of baseline dollars are declining, and energy costs are rising, the Coast Guard must consider alternative ways of reducing energy costs.
Approximately 41% of the Coast Guard energy budget goes to shore facilities.
Most of the energy consumed is derived from petroleum, a resource that will become increasingly scarce as worldwide demand increases.
The result will be ever-increasing petroleum fuel costs.
Therefore, the Coast Guard must consider the use of alternative fuels as part of its strategic policy and plans for energy cost reduction in the future.
The development of a business case for the use of alternative fuels will enable the Coast Guard to do this.
Project Objective: The project objective is to provide Coast Guard energy managers with an understanding of the costs, benefits, and issues such as training, safety, permitting, and logistic availability of alternative energy sources.
This understanding will include recommendations for how/where it should be used throughout CG shore facilities.
Technical Approach: There are two parts to the development of a business case for the use of alternative fuels at Coast Guard shore facilities: a Coast Guard-wide technology assessment of the use of natural gas and other alternative fuels, and a technology assessment at AIRSTA Cape Cod.
The Coast Guard-wide effort will include the technology assessment, a market analysis, an economic analysis and the writing of the business case.
We are partnering with AIRSTA Cape Cod to capture user issues including safety, training, maintenance, fuel reliability, and cost, etc.
By partnering with an actual facility, the results of the study are more likely to have an impact on other facility managers.
The results of the AIRSTA Cape Cod study will be incorporated into the business case.
Benefits: The business case for the use of alternative fuels at shoreside Coast Guard facilities is necessary to help the Coast Guard energy portfolio to be less dependent on foreign sources, and at the same time save money in the long run.
The impact of this study will be that senior energy/facility managers throughout the Coast Guard will be prepared to make intelligent decisions regarding strategic energy choices.
Their decisions will be based upon technical and economic data collected at an actual Coast Guard demonstration site, as well as from the larger energy-consuming facilities in the Coast Guard.
Back Home Investment Areas Top of Page
[resear20.gif]
ONE-DOT Alternative Fuel Marine Power Evaluation
Project Number: 9207.9 Project Manager: LTJG K.C. Cutler
Problem Statement: As part of the effort to improve air quality around major port cities, the Coast Guard, along with other maritime agencies, must prepare for more stringent EPA regulations on vessel emissions.
In addition, budget constraints have made it a necessity for the Coast Guard to reduce vessel operating costs.
Developing a cheaper and cleaner burning fuel for boats and cutters will help provide a solution to these problems.
The merchant fleet, no doubt, will also adopt alternative fuels to meet state and federal limits, and the Coast Guard must be ready to regulate their use.
Since natural gas is a leading alternative fuel for ground transportation systems, including buses, taxis, airport ground transportation, and commercial vehicle fleets, it is entirely appropriate that the Coast Guard should research and fully understand the use of this domestically available fuel in the marine environment.
Project Objective: In accordance with the ONE DOT initiative, participate with MARAD and other agencies to test and evaluate the benefits of CNG and other alternative marine fuels.
Conducting emission and operational testing and project support will illuminate the viability of using alternative fuels, establish potential air quality benefits for coastwise fleets or vessel operators which support the goals of the Congestion Mitigation and Air Quality Program (CMAQ), determine potential for life cycle cost benefits, resolve any safety and regulatory issues, and promote CNG use as a shipboard fuel.
Technical Approach: Design packages for both the engine conversion and shipboard fuel system alterations will be completed and sent to the Coast Guard and ABS for approval.
Following design approval, contracts will be awarded for completing the work.
A test plan for the converted engine will be developed and implemented for evaluating the CNG fuel effects on air emissions and engine operating efficiency.
A report will be written to document the conversion effort and summarize test results.
Benefit(s): The Coast Guard will gain insight and knowledge about using CNG as an alternative marine fuel from both a regulatory and vessel operation standpoint.
Conversion of the vessel to fuel cell technology under the current Interagency Maritime Fuel Cell initiative is a subsequent possibility.
Back Home Investment Areas Top of Page
[resear21.gif]
Acquisition Support - Great Lakes Icebreaking Buoy Tender
Project Number: 9209.7 Project Manager: Mr. Edward Purcell
Problem Statement: G-AGL and G-OCU are preparing for the acquisition of a Great Lakes Icebreaking Capability Replacement (GLIB).
In the previous acquisitions for WLB and WLM, mistakes were made in design and construction which caused many problems.
Project Objective: By applying the lessons learned from WLB and WLM, produce plans which will minimize errors in design and construction of GLIB, thereby helping to provide a better ship which will be less expensive to operate.
These plans include the Operational Assessment Plan (OA Plan) and the Operational Test 
Technical Approach: Review all pertinent documents from the WLB 
Create from these a list of items that need new specifications, either because the previous specs were unclear, or they were circumvented.
Review new developments in the state of the art of ship design and prepare specs for new items that are desired by the customer.
Conduct conferences with various players in the design to inform them of the latest equipment and systems available for the GLIB.
Write the outline of the OA Plan and submit it to the sponsor for continuous up-dates and improvements.
Benefit(s): Guided by RDC lessons learned from the WLB 
Back Home Investment Areas Top of Page
[resear22.gif]
Maritime Operations Simulation (LESIM) Upgrade
Project Number: 9221 Project Manager: Ms. Kathy Shea
Problem Statement: The Office of Cutter Forces (G-OCU) is responsible for initial homeport decisions for new classes of cutters.
They are also responsible for researching the effects of changes in homeports due to operational decisions.
Often they only have hours to make decisions that affect CG personnel and budgets.
G-OCU works with the Housing Office and G-SEC to examine available shore facilities, quality of life issues, training opportunities and transit times to the areas where the cutters missions will be performed.
Because there is no common system of data readily available and no quantitative methodology to analyze the cause and effect of the decisions that are made, the cutter homeport selection process is only as good as the time available for the decision.
The current process of hand calculations does not facilitate an analysis of various solutions in order to determine the best solution for the Coast Guard in terms of all the hundreds of variables that need to be evaluated and the amount of information that needs to be processed.
As a consequence of this less-than-optimal homeporting decision process, the Coast Guard is missing and will continue to miss opportunities to save millions of dollars.
Project Objective: Develop a method for making homeporting decisions that would provide quantitative financial, personnel, logistics, and operational information for determining the best solution for cutter homeport selection.
The initial idea would be to develop a decision support software application that would make information available, accessible, and easy to use.
Technical Approach: RDC will research the factors involved in making a homeporting decision.
We will review the latest Strategic Homeporting studies done at PACAREA and LANTAREA.
We will also work with Facilities Design and Construction Center Pacific (FDCCP).
They developed a process to evaluate the effects on Coast Guard facilities of the recommendations of the Deepwater contractors.
We will conduct workshops to weight the value of each of these factors in the decision.
We will investigate the process that G-MWV is currently using to evaluate a port's need for the Coast Guard's Vessel Traffic Service.
They have identified and defined the factors related to the causes and impacts of an unwanted event happening in a port.
They are using the Analytical Hierarchy Process (AHP).
It is a proven decision-making process used when diverse groups of individuals need to make decisions on complex issues.
We will also look at several existing Coast Guard applications that have been identified as being able to incorporate the homeporting model.
We will look at which application could be modified to include port infrastructure data, transit costs, support costs, etc.
We will look at adding a web-based geographical engine and display interface to any of these packages or a combination of them, so that cutters could then be moved from candidate port to candidate port to determine major transit and support cost impacts.
A comparison of the technical challenges and cost issues associated with modification of each potential Coast Guard application, combined with a benefits comparison (e.g., ease of use, flexibility, power) would be compared with adapting a commercial product.
We would then identify a relocation situation.
We have an opportunity to be involved in relocating the 378's from Charleston, SC. Potential relocation sites are Newport and Little Creek, VA.
We have the information about the relocation sites from the LANTAREA Strategic Homeporting Study.
We would establish a Guidance Team of high-level Coast Guard officers from the areas involved.
Then we would demonstrate how the decision-support software could be used in making a specific homeporting decision.
We could use this to provide the Coast Guard with a demonstration of using information technology to provide highly desired eCoast Guard performance improvements.
This would better use limited staff-hours available to the selection process, significantly reduce human error, and improve cost forecasting and fleet-wide funding levels.
The homeport decisions could be made with the goal of minimizing fuel costs to the Coast Guard so that the savings can be used for training our forces.
Homeport decisions could also be made with the goal of increasing the workforce Quality of Life.
This would increase the retention rate.
Both these would be in line with Restoring our Readiness, from the Commandants 2000 Direction.
Back Home Investment Areas Top of Page
[resear23.gif]
Mobile Communications Infrastructure
Project Number: 9250.7 Project Manager: Mr. Jon Turban
Problem Statement: Mobile radio communications requirements had outstripped existing Coast Guard high frequency (HF), DOD military satellite (MILSATCOM) and Inmarsat A and C system capabilities, available capacity and/or affordability by the late 1990s.
An aggressive R
Project Objective: Evaluate new and emerging commercial systems to meet Coast Guard mobile communications requirements.
Develop an architecture for wide area network connectivity between mobile platforms and shore units.
Test and recommend alternatives that can be used to implement this architecture at the minimum cost.
Technical Approach: 1.
Mobile Communications Requirements Report: The Mobile Communications Requirements Report was written in FY98.
This report documents current and future (+5 year) USCG mobile communications requirements.
It will be revalidated in FY00 to pick up any modified or additional requirements 2.
MSAT Alternatives Report: The MSAT Alternatives Report was written in FY98.
This report documents the projects research into the mobile satellite (MSAT) communications market.
This research will continue to identify all current and emerging mobile satellite communications systems and their suitability for meeting Coast Guard mobile communication needs.
We will accomplish this by continuing market and technical research, attending conferences, direct liaison with industry, and professional reading.
.
The results of this investigation will be documented in an FY00 revision of the MSAT Alternatives Report.
3.
MSAT System Test 
The purpose the testing is to establish an independent, impartial evaluation of each system.
In addition to the hardware testing, software simulations using Satellite Tool Kit and OPNET? may aid in the evaluation.
We will write a brief beta-test notice at the completion of each test to document our preliminary findings.
This technology assessment work will be ongoing to allow for the inclusion of new systems.
Demonstrations of the various systems will also be conducted for the Sponsor on a periodic basis.
4.
MSAT Evaluation Reports: The MSAT Evaluation Reports will document all of the MSAT Systems Test 
A report will be written every 2 years to document the testing during that time period.
These reports will summarize the information from the Beta-test notices and provide a Cost Benefit Analysis of the systems that have been evaluated and appear to meet the Coast Guards needs.
5.
TCP/IP over MSAT Issues: Research will be done on the suitability of these MSAT systems for TCP/IP type networking.
A Small Business Innovative Research Contract (SBIR) has been awarded to optimize TCP/IP for wireless communications.
The more efficient the TCP/IP protocol, the less time it takes to transmit the same amount of data.
The results of this contract will be verified at the US Coast Guard Academy Electrical Engineering Department and then tested over actual MSAT systems at the USCG R
These findings will directly affect the cost benefit analysis.
6.
Security over MSAT Issues: Research will be conducted on sending classified message traffic over commercial MSAT channels.
Issues such as performance, cost, hardware vs. software tradeoffs and how bandwidth is affected will be studied.
Findings will directly affect the cost benefit analysis portion of the MSAT Evaluation Reports.
7.
Sponsor Support, Analysis and Resolution of USCG SATCOM Issues: The project will provide support to sponsor (G-SCT) and the Comm Sys Senior Leadership Team (CSSLT) on issues relating to Satellite communications on a recurring basis as they occur.
Benefit(s): Identification of cost-effective commercial mobile communications alternatives will provide the following benefits to the Coast Guard and the Public: 1) satisfy mission requirements resulting in better service to the public 2) reduce Coast Guard investment in infrastructure which reduces budgetary requirements 3) inject Coast Guard specific requirements into industry 4) realize more cost-effective communications services
Back Home Investment Areas Top of Page
[resear26.gif]
Global Incident Notification
Project Number: 9250.9 Project Manager: LT Kevin Keast
Problem Statement: With the vast array of communication systems available nationwide and internationally, the Coast Guard, and many other agencies are overwhelmed with the methods by which a person may call for help.
Cellular and PCS phones are now a popular, inexpensive method of communication.
Global satellite phones will likely follow suit as we proceed into the next millennium.
As more of these wireless phone systems become available, the public's expectation to call for help follows.
The Coast Guard presently is not integrated with the United States Enhanced 911 system.
Additionally, there are no guidelines associated with satellite phone emergency call handling.
FCC mandates will require Cellular/PCS phones to report position for emergency calls.
Satellite systems will likely receive a similar mandate.
The position information available with a distress call is invaluable when dealing with the private and commercial boating public.
Projective Objective: The Stage 2 objective is to develop a plan for the Coast Guard to integrate into the national E911 network.
The plan will describe how E911 calls may be automatically routed to Group Communication Centers using a Geographic Information System.
It will identify how the E911 equipment that is included in the National Distress and Response System Modernization Project can be utilized on the existing E911 network.
Stage 2 will also include routing of emergency calls on a global level.
A pre-prototype plan will be developed that can be used as a model for Mobile Satellite Systems vendors for routing.
The plan shall serve as a decision-making tool for execution of stage 3, which will be development of a working prototype model of the systems described above.
Technical Approach: 1.
E911 System Analysis: The national E911 system analysis is continued from FY99.
This is an investigative research of the existing E911 system.
It focuses on the new phase II wireless FCC mandates requiring position location information to accompany wireless 911 emergency calls.
2.
E911 Architecture Design: Investigate how the US Coast Guard may utilize E911 equipment and E911 network resources to selectively route distress calls to appropriate Coast Guard Group Communications Centers.
Develop a pre-prototype design utilizing available equipment and technology.
3.
MSS System Analysis: Research existing commercial satellite vendors and identify how they intend to route emergency calls on a global level.
Identify what type of hardware is in use for global call routing.
4.
MSS Architecture Design: Develop a detailed network design that may be implemented for routing global distress calls to appropriate Rescue Coordination Centers.
5.
Business Analysis: A business analysis will be conducted to analyze several aspects of integrating the Coast Guard into the national E911 network and for the MSS industry to integrate automatic emergency number routing.
The analysis will include a costs/benefit analysis for the Coast Guard and liability and FCC regulatory issues involved with the MSS community.
Benefit(s): Global Incident Notification will provide the following benefits to the Coast Guard and the Public: 1) By taking advantage of position information available with wireless calls GIN will satisfy Search and Rescue mission requirements, resulting in quicker response times and a better service to the public.
2) Provide critical integration methods into the United States E911 system, establishing automatic wireless call routing for maritime related distress incidents.
3) Enhance the development of the National Distress and Response System Modernization Project.
Currently E911 equipment is included in the RFP for the project.
GIN will provide guidelines on how the E911 equipment may best interface into the national E911 network.
4) Initiate a global template for emergency satellite call routing that can be implemented by Mobile Satellite Systems (MSS) integrators and be adopted as GMDSS standards.
5) The Stage 2 Business Case plan will provide the cornerstone for implementing a real-time working proto-type E911 wireless routing model and MSS routing scheme.
It will provide a business analysis that will aid in the decision making process to continue with proto-type development.
Back Home Investment Areas Top of Page
[resear27.gif]
Improving Usability of Digital Selective Calling
Project Number: 9251 Project Manager: Mr. Jon Turban
Problem Statement: The single largest operational problem the Coast Guard faces concerning DSC is responding to the large number of MF/HF DSC distress relays being sent by ships.
This problem will be further exacerbated when VHF-FM DSC becomes more widely used.
Presently, the CG Communications Stations receive many false alerts, which they must spend time tracking down.
If they are unable to confirm it is a false alert, it requires a SAR response for all perceived valid alerts.
The Coast Guard treats each distress alert relay as if it were a separate distress.
Additionally, Maritime Domain Awareness is essential to providing Homeland Security to the nation.
Unlike the commercial aviation community, there is presently no means to detect and track commercial vessels transiting to the U. S. coastline.
Project Objective: This project will provide a user-friendly technology to the commercial and recreational maritime user.
In so doing, the DSC system will be used by all signatory nations as the primary method of communications in the maritime environment.
With the decrease in Coast Guard communications stations, the mariner will be able to rely on the distress capabilities integral to the DSC system to provide them with SAR assistance when needed.
Additionally, the completion of the improved standards will reduce the occurrence of false distress alerts and confusing distress relays being received by the CG communications stations.
Secondarily, the project will model the usage of the MF-HF spectra using OPNET to show that if maritime entities use DSC for routine calls, it will not overload the system.
Finally, the project will evaluate the feasibility of using DSC to improve Maritime Domain Awareness in support of Homeland Security by using the ship-specific DSC identifier as a means to detect and identify vessels using the sea lanes around the U.S.
Technical Approach: More than a technical approach, this is really an intellectual approach.
We will work with the international community to change three DSC international standards.
These are the DSC System Standard, the DSC Operational Procedures Standard, and the DSC Equipment Performance Standard.
The International Telecommunications Union (ITU) and the International Electrotechnical Commission (IEC) control these standards.
We have become U.S. delegates to these organizations and have already begun work to change the standards.
We have already represented the U.S. at the May 2001 and October 2001 meetings of the International Telecommunications Union (ITU) working party (8B) and have received positive feedback on the direction we are going.
A new draft of the DSC System Standard has been accepted by the ITU and will be carried over to the next session in May 2002 for further revision.
Benefit(s): Providing a user friendly system will result in increased usage of this technology by the mariner.
Additionally, because of the new standards, there will be a reduction in the number of false alerts and repeated distress relays.
This will result in a decrease in the workload at Coast Guard communications stations and, more importantly, a reduction in the resource hours used to prosecute false search and rescue situations or to sift through the recurrent distress relays to determine if appropriate responses have been initiated to mariners in distress.
Additionally, these improvements will allow the DSC system to be used to provide a "maritime traffic control" capability to detect and identify commercial vessels transiting the waters around the U. S. coastline.
Back Home Investment Areas Top of Page
[resear28.gif]
Small Cutter Connectivity Network
Project Number: 9260 Project Manager: LT Kevin Keast
Problem Statement: There is a need for high-speed data network connectivity between Coast Guard mobile assets that routinely operate in the A1 Coastal Sea Zone (0-30NM).
This need is best defined by the communications needs of these "coastal" assets.
As many of these assets are the CG's primary RBS, MLE, and SAR assets, quick, inexpensive, and reliable communications between on-scene assets and decision-makers ashore are critical to operational success.
Further, implementation of higher capacity communications links between mobile units and shore will enable these assets to improve crew quality of life concerns by providing such options as: underway Email, access to web-based training, and an opportunity to enroll in "distance learning" courses which historically have been unavailable to cutter crews due to underway scheduling.
Finally, the Coast Guard C4ISR Objective Architecture and Transition Plan Executable Actions include providing CGDN+ connectivity to all CG mobile assets to provide real-time and reliable tactical data exchange between our assets through various command/control multi-mission client/server applications.
Project Objective: The objective of this project is to provide wireless data connectivity to CG assets that routinely operate in the A1 coastal zone.
Primary issues to be addressed include: cost, availability, data rate, and supportability.
Technical Approach: The concept implements a wireless "Master Station" installed at a strategic location (high-site) within a CG Station AOR.
Secondary modems are installed on CG Assets with omni-directional antennas.
These secondary modems are clients on the network and also act as repeater modems for other secondary modems that do not have line of sight with the master modem.
Strategic placement of additional secondary modems on CG structures (lighthouses/secondary high sites) will ensure AOR coverage and also provide potential CG structure monitoring/remote control.
Various technologies are being investigated that could provide a high-speed wireless data connection (
The Coast Guard has experience with many of these wireless data technologies including SATCOMM, HF, VHF, IEEE 802.11and Cellular (CDPD).
These technologies all have pros and cons in supporting the A1NET concept.
Some of the cons which this project will address include: viability due to excessive cost, availability (commercial subscriber systems), range limitations, or slow data rates.
One state-of-the-market technology that has not been investigated is spread spectrum frequency-hopping wireless RF modems.
These modems provide high-speed wireless data rates (115Kbps+) at ranges up to 30 miles.
They are FCC license free and operate in the 900Mhz and 2.4Ghz frequency bands.
The average cost of these wireless modems is $2K, with installation costs of approximately $500 per modem.
Many commercial applications of these modems exist, including use in the maritime environment.
The British Columbia Ferry Corporation has installed this technology, allowing them to provide continuous Internet and e-mail service to their customers while underway.
The project management intends to evaluate the viability of this spread spectrum technology to meet the CGDN+ connectivity needs of cutters operating in the A1 coastal zone.
Benefit(s): Benefits will be obtained by having connectivity to the Coast Guard Data Network Plus.
This connectivity provides a secure (EFTO FOUO) connection to many existing resources, including both existing operational and logistical data bases, e-mail, web browsing (Intranet, Internet), and file transfer.
Additional benefits which may be gained by this technology include: Tactical Data Exchange applications (Asset Tracking, near real-time data communication, Law Enforcement applications (Vessel Management System (VMS), Operational Web Link (OWL)).
Any client server application developed for CGDN+ will be accessible.
Back Home Investment Areas Top of Page
[resear29.gif]
Aggregate Bandwidth Study
Project Number: 9270 Project Manager: LT Amy Grable
Problem Statement: CGHQ recently chartered the Cutter Connectivity Business Solutions Team (C2BST) to look at the current state of Cutter data connectivity, research and evaluate current and future connectivity technologies, and recommend a way ahead for the CG to achieve the Commandant's e-CG vision.
As an organization, the CG has done a good job of defining and projecting cutter connectivity needs and wants; however, those needs and wants have never been translated into bandwidth requirements.
Recent commercial satellite communications (SATCOM) initiatives have been undertaken to improve performance, but without a quantitative bandwidth goal in place, it is difficult to effectively measure the improvement and more importantly, the remaining connectivity gaps.
Unless the actual bandwidth requirements are clearly defined, the CG will continue to implement systems with a "catch-up" mentality -- always trying to improve the technology, but never quite meeting the goal.
Project Objective: The objective of the study is to quantify the aggregate bandwidth requirements for underway cutters by modeling the data transfer characteristics of various CG Enterprise Applications (EAs) that have been identified by the C2BST as required for underway use.
Technical Approach: A bandwidth usage model will be developed using Optimized Network Engineering Tools (OPNET) software in conjunction with its Application Characterization Environment (ACE) add-on module.
This software will allow a PC residing at the R
Participation from remote units will be required for this effort.
The data collected will be used as input to the bandwidth usage model and used to predict the aggregate bandwidth requirements of underway cutters.
Users will be able to modify parameters to consider different combinations of bandwidth requirements for cutters in different OPAREAs or conducting different missions.
Benefit(s): The results of the study will assist CG long-range communications planners in identifying performance gaps and developing an underway communications architecture to resolve them.
Back Home Investment Areas Top of Page
[resear30.gif]
Mobile Computing for Vessel Inspection
Project Number: 9550.1 Project Manager: LCDR David Dixon
Problem Statement: Vessel inspection of commercial vessels is an information-intensive process.
Vessel inspectors must retrieve information from corporate databases before the inspection and place the inspection results back in the database.
This reliance on database access means that the inspector must travel to the vessel inspection office before the inspection and after the inspection.
The inspector may also require access to regulations and policies that either are carried to the inspection site or require a call back to the inspection office.
Since all the information about the vessel and its inspection history are contained in the database, inspector efficiency could be greatly improved if the inspector had remote access to the required information.
Remote access to the database for vessel inspectors is contingent upon the ability of the inspectors to access data residing on the Coast Guard Data Network Plus (CGDN+) from mobile computers.
Current solutions involve the use of "challenge and response" tokens, which may not be cost effective or available to all inspectors and are not well suited for the extended data entry and retrieval required of vessel inspectors.
In order for the Coast Guard to benefit fully from the cost savings and efficiencies potentially available using mobile computing technology, access to the data network will need to be available in a secure, effective, cost and time-efficient manner.
Project Objective: Determine and demonstrate a solution for remote access to the CGDN+ and Marine Information for Safety and Law Enforcement (MISLE) CG Web application via reliable, cost effective, and token-less/wireless technology for the use of vessel inspectors.
Develop a Business Case which will specify the technology and costs to implement token-less and token-less/wireless access to the CGDN+, as well as recommend business change processes required to use, or resulting from using this technology.
Determine if the remote computing technology can improve inspection efficiency or positively affect the quality of the inspection process.
Technical Approach: This project will take advantage of several ongoing and recently completed projects that address vessel inspection.
This project is envisioned as a business case development, as such, it is an overview of what is required to institute wireless and token-less access to the MISLE application on the CGDN+ for vessel inspectors.
Effectively the project ends at stage 2.
The results of this business case may be used to implement a Coast Guard wide change to vessel inspector CGDN+ access processes.
Our intention is to examine the benefits of token-less and token-less/wireless connectivity to the CGDN+ relative to the costs and risks inherent in establishing such a capability, and to develop a prototype to demonstrate token-less and token-less/wireless remote access to the MISLE application.
We view the major area of investigation to be how to balance ubiquitous access to the CGDN+ against maintaining the security of the network.
Benefit)s): A demonstration of token-less and token-less/wireless access to the CDGN+ technology will make clear to vessel inspection managers how the technology works, its applicability to their requirements and provide them a feel of its application in the field.
Adopting a token-less/wireless access method to the CGDN+ may be more cost efficient and easier to implement and distribute then current token methods.
The primary benefit would be improved efficiency of the inspector.
A reduction in time to retrieve and input information into the inspection database would allow an inspector to inspect more ships.
This would allow the Coast Guard to meet its inspection goal for ship, which it can not achieve with the current system and staffing.
This enhancement to inspection information handling could also facilitate changes to inspection assignments and the inspection process itself.
Back Home Investment Areas Top of Page
[resear30.gif]
Mobile Computing for Vessel Inspection
Project Number: 9920 Project Manager: Mr. Brian Dolph
Problem Statement: Mishaps result in an annual average of approximately five fatalities, 9,000 lost workdays, 15,000 restricted workdays, and $27M cost to the Government.
These statistics demonstrate an overwhelming need to improve our loss prevention program and the management of risk at our facilities.
The Coast Guard relies on compliance-based safety surveys, not on predictive risk information to identify potential hazards before they result in losses.
The result is an inefficient approach to loss prevention.
Project Objective: Develop a methodology for conducting risk assessments on CG platforms and in CG facilities, and managing the identified risks.
This methodology will be used to move the Coast Guard away from its traditional compliance-based prescriptive safety program toward a more encompassing risk-based loss prevention program.
Provide an implementation-ready, risk-based loss prevention methodology, complete with required assessment techniques, assessment and management tools, management systems, training, representative and prototype examples.
Technical Approach: This is a mature project and is a couple of years away from program implementation.
The past years focus has been on testing and evaluating the robustness of the Coarse Risk Analysis (CRA) component of the Integrated Risk Assessment (IRA) Process with full-cycle applications on major Coast Guard afloat and shore assets, i.e., WHEC-378s, an ISC, and an MSO. CGHQ program managers and MLC staffs gained first-hand experience through direct participation in the recent applications with the CRA methodology.
The experience generated a greater appreciation of the benefits of the process and the resources needed to manage a CRA.
It resulted in consensus that the fundamental methodology is appropriate for addressing Coast Guard internal risks, i.e., personnel and property.
Some methodology refinements will be tested that would make the CRA approach less intrusive to operational units, capture more experienced subject matter experts, and better communicate the results throughout the organization.
Work on completing the full-cycle evaluations will continue in FY00 with evaluations of the related risk-based safety survey components.
Last years attempt at defining IRA-related management systems was rejected by the program sponsors.
This project learned that understanding what management system modifications are needed (and gaining buy-in for modifications that are made) is very difficult without first developing and demonstrating that the new/improved tools clearly provide value.
Although, defining a management system took a back seat to the full-cycle evaluations initiated last year, work remains on defining an implementation strategy.
The approach will be to assess gaps and/or opportunities to dovetail and enhance existing safety management systems.
(Ongoing examples include, integration of IRA sections in the new Health 
Sufficient time remains to revise or develop additional procedures before implementation to close any gaps discovered.
A prototype safety measurement program will be developed and put in place next year.
Both direct and indirect performance metrics will be developed and tested to measure the effectiveness of risk management activities.
There remain some operational units that represent a unique challenge in applying the IRA approach.
It is important that the R
The CRA methodology will be tested on a CG air station and on small boat station operations.
Successful use of the CRA methodology on an air station would tie a common risk approach to the triad of CG major assets, i.e., afloat, air, and shore assets.
An assessment of a small boat station is designed to integrate the shore and vessel approaches.
A key activity to support the IRA program is the development of a suite of automated IRA tools to ensure the risk assessment and management activities are as efficient as possible.
Acknowledging the considerable volume of data needed to support a risk assessment, and the volume of data generated from an assessment, automated tools are required to support these programs.
Prototype tools will be developed, and tested on a continual basis with the conduct of field level analysis and development of any management system elements to support the risk-based loss prevention program.
The IRA database will be populated with data collected on the various applications over the next couple of years before it is handed off to the program manager.
Briefings for all levels of the organization will be developed and conducted.
The project team considers it essential for all personnel and organizations to be knowledgeable about the process, to have input to its implementation, and to ensure alignment of organizational goals and systems.
The key organizations to contribute to this includes CGHQ (G-WKS) both Maintenance Logistics Commands (LANT and PAC) and various units.
G-WKS will select the units for evaluation and assist in scheduling the analysis.
Deliverables will be provided for key elements of the project.
Interim reports will be provided on an annual basis to summarize the efforts completed in the previous year.
In addition, a comprehensive formal report documenting the loss prevention program will be provided at the completion of the project.
Benefit(s): Understanding risk characterizations, and having the correct tools to manage risk information has resulted in high-hazard industries achieving significant reduction of losses.
Industry experience indicates 70% of the losses reduced through risk management were operational, more than paying for the 30% safety loss reduction and cost of the program.
The Coast Guard does not immediately expect to see such dramatic results, but significant cost and resource savings are expected within ten years.
Immediate benefits have already been obtained through risk reduction recommendations that are being applied to new Cutter designs, shore facility planning, marine safety inspection procedures, and the Cutter crew optimization projects, Paragon and Exemplar.
Back Investment Areas Top of Page
[resear30.gif]
| Home | News | Overview | Research | Miscellaneous | Directory | | Business Opportunities | Partnerships | Publications | Disclaimer | Coast Guard | | R
