Congressman Robert Menendez Political Parties The Two Party System Candidates running for an elected office usually run on along a party platform.
A party platform is the core group of issues that people stand for.
There are two major party platforms in the United States:
Democratic Party The party of Jefferson, Franklin Roosevelt, Kennedy and Clinton, the Democrats are the more liberal of the two main American parties.
The Democratic Party is the oldest existing political party in the U.S.
Some historians believe it began in the 1790's as Jefferson's Democratic- Republican Party.
Most historians trace the party's origin to the campaign organization that formed after the 1824 presidential election to win the presidency for Jackson in 1828.
Republican Party The Grand Old Party (GOP), the party of Lincoln, Teddy Roosevelt, Eisenhower and Reagan.
Of the main parties in American politics, this is the more conservative of the two.
The Republican Party started as a series of antislavery political meetings in the Midwest in 1854.
At that time, the Whig Party was breaking up.
Many Whigs--as well as Northern Democrats-- opposed the extension of slavery.
The Republican Party represented this viewpoint and thus gained followers rapidly.
The party's first presidential candidate, John C. Fremont, ran unsuccessfully in 1856, but he carried 11 northern states.
Early History When the U.S. Constitution was drawn up in 1787, it made no mention of political parties.
In fact, George Washington and other early political leaders opposed their development.
Nevertheless, common economic, political, and social interests brought people together to form political organizations.
A group called the Federalists supported strong national government.
Their opponents were called the Anti-Federalists.
These political organizations began to take shape before Washington became President in 1789.
Soon after, the two groups developed into the first American political parties--the Federalist Party and the Democratic- Republican Party.
Federalists, led by Alexander Hamilton, wanted a strong central government.
The Democratic-Republicans, led by Thomas Jefferson, favored a weak central government.
Both parties would split after the 1816 presidential election.
One of the Democratic-Republican factions came under the leadership of Andrew Jackson.
By about 1830, Jackson and his followers were known as Democrats.
Today's Party Structure in Congress After elections are held, one party is deemed the majority based on number of elected members they have versus the other party.
Having a majority means having being able to control more votes on bills that might coincide with party platforms.
The Senate and the House do not necessarily have to have the same majority and minority parties.
In the House, it also means that the daily agenda can be set by the Speaker of the House, who is nominated by the majority party.
The minority party is not without its own influence though.
A lot of bills cannot go through with the votes of the majority alone.
Cooperation and compromise is often required with the minority party.
Gridlock occurs when Congress members cannot agree with each other on the bill, which can prevent the bill from becoming law.
Third Parties Third Parties provide an alternative to the normal two party system.
In the American political landscape, these parties usually sit in the shadow of the dominant Democratic and Republican parties.
In the past, certain third parties have influenced presidential elections, typically by helping split vital votes from one of the larger parties.
Some of these parties include the Green Party, the Libertarian Party, and the Reform Party.
