[sdcphead.jpg] 5.
Upper Santa Cruz Valley I. SUBAREA: The subarea defines the watershed draining the Sierrita Mountains on the west and the Santa Rita Mountains on the east into the Santa Cruz River, the subarea's primary watercourse.
The southern boundary of the planning unit is marked by the Pima County Santa Cruz County line and its northern end runs along the City of Tucson's South Valley as indicated on the map entitled, Modern Communities, Transportation, and Ownership.
This area encompasses approximately 702 square miles.
The Upper Santa Cruz Valley subarea contains approximately 449,684 acres, within which land status is broken down as presented in the table below.
Like many parts of Pima County, State Lands make up a sizeable portion of the countryside.
This is followed by private lands, federal lands, and Indian land in that order.
Table IV.5.1.
Upper Santa Cruz Valley Subarea Land Ownership by Acreage and Percent Ownership Acres Percent Bureau of Land Management 7,724 1.7 Indian Lands 31,612 7.1 National Forest Lands 41,034 9.1 Private Land 156,454 34.8 State Lands 212,745 47.3 Other 114 
Principal communities in the subarea are Arivaca Junction, Canoa, Continental, Green Valley, Sahuarita, Corona de Tucson, and portions of the South Valley of Tucson.
Additional population is dispersed on ranches and other rural settlements throughout the area.
Traditionally, the economy has been dominated by mining, ranching, farming, which continue to the present day.
However, a growing service sector is associated with those areas experiencing rapid urbanization such as Green Valley.
The population estimate for the year 2000 is 31,030.
II.
CULTURAL RESOURCES: This section presents information and analysis of current data on archaeological sites, historic resources and traditional cultural places within the subarea.
A. Archaeological sites "Archaeological sites are any material remains of past human life or activities which are preserved in their original setting that are important to understanding prehistory or history.
These sites or districts may include occupation sites, work areas, farming sites, burials and other funerary remains, artifacts, campsites, hearths, rock art, intaglios, trails, battle sites, religious or ceremonial sites, caves and rock shelters, the architectural or other remains of structures of all kinds, such as pit houses, pueblo rooms, adobe or rock foundations, and other domestic features, usually dating from prehistoric or aboriginal periods, or from historic periods at least 50 years old, for which only archaeological vestiges remain" (Preserving Cultural and Historic Resources, Pima County, May 1999).
Archaeologists learn about the past by collecting and analyzing information in two ways: through survey and by excavation.
Survey involves inspecting the ground surface in a particular area and recording concentrations of artifacts and features (hearths, roasting pits, pit houses, etc.) as archaeological sites.
A site represents the physical remains of past human behavior in a single location dating to one or more periods of use through time.
Surveys are often done systematically by groups of archaeologist who walk the land in regularly spaced lines looking for artifacts.
Some surveys, however, are judgmental in that archaeologists only look where sites are expected to be found and not elsewhere.
In all cases, survey offers an extensive perspective on past land use.
The second kind of information on archaeological sites is gained through excavation.
This is the systematic recording, recovery, and analysis of artifacts and features from within a site's limits.
Critical information is gained by understanding the spatial relationship of all artifacts and features within a three dimensional context.
This enables interpretation about how the site was used, by whom, when, whether the site was used more than once and what happened after it was abandoned.
Often, archaeological sites are not fully excavated but are only partially sampled.
This saves what is left of the site for future investigations.
Archaeological excavation provides highly detained information about the use of one limited spatial area during one or more use episodes.
Archaeologist use survey and excavation data together to interpret the past; however, as new information becomes available and as new ideas about the past are developed, this interpretation changes over time.
Previous Research Archaeological investigations in the Upper Santa Cruz Subarea have been conducted since the 1920s, and over the years, evidence has accumulated suggesting that human beings have occupied the valley and its highland margins for the last seven millennia.
The first investigations involved sampling prehistoric pottery found on archaeological sites located between Tubac and Sahuarita in an effort to build a cultural time line for the region.
Exploration of ruins in Sonora Mexico in the early 1930s also included the southern reaches of the subarea.
It was noted at the time that similarity between Red on buff decorated pottery found in southern Arizona and pottery found in Sonora, Mexico suggested a connection between the two areas.
In the mid 1940s Ted Danson (father of actor Ted Danson Jr.) conducted a large scale survey of the Upper Santa Cruz Valley recording over 200 archaeological sites dating to the prehistoric and historic time periods.
From this work Danson was able to recognize differences in the artifacts between the upper and lower portions of the Santa Cruz Valley suggesting different cultural groups lived in these areas during prehistory.
These early investigations of the Upper Santa Cruz Valley were conducted at a time when archaeologists throughout the Southwest region were attempting to describe the extent of archaeologically recognizable cultures in time and space.
In the early 1950s, Paul Frick, a graduate student at the University of Arizona, investigated the flood plain and lower terraces of the Santa Cruz River, again between Tubac and Sahuarita, to identify and record sites for his Master's thesis.
This effort resulted in 216 sites being recorded within an area covering approximately 80 square miles.
Frick was able to discern patterns in where people settled on the landscape, noting several site concentrations suggesting distinct communities.
He further distinguished between places that were used for habitation from those that appeared to have been used for food production and was able to classify sites by time period within the Hohokam archaeological sequence (A.D. 700 - 1450).
Frick noted that the highest number of sites appeared to date to between A.D. 950 and 1150 suggesting a peak population in the valley during that time period.
Excavations at the Paloparado Ruin near Otero by Charles Di Peso in 1953 revealed that the site had been periodically occupied during the Hohokam, historic Piman, and early Spanish Colonial times spanning a period from AD 900 to the 1700s.
With the passage of environmental laws in the mid to late 1960s, federally funded or authorized projects required an assessment of impacts to archaeological sites and other kinds of cultural resources prior to development.
As a consequence, the number of archaeological surveys and excavations in the Upper Santa Cruz Valley increased notably with a concomitant increase in information about and understanding of the past.
This occurred at a time in the discipline of American archaeology when the questions of interest shifted from descriptive inquiries of what happened in the past, where and when, to an emphasis on explaining how cultural behavior changes through time and why.
Work during the 1980s revealed a more complete picture of human land use in the Upper Santa Cruz River Valley through time.
While most archaeological survey investigations involve looking at the ground surface in relatively small areas on the level of tens of acres or smaller, a number of surveys involving many thousands of acres were conducted during this time revealing past land use pattering over a broad area.
Large scale surveys were conducted east of the Sierrita Mountains in the Tinaja Hills; on the Tohono O'odham Reservation, San Xavier District; north of Sahuarita on the east side of the Santa Cruz River; within the Santa Rita Experimental Range; and, on adjacent land in the Coronado National Forest.
These investigations were prompted by a combination of legal mandates, publicly funded research, and academic studies that in total covered thousands of acres of federal, tribal, state, and private lands.
Hundreds of archaeological sites were recorded from a variety of ecological and elevational settings, and a number of these were subject to partial testing and full excavation programs.
It was during this time that archaeologists were able to correlate shifts in the position of the Santa Cruz River over time with changes in how the Hohokam Indians practiced farming along the valley floor.
After about AD 1000, it appears that the east side of the river was favored for settlement and the populace began to make extensive use of the upland bajadas for the cultivation of agave through dry farming, a pattern also identified in the Tortolita Mountains to the north.
While research on the late prehistoric time period associated with the pottery bearing Hohokam culture expanded during the 1980s, research on the pre-ceramic or "Archaic" period added time depth to human occupation in the Upper Santa Cruz and elsewhere in the region.
For instance,, survey conducted for a land exchange on US Forrest Service land in the Rosemont area of the northern Santa Rita Mountains resulted in the excavation of 10 sites dating to the Middle and Late Archaic time Period spanning the years 4800 B.C. to A.D 350.
This research also demonstrated that Archaic populations were well established in the upland areas and that the pattern of settlement involved using small, short term camps for hunting and gathering and larger base camps that were used by residential groups for longer periods of time.
Excavation of a site located in the Santa Cruz flood plain in the early 1980s revealed deeply buried archaeological deposits that also date to the Middle and Late Archaic time period and demonstrated the existence of sites of this age in the deeper layers of soil along the river's margins.
The 1990s have seen additional survey and excavation projects in the subarea, most notably the investigation of 6400 acres in the Canoa Land Grant, in Green Valley.
This project, conducted in 1995, identified 122 historic and prehistoric sites, indicating that the terraces along this portion of the Santa Cruz River have been utilized for a period of at least 2000 years.
Excavations at the Continental site, the remains of a large Hohokam village just north of the town of Continental, revealed further evidence that certain parts of the flood plain were intensively utilized.
Land use intensity can be measured by determining the number of sites found in an area that has been well surveyed.
In the central portion of the subarea adjacent to the Santa Cruz River site density averages 9 sites per mile whereas in other areas more removed from the river site density averages around 2 sites per mile.
The Canoa Land grant survey and the on going excavation at the Continental Site indicate that this portion of the subarea was a highly attractive location for human settlement because of its access to arable land, water for farming and domestic use, as well as its proximity to the mountains, upland areas, and the flood plain for hunting and gathering wild plants, animals, and other resources.
In sum, 80 years of archaeological survey and excavation within the subarea reveals that the Upper Santa Cruz River Valley was repeatedly used by human populations over many thousands of years, first by highly mobile hunter gatherers and later by large village based agriculturalists, and that certain places on the landscape have been favored over others.
This research has contributed to knowledge on the age of archaeological sites, how people settled on the land, what they ate and how they acquired their food, the manner in which people related to one another, the kinds of communities they lived in, and how people interacted with others in the rest of the valley and beyond.
Survey data Archaeological survey is the first step in characterizing the nature, age and distribution of archaeological sites within an area like the Upper Santa Cruz Valley and there are two different kinds of survey that archaeologists typically perform: Linear surveys and block surveys.
Linear survey involves inspecting a right- of-way for construction of a road, sewer line, telephone cable or other linear feature.
These surveys tend to be done in compliance with legal mandates requiring environmental studies during project planning.
Block survey involves examining non-linear properties ranging in size from a few acres to 1000s of acres.
These are typically done either in compliance with legal mandates, or through academic or preservation related research projects.
The Map entitled "Archaeological Survey and Site Locations" shows the areas within the subarea that have been archaeologically surveyed and the sites that have been recorded.
The map demonstrates that a number of large block surveys and some linear projects have been conducted with the subarea, notably on the east side of the Sierrita Mountains, east of the San Xavier District boundary, within the Coronado National Forest on the west side of the Santa Rita Mountains and within the Santa Rita Experimental Range and Wildlife Area.
This latter survey is an example of a systematic sample survey consisting of linear corridors that were examined separated by spaces that were not examined.
Not shown are the 46 sites that were recorded during this survey.
Presented below is a breakdown of survey data currently available at the Arizona State Museum presented by acreage and survey type including the percentage of the subarea that has been investigated.
.
Table IV.5.
2.
Upper Santa Cruz Valley Subarea - Survey Acreage by Survey Type Survey Number Acres Surveyed Percent of Subarea Linear 53 5513 1.2 Block 120 68,355 15.2 Total 173 73,868 16.4
While the total acreage figures indicate that more of this subarea has been investigated than elsewhere within Eastern Pima County, such as the Altar Valley at 5.3 percent and the Avra Valley at 8.0 percent, these figures still indicate that approximately 83% of the area has not been formally investigated.
This means that research conclusions about the past within the subarea are always under going revision as new areas are explored and more data are made available.
Site Data - Chronology Table 3 presents information on the number of prehistoric sites in the subarea by time period as reported by the Arizona State Museum.
Table IV.5.3.
Upper Santa Cruz Valley Subarea - Prehistoric Archaeological Site Data by Time Period TIME PERIODS PaleoIndian 12,000 B.C. - 8,000 B.C Archaic 8,000 B.C.- A.D. 200 Ceramic A.D. 200- A.D. 1540 Unknown Total Site Counts 0 21 172 189 382
While no sites dating to the PaleoIndian Period have yet been reported in the subarea, four sites dating to this time period are known in the San Pedro River Valley to the east and several diagnostic spear points have been found on the Tohono O'odham reservation to the west.
The term "PaleoIndian" describes the earliest period of human occupation in the Americas.
This was a time following the end of the last ice age when the environment was cooler and wetter than it is today.
Many species of now extinct animals including mammoth, horse, camel, bear, bison, and lions lived during this period.
Numerous archaeological sites found in the west indicate that hunting these large animals was an important part of the subsistence of PaleoIndian people, and as such, archaeologists refer to them as "big game hunters."
While very little is known about these people, it is believed that they lived in small groups or bands by hunting and gathering wild foods as they became seasonably available throughout the year.
Archaeological evidence suggest that they were highly mobile covering thousands of square miles in a year as they moved across the landscape.
Early in the succeeding Archaic Period, the environment became warmer, the large game animals disappeared, and modern plant and animal species were established.
The Archaic Period is represented in the subarea with 21 sites, one of which dates to the time period between 1500 B.C. and A.D. 200; the rest cannot be more accurately dated based on survey data.
New information collected from the Canoa Ranch survey project, however, has identified seven sites that date to between 5000 B.C. and A.D. 100.
The Archaic Period represent a time span of almost 8000 years during which human beings adjusted their way of living in response to new environmental conditions.
In order to survive, people became generalists in their subsistence practices, hunting and gathering a wide variety of plants and animals and becoming more efficient in how they processed their food as indicated by the presence of grinding stones found on sites of this period.
Again, people appeared to have lived in small groups by hunting a gathering wild plants and animals over large areas through a seasonal round.
Sites from the early and middle parts of the Archaic are rare in southern Arizona suggesting low population levels in response to the unfavorable environmental conditions believed to exist at that time; however, toward the end of the period several significant changes occurred laying the foundation for subsequent cultural development.
First, the environment stabilized by 4500 years ago approaching modern conditions by that time.
Second, population levels appear to have increased and some evidence suggests that people roamed within more restricted territories as a result.
Third, by approximately 3500 years ago, people began to experiment with growing their own food as a supplement to their diet.
This change also co-occurred with more permanent settlement along well watered reaches of the major drainages in the region.
A total of 172 sites dating to the Ceramic Period are known within the subarea indicating intensive use of the Avra Valley during this time in prehistory.
Fourteen sites date to the Early Ceramic times (A.D. 200 - A.D. 1000), 47 to the Middle Ceramic Period (A.D. 1000-A.D. 1300 ) but only one is known dating to the end of the Hohokam Sequence (A.D. 1300-A.D. 1500); the rest cannot be more accurately dated with survey data.
The Ceramic Period covers the time between the adoption of ceramic technology in the third and fourth centuries after Christ to the end of the prehistoric sequence around A.D 1540.
It was during the early part of the period, between approximately A.D. 200 to A.D. 700, that Archaic Period populations completed the transition from mobile hunting and gathering to settled, village based, agricultural existence in southern Arizona and elsewhere.
The principal pottery bearing people in the region during prehistory were the Hohokam, who emerged as a distinct culture in the eighth century and dominated central and southern Arizona until around A.D. 1450.
The Hohokam flourished along the river valleys of southern Arizona, including the Avra Valley, but were also well adapted to the desert lands to the west.
They lived in settled, permanent villages, grew their own food using irrigation and dry farming techniques, developed a rich ceremonial life, and traded extensively with their neighbors throughout the region.
A period of environmental instability during the A.D. 1300s is believed have weakened the agricultural economy to the point where the Hohokam were no longer able to produce food in sufficient quantifies and with enough consistency to support large populations and the culture collapsed around A.D 1450.
Following the collapse of the Hohokam, the region is believed to have been occupied in very low numbers by an O'odham (upper Piman speaking) people whose settlement and subsistence practices reflect a return to an earlier, simpler way of living.
Life continued to involve the cultivation of crops supplemented by hunting a gathering, but the level of technical sophistication and social and religious cohesion characteristic of the Hohokam is missing in these later populations.
These people are believed to be the descendants of the Hohokam, but are recognized as separate culture groups.
Archaeologists know very little about the period that represents the end of the Hohokam and the beginning of the Spanish Colonial presence in southern Arizona.
It appears to have been a time of flux when the vacuum left by the disappearance of the Hohokam was filled by groups that the Spanish recognized as the Sobaipuri and the Tohono O'odham in the 17th and 18th centuries
While a few sites dating to this time period are known in the Tucson Basin to the north, the Upper Santa Cruz subarea has not yet revealed evidence of occupation during the time after the Hohokam collapse and before the arrival of the Spanish.
Table IV.5.4.
Upper Santa Cruz Valley Subarea Historic Archaeological Site Data by Affiliation Euro-America n Mexican-A merican Native American Unknown Total 9 6 3 11 29
Table IV.5.
4 presents archaeological data on the Historic Period, spanning the years between A.D. 1540 and 1950.
The history of the Santa Cruz Valley is rich and complex.
One of the first Europeans to enter the desert southwest was Francisco Vasquez de Coronado who with a large entourage of some 300 Spaniards and 1300 Indians is believed to have passed up the San Pedro River Valley in A.D. 1540 on a journey that ultimately brought him to the Rio Grande River in the vicinity of Albuquerque, New Mexico.
But it wasn't until the 1690s that attempts were made by the Spanish to settle in southern Arizona.
During these forays, Spanish soldiers and clergy encountered people who spoke the O'odahm (Piman) language living in numerous villages in the area.
In 1691, Eusebio Kino, a Jesuit priest, began a series of trips into the Pimera Alta, to meet with the native population.
This resulted in the construction of the mission church at the village of San Xavier del Bac starting in 1700 south of Tucson and the founding of a large church at Guevavi in the Upper Santa Cruz Valley, north of modern day Nogales.
The introduction of Christianity changed the native ways of life profoundly.
Livestock, wheat, and other domesticated plants and animals were added to the economy.
Diseases introduced by the Europeans wiped out entire Indian villages and native settlements of Sonora and Arizona were reorganized with a new focus on mission communities.
Presidios, or forts, established by the Spanish at strategic places, originally for protection from the Apaches, were also occasionally used to keep the usually friendly Pimans in check.
This was of particular concern to the Spanish int he years between 1734 and 1760 when Piman populations were agitating against Colonial rule culminating in the Pima Revolt of 1751.
Following these event, Spanish security concerns focused on the Apaches, who threatened Spanish outposts all along the northern frontier.
The need for defense prompted the Spanish to establish a presidio at Tubac in 1752, which was later removed to the location of Tucson in 1775.
In the same year, Juan Batista de Anza set off from Tubac, passed up the Santa Cruz River Valley turning west along the Gila River and journeyed to the Pacific Coast culminating in the founding of San Francisco.
In the later years of the Spanish Colonial period, ranching, mining, and agriculture were the principal economic activities in the Santa Cruz Valley and elsewhere.
This was a time of relative peace until the Mexican War of Independence ended the colonial period in 1821.
The missionization and military protection programs of the Spanish colonial government encouraged an influx of Spanish colonists early in the 18th century that eventually brought and end to the dispersed pattern of Indian Villages along the length of the Santa Cruz River.
The Santa Cruz Valley became dominated by the inhabitants of Spanish and Mexican decent who survived mainly by farming, ranching, and trade.
Apaches began raiding extensively n southern Arizona after 1830 and were a major threat to the Mexican Settlements.
By the time of the Gadsden purchase by the united States in 1853, Spanish and later Mexican settlements were well established, and ranching and mining had replaced much of the traditional agricultural subsistence base.
One of the larger holdings in the Upper Santa Cruz Valley, the San Ignaciao del la Canoa Land Grant, was established by brothers Tomas and Ignacio Ortiz just prior to Mexican independence in 1820.
The grant, covered some 17,000 acres on both side of the Santa Cruz River from north of Tubac to Sahuarita, was operated as a cattle ranch throughout the Mexican period despite repeated Apache attacks
The Mexican war of 1846 and subsequent transfer of the Gadsden purchase to U.S. ownership in 1854 were the primary historical events leading to the end of Spanish and Mexican domination of the Santa Cruz Valley.
Arizona officially became at territory in 1863, during the American Civil War.
Tucson was briefly occupied by the Confederacy in 1862, only to be chased out by Union Troops a short time later.
National politics, and the presence of proven mineral wealth, convinced President Abraham Lincoln to recognize Arizona as a territory separate from that of New Mexico.
After the war, ranching and mining dominated the territorial economy and brought in Anglo-Americans in search of gold, silver , copper and other minerals.
However, lumbering and farming also contributed as economic opportunities expanded.
Continued confrontation with the Apaches prompted the establishment of a permanent US military presence throughout southern Arizona, and a number of posts, camps, and forts sprung from Tubac to Holbrook.
The war with the Apaches ended in 1886 with the surrender of Geronimo ushering a period of peace and prosperity.
With the coming of the railroad in 1880 Tucson became connected to the rest of the nation, bringing greater population growth and a more commercially oriented economy.
Statehood came to Arizona in 1912 after many fruitless years of trying to convince the Congress of the Territory's worthiness.
Statehood also resulted in the establishment of the state trust lands that still to this day cover vast territory throughout southern Arizona.
The establishment of the US Forrest Service (1905) prior to statehood and the Bureau of Land Management afterwards (1946) had a tremendous impact on rural life in the region including the Upper Santa Cruz Valley adding forest and range management requirements to lands that traditionally had none.
The effects of the first and second World Wars cannot be overstated in that each of these national convulsions brought an influx of people and technology to southern Arizona making Tucson the main population center in the region.
Copper mining became a major economic force in the area region including the east flanks of the Sierrita Mountains, but farming and ranching continued to be important in the Santa Cruz Valley and elsewhere.
It was during the 1960s, that the population of Tucson began to grow explosively reaching its present size of approximately 800,000.
As a result of this demographic trend, urbanization has begun to creep down the Upper Santa Cruz as new communities have become established in what was open range along the valley floor.
Despite these changes, the Upper Santa Cruz subarea today remains largely rural and dependant upon ranching and farming just as has for hundreds of years.
A total of 29 Historic Period sites have been identified in the subarea by the Arizona State Museum, 9 of which are Euro-American, Six are Mexican American in ethnic origin, three are O'odham and the cultural identity of eleven sites is unknown.
Most date to the 19th and early 20th centuries.
Low sample size, the greater visibility of some sites and not others, and a lack of research interest in the archaeology of the historic time period distorts the true picture of historic period land use in the subarea.
Given the long history of the valley, it is certain that archaeological remains associated with the trends discussed above exist within the subarea and will be recorded as more areas are explored.
Site Data - Function The site data from both the historic and prehistoric eras can also be examined from a functional perspective to highlight land use trends within the subarea.
The following is a summary of archaeological site data for the subarea that is presented by gross time period and site function.
These data are made available by the Arizona State Museum, University of Arizona.
Please note: the data presented in Table IV.5.5 includes archaeological sites found on Indian lands.
The data used to prepare Table IV.5.6 and the map figures showing site distributions have removed the sites found on Indian lands from analysis, therefore, the site counts differ.
Table IV.5.5 Upper Santa Cruz Valley Subarea - Archaeological Site Data Time Period by Site Function PERIOD Prehistoric Historic Both Unknown Total FUNCTION Agriculture 4 2 1 0 7 Art 4 3 0 0 7 Disposal 4 3 0 1 8 Government 2 2 0 0 4 Habitation 12 7 2 3 24 Resource Processing 83 1 1 11 96 Resource Procurement 0 3 0 1 4 Religion 1 0 0 0 1 Transportation 0 1 1 0 2 Unknown 272 7 5 35 319 Total 382 29 10 51 472
The site counts presented in Table 5 show that prehistoric sites out number the historic by more than 13 to one and that in ten instance, occupations from both major time periods are present on the same site.
The prehistoric site counts are dominated by Resource Processing (food and non food resources) and Habitation (residential) as the most common of the identifiable functions.
Agriculture (i.e. fields, water control features), Art (rock art) and Disposal (trash) appear in equal, but small numbers.
Two prehistoric sites are functionally identified as governmental in nature, meaning they contain features that are believed to be communal, such as public architecture .
One site is believed to represent Religion or ritual functions, such a shrine or other place or worship.
That Resource Procurement (food and non food resources) activities, such as evidence of hunting or stone quarrying, is completely lacking, is probably a function of research bias towards recording larger, more visible sites.
As is the case in the other subareas in Pima County, the largest number of prehistoric sites cannot be functionally identified based on survey data.
The historic sites emphasize residential needs, with Habitation being the primary functional category represented.
Its interesting to note that three sites with Art as the site function are present.
These are almost certainly Native American rock art sites that date to the historic period, possibly Tohono O'odham in origin.
Disposal and Resource Procurement functions are present in the subarea with three sites each, followed by two sites identified as having agricultural uses and two with governmental functions.
Lastly, Resources Processing, such as a kiln or ore processing feature, and Transportation, meaning a road or trail, are present with one site each.
Ten site have both prehistoric and historic occupations on them that are functionally identified as Habitation (2), Agriculture (1), Resource Processing (1), and Transportation (1) being the dominant function at these sites where site use can be determined.
There are also 51 sites where function can be determined but their general age cannot, with Resources Processing, Habitation, Disposal and Resource Procurement being the primary site functions at these sites in descending numbers.
This kind of situation is often revealing of Native American site occupation more than sites occupied by Euro-Americans, because similar kinds of behaviors were practiced by Native Americans in both the prehistoric and historic time periods that only simple tools and left little physical evidence; for example, collecting and processing cactus fruit.
Of all sites from both the prehistoric and historic time period, the data presented in Table 5 indicates that site use within the subarea is dominated by Resource Processing at 96 sites.
Residential needs are represented by Habitation sites and is the second highest site function by count (24), followed in order by Disposal (8), Agriculture and Art (7), Government and Resource procurement (4) Transportation (2) and lastly Religion (1).
Not surprisingly, the vast majority of those sites that could be functionally identified relate to processing food and non food resources, and housing.
To sum the information on archaeological sites, the Upper Santa Cruz Valley subarea has witnessed intensive archaeological survey and site excavation, but still only a fraction of the whole of the subarea has been investigated.
Because of this, site distribution is still more a reflection of where investigation has occurred than past land use patterning.
Nonetheless, the following statements can be made based on the archaeological record: 1) It is evident that human beings have occupied the Upper Santa Cruz Valley subarea for many thousands of years, with a peak occupation during the period between A.D. 200 and A.D. 1300; 2) certain parts of the landscape have been more heavily utilized than others especially along the margins of the Santa Cruz River where surface water has been available; and, 3) the predominant use of the landscape relates to processing both food and non food resources and meeting residential needs.
B. Historical Resources "Historical resources are sites, districts, structures, objects, or other evidences of human activities that represent facets of the history of the nation, state, or locality.
Also places where significant historical or unusual events occurred even though no evidence of the event remains, or places associated with persons significant in our history that have gained importance in the last 50 years" (Preserving Cultural and Historic Resources, Pima County, May 1999).
Historical resources are largely constructed or engineered elements of the built environment including buildings used for residential purposes, such as houses, but also commercial stores, industrial facilities, civic centers, and places of worship.
Roads, bridges, irrigation canals, mining works, and railroad tracks are also historical resources.
Information on these places is recovered through drawings and design plans, photographs, maps, surveys, and personal recollections.
The Upper Santa Cruz Valley subarea has a number of places of historic importance including occupied historic communities, abandoned settlements or ghost towns, places that have been recognized for their historic value and registered on the National Register of Historic Places, and a historic trail.
These are represented on the attached map entitled, "Upper Santa Cruz Subarea Historic Resources."
Historic Communities: Historic Communities are those settlements that are in existence today that were established 50 years or more ago as indicated by a founding date or the date the first post office opened.
The following descriptions are derived from "Arizona's Names" by Byrd Howell Granger, The Falconer Publishing Company, 1983)
EUR Continental.
The town of Continental originated as a rail stop named after the Continental Rubber Company, which bought part of the old Canoa Land Grant.
The plant Guayule, from which rubber is derived, was grown for many years; however, in 1949 the company sold its land to be used for farming.
In recent years, the economic focus in the town has shifted from agriculture to residential and today it is within the Green Valley development corridor.
The first post office was established in 1916.
EUR Sahuarita was originally part of the Sahuarita Ranch, which was established by James Kilroy Brown in 1879.
The ranch headquarters was used by Pedro Aguirre as a stage stop between Tucson, Arivaca and Quijota.
The community was named after the ranch and opened its first post office in 1882.
Brown's sale of the ranch in 1886 lead to a decline that lasted until 1911 when a second post office was opened in town.
Originally named after the abundant saguaro cactus in the area, Sahuarita is today a growing community.
Ghost Towns: Many communities became established only to be abandoned.
These places were typically mining towns, or in some cases, milling towns, that thrived until economic forces eliminated the driving force of their existence.
Established during the later part of the last century and early 20th century, these places remain time capsules that reflect by-gone eras.
Several ghost towns are known in the subarea.
The following descriptions are derived from "Ghost Towns of Arizona" by James E. and Barbara H. Sherman, University of Oklahoma Press, 1969.
EUR Helvetia.
This was a mining community, and like so many in the region, suffered the ups and downs of the marker for copper ore.
Mines were probably in use after the civil war but it wasn't until the early 1880s that several large mining claims were developed including the Old Dick, Heavyweight, and Tallyhoo mines.
In 1890s the Helvetia Copper Company formed and it was in response to the mining under this company that the community of Helvetia developed.
Copper mining continued until 1911 when low copper prices lead to a shut down, although sporadic mining continued through the years of the First World War.
The post office opened in 1899 and was closed by 1921.
EUR Olive.
Named in honor of Olive Stephenson Brown, wife of James Kilroy Brown (see Sahuarita above), this mining community owed its existence to silver not copper and served a number of mines in the area including the Olive, San Xavier, Wedge, Michigan Maid, and the Richmond mines.
Olive Camp, as it was known, was active during the 1880s.
It was a unique mining settlement in that ore was not milled on site and there was no smelter or machinery.
Instead raw ore was shipped elsewhere for processing.
Olive Brown lived in the camp with her husband and was known to treat the men to a free chicken dinner every Sunday, an act of kindness that was eagerly anticipated by the miners.
The mine was sold in the late 1880s and was abandoned shortly there after.
The post office opened in 1887 and closed in 1892.
EUR Twin Buttes.
This copper mining town developed around 1903 when the Twin Buttes Mining and Smelting Company was formed and operated the Senator, Morgan, Copper glance, Copper Queen, and Copper King mines.
Ore was shipped by rail to the smelters at Sasco until 1914.
The settlement itself burgeoned with the success of the mining operation and a bunkhouse, assay office, store, boarding house, and school were built to serve a population of some 300 people.
The opening of a post office and a rail link connecting Twin Buttes with Sahuarita both occurred in 1906.
Despite good fortune in the early years, the inevitable ups and downs of life dependant upon copper prices lead to the eventual abandonment of the town and by 1930 the post office was discontinued.
National Register Properties: The National Register of Historic Places were created as a part of the National Historic Preservation Act of 1966.
It is the nation's premier honor roll for places deemed of national, regional, or local importance.
The criteria for listing include a) association with a person who has contributed to history; b) association with an event important to history; c) associated with the work of a master artist or craftsman or typical of a style or type of workmanship; d) yielding or having the potential to yield information important to history or prehistory.
Listing in no way effects the rights of private property owners to do what they wish with their property.
Federal agencies; however, are required to consider the effects of their actions on listed properties.
The following description is derived from the National Register nomination form available at the State Historic Preservation Office in Phoenix, Arizona.
EUR Air Force Facility Missile Site.
This is the site of a Titan II missile silo that contained a nuclear tipped missile on 24 hours alert from 1963 to 1982.
Known officially at Titan Missile Site 571-7, this formerly top secret facility is the sole remaining Titan Intercontinental Ballistic Missile complex left in the country.
In 1988 in was opened as a museum containing both above ground and below ground components of the launch operations including, the operations center, multiple blast shields, crew quarters, and the silo itself, a concrete lined hole 55 feet wide and 154 feet deep that housed a single missile capable of delivering between 10 and 20 megatons to a target 6000 nautical miles away.
The property was listed to the National Register in 1992 for its military, architectural and engineering significance as a symbol of the Cold War.
Historic Landscapes: This is a special subcategory of historic resources as defined by the National Park Service a rural historic landscape is "...that portion of the exterior natural environment that has been modified, influenced, or given special cultural meaning by people who shaped the landscape to serve human needs.
A rural historic landscape is a geographical area that historically has been used by people or shaped or modified by human activity, occupancy, or intervention, and that possesses a significant concentration, linkage, or continuity of areas of land use, vegetation, buildings and structures, roads and waterways and natural features.
Historic landscapes may reflect the beliefs, attitudes, traditions, and values of these people."
(National Register Bulletin 30, U.S. Department of the Interior)
This is a new concept in cultural resources preservation; however, its use recognizes that there are places on the landscape that have been altered, both intentionally and unintentionally, by human behavior in ways that make the landscape and the historic resources that are associated with it, a single, coherent entity of historic value.
A historic ranch and its associated ranch lands may be the best example of a rural historic landscape where ranching activities over time have resulted in modifications to the natural environment that are recognizable as such.
The Canoa Land Grant, established in 1820, may possess the qualities needed for designation as a rural historic landscape because of its historic use for ranching dating from the end of the Spanish Colonial period up to the 20th century.
Trails: In many places historic and even prehistoric trails crossing the landscape often become the basis for historic roads and modern highways and the Upper Santa Cruz subarea is no exception.
EUR Anza Trail.
This is the route taken by Juan Batista de Anza in the expedition of 1775-1776 when he lead a group of some 250 colonists and 1200 head of livestock from Sonora to found a presidio and mission for Spain at San Francisco Bay.
The trail extends from Nogales, Arizona to San Francisco, California, a distance of 1200 miles.
There are approximately 60 miles of trail in Pima County along the west bank of the Sant Cruz River, with six campsites at Canoa, Llano Grande (south of Sahuarita), San Xavier del Bac, Tucquison (north of downtown Tucson).
Llano del Azotado (at the north end of the Tucson Mountains), and Oitipars (near the Pinal County Line).
The Anza Trail has been nominated as a National Historic Trail by the National Park Service.
Today, Interstate 19 follows the original route up the Santa Cruz Valley (See Juan Bautista de Anza National Historic Trail Arizona-California.
Draft Comprehensive Management and Use Plan and Environmental Impact Statement, National Park Service, San Francisco, CA, September 1994).
To sum the discussion of historic resources, the subarea contains a variety of places that are symbolic of different historic forces that have affected southern Arizona and the nation as a whole ranging from 18th Spanish Colonial expeditions into the unknown, to Mexican era Land Grants, to 19th century copper mining boom towns, and finally to the modern age of global missile defense.
C.
Traditional Cultural Places "A traditional cultural place is a historic site or district that is important because of its association with cultural practices or beliefs of a living community that (a) are rooted in that community's history, and (b) are important in maintaining the continuing cultural identity of the community.
The traditional cultural significance of an historic property is derived from the role the property plays in a community's historically rooted beliefs, customs, and practices" (Preserving Cultural and Historic Resources, Pima County, May 1999).
Pima County has been occupied by indigenous peoples for thousands of years and the modern descendants of these prehistoric cultures still live in the region today.
All of Pima County is claimed as ancestral lands by the Ak-Chin Indian Community, the Gila River Indian Community, and the Tohono O'odham Nation.
The Piman speaking groups (including the Salt River Pima Maricopa Indian Community) claim direct ancestral affiliation with the prehistoric Hohokam Indians who inhabited much of southern and central Arizona.
Other Indian groups also claim ancestral ties to the Pima County area including the Zuni of central western New Mexico and the Hopi of northeastern Arizona based on oral histories and myth that identify southern Arizona as a place of origin for these tribes.
The Apaches also lived in the region for hundreds of years and therefore they too can claim an ancestral connection to the land and the places of traditional value to them that it may contain.
Other groups with potential claims to places of traditional cultural value include the Hispanic and Anglo communities.
Places of traditional cultural value, as defined, are special to the community and must often remain secret to non-members; this is particularly true among Native Americans.
These might be places where in the past natural resources were collected for ceremony or where natural features on the landscape are still recognized as having significance.
Other places with traditional cultural value of particular importance to Native Americans are rock art sites and all archaeological sites containing human graves.
Four sites within the subarea are identified as prehistoric rock art localities and in addition, 12 prehistoric sites were used for habitation, which often contain human graves.
It is reasonable to assume, that Native Americans would identify these places as having traditional cultural value.
More than likely, there are many places with these kinds of values that exist in the Upper Santa Cruz Valley subarea.
III.
THREAT ASSESSMENT: The next map, entitled "Archaeological Sites and Land Ownership" shows the distribution of sites in relation to land status.
Most of the 396 sites reported in the subarea are on state lands followed by private property, federal lands (BLM and National Forest Lands), and Pima County land in that order.
Legal protections against unauthorized disturbances are afforded archaeological sites and other cultural and historical resources on state and federal lands, but only one law, the Arizona State Burial Protection Act, applies on private land.
Cultural resources on county lands are also covered by legal protections defined under county law and policy.
Data are presented in Table 6 below showing the number of archaeological sites by land status and degree of legal protection for cultural resources .
Table IV.5.6.
Upper Santa Cruz Valley Subarea Archaeological Sites by Landownership and Legal Protection Jurisdiction No. of Archaeological Sites Protection Status/Level BLM 15 Protected/high National Forest Lands 11 Protected/high State Lands 189 Protected/moderate Private Lands 181 Unprotected/low Total 396
A total of 26 of the 396 sites or only 6.5% have high protection status because of their location on federal lands.
One hundred and eighty-nine sites are moderately protected from public and private actions.
The remaining 181 sites or approximately 45.7% are on private lands and thus have low protection status.
Since state lands can be sold for development, and private lands are subject only to local zoning, 370 of the 396 or 93.4% of the total number of known archaeological sites are potentially threatened by future development in the subarea.
Furthermore, since the majority of the land base in the subarea has never been archaeologically surveyed (83.6%), hundreds even thousands of sites may exist in the subarea that could be affected.
One way to estimate this number is to divide the number of square miles surveyed in the subarea by the number of reported archaeological sites to get an average of the number of archaeological sites per square mile.
The Arizona State Museum reports a total of 73,868 acres (115.4 square miles) have been surveyed (see Table 2) and 472 sites, including those on Indian lands, have been recorded for a little over 4 sites per square mile.
The subarea is approximately 702 square miles, thus as many as 2,808 sites may be within the subarea.
State lands represent 47.3% of the subarea and private lands represent 34.8%.
U sing an average of 4 sites per square mile and multiplying the state and private land percentage into 2802, indicates that as many as 1,328 sites may be located on state lands and another 977 sites may be on private land.
In all, over 2300 archaeological sites could be vulnerable to future developmental pressure by this calculation.
Archaeological sites are not evenly distributed across the landscape; people do not settle on or utilize the land in a uniform manner and therefore some areas will be more heavily used than others.
As such, site densities will be lower than the average of approximately 4 sites per square mile in some places and higher in others.
Since private lands concentrate along valley bottom adjacent to the Santa Cruz River, among other places, and since proximity to water is a reasonable predictor of where human being have tended to settle in the past, private lands may actually hold more of the archaeological sites in the subarea, with state lands holding fewer sites than predicted.
Low survey coverage and bias in survey recording contributes to the problems of this analysis making it no more than an educated guess.
Even so, the results suggests the scale of the potential loss in the subarea and the conversely the size of the conservation problem.
The loss of cultural and historical resources and the threat of further loss in the Upper Santa Cruz subarea can be summarized as follows..
Resource Loss: There are three principal sources of cultural resource loss in the subarea: Mining, farming and urbanization as depicted on the map entitled, GAP Vegetation with Archaeology Site Locations.
Intensive copper and silver mining on the east side of the Sierrita Mountains has over many years has disturbed approximately 29,000 acres and the cultural resources that they contain.
Similarly, agricultural uses of the bottom lands and adjacent terraces of the Santa Cruz River has resulted in additional loss of resources, particularly archaeological sites.
There are currently more than 7300 acres of land in agricultural use along the Santa Cruz, stretching from the southern end of Green Valley north to Pima Mine Road, most of which has been modified for development of pecan orchards.
Historically, as much as 13,000 acres were in non ranching agricultural use in this same area.
The last and most recent phenomenon to affect cultural resources is associated with the process of rapid urbanization that is occurring on both sides of I-19 within Green Valley but also including the communities of Continental and Sahuarita.
Data available through Pima County indicates that approximately 15,860 acres in this area are "urbanized" and that this land too is located adjacent to the Santa Cruz River.
Archaeological Survey data along the western flanks of the Sierrita Mountains indicate that two to four sites can be expected per square mile, whereas as many as nine sites will be located in certain locations on the valley bottom adjacent to the Santa Cruz River.
It should be noted that surface water was not always available between the area of modern day Continental and San Xavier and so site density would be expected to be lower in this area, perhaps as few as 2 sites per square mile.
With this caveat in mind, given the density estimates and the acreage totals of disturbed lands it is possible to make an educated guess about how many archaeological sites have been affected by the combined disturbances of mining, farming and urbanization.
At 2-4 sites per square acre, mining has probably affected between 90 and 180 sites.
If a range of 2-9 sites per square mile is used for the Santa Cruz River area, for an average of 5.5 sites per square mile, then farming on the Santa Cruz River, has probably affected another 110 sites, and the land use associated with urbanization has impacted another 135.
In short, the combined effect of these forces are likely to have damaged or destroyed between 335 and 425 archaeological sites within the subarea.
It is important to note that other kinds of cultural resources, including historic buildings and structures, engineered features, roads, railroads, and trails, have also been impacted over the years by the combined forces of mining, farming, ranching, and urbanization.
That it is easier to quantify these effects for archaeological sites does not mean that important historical resources have not been similarly affected by both man made and natural forces.
It is certain that the vestiges of the history of life on the Western frontier have also been lost.
Resource Threat: The greatest threat to cultural resources of all kinds is continued urbanization from both platted subdivisions and unplatted or "wildcat" development of individual lots.
The area of principal development pressure is along the central axis of the valley paralleling I-19 and the Santa Cruz River from Green Valley to South Tucson.
There are, however, other places in the subarea, such as the Corona de Tucson area to the east and north of the Santa Rita Mountains, that are also experiencing rapid growth and which can be expected to continue to develop in the future.
Since private land can be split into five lots or less and developed without platting under current state law, and state trust land is vulnerable to sale for residential development, cultural and historical resources will continue to be threatened on state and private lands, especially adjacent to area that are already experiencing growth.
In unincorporated Pima County, development of unplatted land as individual parcels or in "lot split subdivisions" is not subject to the same environmental regulations, including cultural resources requirements, as formally platted subdivisions.
Under these circumstances, cultural resources may be destroyed without first being recorded and no opportunities exist for in place preservation through avoidance.
Even in cases where development is subject to full review by the county, cultural resources may be destroyed provided they are first investigated.
Thus both platted and unplatted residential growth threatens cultural resources, particularly archaeological sites, but not exclusively.
Green Valley is not incorporated and is therefore subject to county development requirements.
However, Sahuarita is an example of a community that has incorporated but has not adopted cultural resources protection mandates.
Development in this area occurs without cultural resources investigations and thus resources are lost without even been noted.
In reviewing the map entitled, Archaeological Sites and Land Ownership, it is worth noting that private land tends to concentrate along the Santa Cruz River in areas both demonstrated to contain high concentrations of archaeological sites and predicted to be archaeologically sensitive.
State lands in close proximity to the River are similarly rich and can be expected to be "hot spots" for archaeological sites where ever surface water was available in the past.
See for instance the high concentration of archaeological sites on state lands to the east of the San Xavier District.
These are the areas that are most threatened by urban expansion and for which cultural resources have the fewest legal protections.
Sensitivity Zone: Because survey coverage within the subarea is limited (16.4%), the distribution of cultural resources is unknown, thereby making risk assessment and conservation recommendations difficult.
In an effort to predict areas with high sensitivity for cultural and historical resources, proximity to water is used as an objective predictor; this assumes that in the desert places closer to water will tend to have been used more heavily by past human populations than places more removed from water sources.
The relationship between land use and proximity to water has been alluded to elsewhere in this report and so the following analysis is an attempt to use this relationship as a tool to predict site location within the subarea.
The map entitled Cultural Resources High Sensitivity Areas identifies zones within the subarea that are predicted to be highly sensitive for cultural resources.
The models encompasses the Santa Cruz River, as well as spring sites in both the Sierrita Mountains and the Santa Rita Mountains, and areas of shallow ground water along Sopori Creek.
Different buffers widths are used for the sensitivity model.
The River is buffered by two miles on either side for a total of four miles in width.
The springs receive a one mile buffer around them as does the area of shallow ground water.
The distribution of known archaeological sites is also provided in this figure and demonstrates that many, but not all known sites are captured within the sensitivity zones as defined.
The buffers used are arbitrary and the statistical efficacy of the model is untested, even so this projection provides and idea of where common sense would predict sites to be located.
The buffered areas capture the distribution of known sites along the Santa Cruz River, adjacent to springs in the Santa Rita Mountains, and along Sopori Creek.
The model also includes the Historic communities of Continental and Sahauriata, and the ghost town of Helvetia.
It does not include all sites or historic resources thereby demonstrating the limit of its utility to predict past land usage.
Obviously, proximity to surface water is only one factor that conditioned human behavior in the past.
Nonetheless, the model does appear to work with sufficient capacity as a good guess where cultural resources, particularly those associated with habitation, can be expected to be found.
Adding tributary drainages along with data on historically exploited mineral resources would contribute to the utility of the model.
IV.
SUMMARY: The cultural resources of the Upper Santa Cruz subarea are the product of thousands of years of human settlement from the earliest prehistoric times to the modern day.
In that sense, they represent a collective history of this portion of the Valley that can inform and educate future generations about the past.
But these resources are non renewable: there are only so many archaeological sites, historic buildings or places with traditional cultural value, and once they are gone there are no replacements.
It is for this reason that Pima County has included cultural resources in its planning for the Sonoran Desert Conservation Plan.
This report provides information on known cultural resources within the subarea describing their nature and distribution and attempts to predict where other cultural resources may be found.
Clearly, much more is known about the archaeological record than either historic resources or traditional cultural places.
This is because more formal study has been directed to the archaeological record, whereas research on historic resources is limited, and ethnographic information on traditional cultural properties is almost completely lacking.
It is also apparent that the subarea has received different levels of research attention in different locations over the years.
While archaeological survey data indicate that approximately 16.4% of the subarea has been intensively investigated, the focus of this research has been scattered here and there, with little or no data on to connect these areas; thus the picture of land use patterning is fragmented.
Despite the low survey coverage, those areas that have been studied suggests that up to 10,000 years of human history is represented in the subarea, and that the peak use of the valley occurred during late prehistory when the subarea was occupied by the Hohokam Indians.
Historic uses of the valley for mining, ranching and agriculture contribute to its importance as a place with high scientific, educational and recreational potential, an assessment that is further supported by site density estimates indicating that as many as 2800 archaeological sites may be within the subarea.
The historic communities of Continental and Sahuarita are products of agriculture and ranching respectively, both of which contributed to the rich history of the subarea and which continue to be practiced today.
The ghost towns of Olive and Twin Buttes on the west and Helvetia on the east are examples of 19th and early 20th century mining communities that historically were a part of the western mining phenomenon that has contributed so much to the building of the nation.
The subarea has a single places that is listed on the National Register of Historic Places for its importance to the historic era known as the "Cold War," a period that historically has just come to a close, but that influenced many facets of modern American life.
Lastly, Native American claims identify the subarea as part of their traditional use areas and the possibility that places with traditional cultural value exist in the subarea is high, especially those associated with the archaeological record.
In short, the subarea, while still mostly unrecorded, has rich record of cultural and historical resources with a high potential for many more resources than are currently known.
Since the majority of the Subarea is composed of private lands and state trust lands that are potentially convertible into private lands for development, there is a further need to identify cultural and historical resources, evaluate their significance, and where warranted protect them for future generations.
[ Next ]
return to top of page
TABLE OF CONTENTS _________________________________________________________________
SDCP Footer Image SDCP Home
