[sdcphead.jpg] 1.
San Pedro Valley Subarea I. SUBAREA: The subarea defines the San Pedro Valley watershed west of the Santa Catalina and north of the Rincon mountains, and is bounded by Pinal county to the north and Graham and Cochise counties to the east as indicated on the map entitled, "Modern Communities, Transportation, and Ownership.
" This area encompasses approximately 278 square miles and includes the community of Redington.
The San Pedro River is the principle drainage, which is one of the few remaining "live" rivers in southern Arizona.
As such, the valley bottom is ideal farm land and has been used for farming since prehistoric times.
Today, the San Pedro Valley retains its rural character with farming, ranching, and mining being the principle economic forces.
The subarea contains an estimate 66 people and Redington is the only settlement of any size.
As is the case elsewhere, federal and state lands make up the bulk of the land base in the subarea as indicated in the table below.
Table IV.1.1.
San Pedro Valley Subarea - Land Ownership by Acres and Percent Ownership Acres Percent Military Reservation 62 
II.
CULTURAL RESOURCES: This section presents information and analysis of current data on archaeological sites, historic resources and traditional cultural places within the subarea.
A. Archaeological sites "Archaeological sites are any material remains of past human life or activities which are preserved in their original setting that are important to understanding prehistory or history.
These sites or districts may include occupation sites, work areas, farming sites, burials and other funerary remains, artifacts, campsites, hearths, rock art, intaglios, trails, battle sites, religious or ceremonial sites, caves and rock shelters, the architectural or other remains of structures of all kinds, such as pit houses, pueblo rooms, adobe or rock foundations, and other domestic features, usually dating from prehistoric or aboriginal periods, or from historic periods at least 50 years old, for which only archaeological vestiges remain" (Preserving Cultural and Historic Resources, Pima County, May 1999).
Archaeologists learn about the past by collecting information in the field in two ways: through survey and by excavation.
Survey involves inspecting the ground surface in a particular area and recording concentrations of artifacts and features (hearths, roasting pits, pit houses, etc.) as archaeological sites.
A site represents the physical remains of past human behavior in a single location dating to one or more periods of use in time.
Surveys are often done systematically by groups of archaeologist who sweep the land in regularly spaced lines looking for artifacts.
Some surveys, however, are judgmental in that archaeologists only look where sites are expected to be found and not elsewhere.
In all cases, survey offers an extensive perspective on past land use.
The second kind of information on archaeological sites is gained through excavation.
This is the systematic recording, recovery, and analysis of artifacts and features from within a site's limits.
Critical information is gained by understanding the spatial relationship of all artifacts and features within a three dimensional context.
This enables interpretation about how the site was used, by whom, when, whether the site was used more than once and what happened after it was abandoned.
Often, archaeological sites are not fully excavated but are only partially sampled.
This saves what is left of the site for future investigations.
Archaeological excavation provides highly detailed information about the use of one limited spatial area during one or more use episodes.
Archaeologists use survey information in conjunction with site excavation information to build regional time lines over broad areas such as a river valley.
Survey data: Archaeologists perform two kinds of surveys: Linear and block.
Linear surveys involve inspection of a right-of-way for construction of a road, sewer line, telephone cable or other linear feature.
These surveys tend to be done in compliance with legal mandates requiring environmental studies during project planning.
Block surveys involve the examination of properties ranging from a few acres to 1000s of acres.
These are typically done either in compliance with legal mandates or through academic research projects.
The Map entitled Archaeological Site/Survey Locations shows in blue the areas within the subarea that have been archaeologically surveyed.
Some linear surveys are evident on the map, but most of the surveys shown near the river are a result of judgmental sampling of the river's terraces.
Presented below is a breakdown of survey data by acreage and survey type including the percentage of the subarea that has been investigated.
Table IV.1.2 San Pedro Valley Subarea - Survey Acreage by Survey Type Survey Type Acres Surveyed Percent of Subarea Linear 1,680 0.9 Block 4,256 2.4 Total 5,936 3.3
The total acreage figures indicate that more than 96 percent of the area has not been formally investigated.
This limits what can be said about cultural resources in general and archaeological sites in particular.
However, the San Pedro River Valley, its terraces and the adjacent bajadas have been the focus of considerable research, and much of it within the last ten years.
Archaeological research in the San Pedro Valley began in the 1950s when the University of Arizona recorded numerous Hohokam village sites north of the town of Mammoth; however it wasn't until the 1970s that full attention was given to the area.
Testing and excavations of sites along the San Pedro produced large quantities of information on the Hohokam people who occupied the San Pedro Valley, and much of southern and central Arizona, between approximately A.D. 700 and A.D. 1450.
Extensive survey and test excavations conducted by the Center for Desert Archaeology in the 1990s has turned the San Pedro Valley into an archaeological laboratory where theories are being tested about the development of Hohokam culture and the interaction of the Hohokam with prehistoric Puebloan groups from the north and east
Site data: The following is a summary of archaeological data for the subarea that is presented by general time period and site function.
This information was made available by the Arizona State Museum.
Table IV.1.3.
.
San Pedro Valley Subarea - Archaeological Site Data by Function.
Prehistoric Historic Unknown Total Agriculture 34 2 0 36 Art 2 1 1 4 Communication 0 1 0 1 Habitation 22 7 3 32 Resource Processing 6 0 0 6 Resource Procurement 0 1 0 1 Religious 2 1 0 3 Transportation 0 4 0 4 Unknown 39 2 25 66 Total 105 19 29 153
As can be seen by this table, prehistoric sites out number the historic sites by five and a half to one and Agriculture is the most common of the identifiable functions, followed by habitation.
This reflects a strong emphasis on agrarian settlement in the San Pedro subarea, particularly during prehistoric times.
Third in order are sites identified as having a Resource Processing function, such as food preparation.
Art, meaning rock art, and sites with a religious element indicated by the presence of a ceremonial structure such as a shrive (stone circle) or even a Puebloan style Kiva, which are known to occur on sites in this area.
As is typical of archaeological site data anywhere, a large number of occupations cannot be assigned a function.
This is because the data that are used here are collected during survey where only surface characteristics of sites are recorded without the benefit of excavation.
The map entitled "Archaeological Site/Survey Locations" does not fully reflect the data presented in Table IV.1.2 due to incomplete entry of site data into the county's computerized database.
The next two tables tally the number of sites by time period.
Table IV.1.4.
San Pedro Valley Subarea Prehistoric Archaeological Site Data by Time Period.
PaleoIndian 12,000 B.C - 10,000 B.C.
Archaic 10,000 B.C-A.D. 200 Ceramic A.D. 200- A.D. 1450 Unknown Total 0 2 77 26 105
No occupations from the PaleoIndian time period are known with the subarea, although several sites dating to this time have been recorded in the San Pedro Valley further to the south.
Only two components dating to the succeeding Archaic Period are known within the Subarea.
During these ancient times, people are believed to have lived in small, highly mobile, bands by hunting and gathering wild plants and animals as food resources became seasonably available throughout the year.
During the PaleoIndian Period, these bands appear to have favored hunting large game animals including mammoth, horse, camel, bear, and bison, all of which are now extinct.
The environment became considerably warmer in the succeeding Archaic Period, the large game animals disappeared and were replaced by new plant and animal species.
Human beings continued to hunt and gather their food but archaeological evidence suggests that they became more generalized in their diet and more efficient in processing their food.
Towards the end of the period several significant changes began to occur.
First, the environment stabilized by 4500 years ago approaching modern conditions.
Second, population seems to have increased and some evidence suggests that people roamed within more circumscribed areas as a result.
Third, by approximately 3500 years ago, people began to experiment with growing their own food.
This change also co-occurred with more permanent settlement along well watered reaches of the Santa Cruz River and perhaps other regional drainages including the San Pedro.
The Ceramic Period covers the time in prehistory between the adoption of ceramic technology in the third and fourth centuries after Christ to the end of the Hohokam sequence around A.D. 1450.
Few sites are known from the early centuries of this time period in the San Pedro Subarea.
This was a time during which Archaic Period populations made the transition from hunting and gathering to an agricultural based, village oriented existence in southern Arizona and elsewhere.
By the time the Hohokam culture emerged in a recognizable form around A.D. 700, this commitment to an agricultural economy was complete.
A total of 27 sites have been firmly identified as Hohokam in the San Pedro Subarea reflecting a sustained presence in the valley for over 700 years.
The Hohokam flourished along the rivers throughout the region and also adapted to the desert lands to the west.
They lived in permanently settled villages, practiced agriculture and supplemented their diet by hunting and gathering.
The Hohokam are known for their well executed pottery traditions, a distinctive style of arrowheads, ritual items such as sensors and carved stone pallets, as well as shell jewelry, to mention only a few examples of their material culture.
Prior to about A.D. 1100, people lived in a variety of settlements ranging from small houses located near their fields, to hamlets consisting of a few houses, to large villages consisting of multiple groupings of house clusters, each representing families or extended families.
Ritual appears to have played an important part of life and large oblong shaped depressions called "ball courts" were used providing social and political cohesion through ceremony, the exact nature of which is unknown.
During the Late Ceramic Period from approximately A.D. 1150 - 1450, mounded earthen platforms replace the ball courts as the center of religious life in the main villages.
Housing style also changes from building houses in shallow pits with mud over wood and brush exteriors to above ground rooms built out of adobe, either as separate structures or in blocks of rooms.
Frequently, these houses were surrounded by a low wall that defined the settlement as a separate compound consisting of related families.
Subsistence continued to rely heavily on growing corn, beans, and squash, and just as in earlier times, large investments of labor were put into both irrigated agriculture and dry farming techniques.
It is also at this time that the Hohokam began to intensively cultivate agave as a food source along the upper bajadas of the major rivers such as the Santa Cruz and the San Pedro.
By the end of the Hohokam period, people had moved into a few, very large settlements.
A period of environmental instability resulting in a series of floods in the A.D. 1300s appears to have weakened the agricultural economy to the point where the Hohokam were no longer able to produce food in sufficient quantifies and with enough consistency to support large populations.
Some researchers have suggested that disease or warfare may have brought down the Hohokam, but whatever the cause, by A.D. 1450, the large villages were abandoned and shortly thereafter the remaining people that archaeologists recognize as the Hohokam passed into human history.
The San Pedro was a boundary between several culture groups as defined by archaeologist.
Seven of the 77 Ceramic Period sites have been identified as Salado, a Puebloan culture group that originated from the north of the San Pedro Valley and who were contemporaries of the Hohokam in the Late Ceramic Period.
Another 13 sites are described as Salado/Hohokam mixed reflecting the presence of material traits from both groups on the same site, and two more sites are labeled Mogollon, a culture group to the east of the San Pedro.
Twenty-eight more sites from this time period could not be culturally identified.
Very little is known of the period following the collapse of the Hohokam and before the earliest entrance of the Spanish into the region in A.D. 1540.
The Proto-Historic Period, marking the years between A.D. 1540 and the Pima Revolt in 1751 is equally murky, despite some written accounts, and sites dating to both times are very rare.
The region appears to have been occupied by only a few people whose style of pottery, housing, and burial practices differed from the former Hohokam occupants reflecting a return to an earlier, simpler way of living.
Life continued to involve the cultivation of crops supplemented by hunting and gathering, but the level of technical sophistication and social and religious cohesion characteristic of the Hohokam is missing in these later populations.
The people who occupied the region are believed to be the descendants of the Hohokam who filled the vacuum left by their disappearance and emerged as the groups that in the San Pedro were known to the Spanish historically as the Sobaipuri, and to the west of the Santa Cruz River, the Tohono O'odham.
No components dating to late prehistoric times are known in the San Pedro subarea.
Several sites from this time period are known in the San Pedro Valley subarea as indicated in Table IV.1.5.
Table IV.1.5.
San Pedro Valley Subarea - Historic Archaeological Site Data by Affiliation Proto-Histor ic Euro-Ameri can O'odham Unknown Native American Total 2 11 1 5 19
European occupation of the San Pedro dates primarily to the mid to late 19th century.
A total of 11 such sites have been identified in the subarea dating to this time period, six of which are habitations, four are transportation (roads, trails, stage stops, etc.) related features and one is related to communication functions (cairn, telegraph/telephone line, monument etc) as indicated in Table IV.1.3.
In addition, there are six sites identified as Native American, one of which was positively identified as O'odham and the other are not specified.
Historically, the Sobaipuri lived in the San Pedro River Valley until they moved to the Middle Santa Cruz in the 1760s for their protection against Apache attacks.
It may be that some of these sites are Sobaipuri in origin.
Generally, researchers have not focused on the historic period as a subject of archaeological interest and the low number of sites recorded in the valley dating to this time period reflects this bias.
B. Historical Resources "Historical resources are sites, districts, structures, objects, or other evidences of human activities that represent facets of the history of the nation, state, or locality.
Also places where significant historical or unusual events occurred even though no evidence of the event remains, or places associated with persons significant in our history that have gained importance in the last 50 years"(Preserving Cultural and Historic Resources, Pima County, May 1999).
Historical resources are largely constructed or engineered elements of the built environment including buildings used for residential purposes such as houses but also commercial stores, industrial facilities, civic centers, and places of worship.
Roads, bridges, irrigation canals, mining works, and rail road tracks are also historical resources .
Information on these places is recovered through drawings and design plans, photographs, maps, surveys, and personal recollections.
Historic Communities: Historic Communities are those settlements that are in existence today that were established 50 years or more ago as indicated by a founding date or the date the first post office opened.
The following description is derived from "Arizona's Names" by Byrd Howell Granger, The Falconer Publishing Company, 1983.
EUR Redington is a historic community that contains buildings that may have historic value, and may also contain historic archaeological deposits dating to the end of the last century and the beginning of the 20th century.
Redington was settled as a result of a post office being opened by Henry and Lem Redfield in 1875 at their ranch located approximately six miles south of the present town.
Lem Redfield was hung by a mob at Florence in 1883 for allegedly participating in a stage robbery that resulted in a murder.
They wanted a post office, but the post office would not allow the use of their name, so they used "Redington."
In 1879, the post office was formally established by Henry Redfield.
There may also be individual ranches or farmsteads within the subarea that qualify as having importance to the history of the settling of the San Pedro River Valley.
Some of these may be part of larger historic landscapes that are recognizable entities that have historic value.
Historic Landscapes a special subcategory of historic resources.
As defined by the National Park Service, a rural historic landscape is "that portion of the exterior natural environment that has been modified, influenced, or given special cultural meaning by people who shaped the landscape to serve human needs.
A rural historic landscape is a geographical area that historically has been used by people or shaped or modified by human activity, occupancy, or intervention, and that possesses a significant concentration, linkage, or continuity of areas of land use, vegetation, buildings and structures, roads and waterways and natural features.
Historic landscapes may reflect the beliefs, attitudes, traditions, and values of these people."
C.
Traditional Cultural Places "A traditional cultural place is a historic site or district that is important because of its association with cultural practices or beliefs of a living community that (a) are rooted in that community's history, and (b) are important in maintaining the continuing cultural identity of the community.
The traditional cultural significance of an historic property is derived from the role the property plays in a community's historically rooted beliefs, customs, and practices "(Preserving Cultural and Historic Resources, Pima County, May 1999).
Pima County has been occupied by indigenous peoples for thousands of years and the modern descendants of these prehistoric cultures still live in the region today.
All of Pima County is claimed as ancestral lands by the Ak-Chin Indian Community, the Gila River Indian Community, and the Tohono O'odham Nation.
The Tohono O'odham claim direct ancestral affiliation with the prehistoric Hohokam Indians who inhabited much of southern and central Arizona.
Other Indian groups also claim ancestral ties to the Pima County area including the Zuni of central western New Mexico and the Hopi of northeastern Arizona based on both a recognition of prehistoric archaeological sites as ancestral and based upon oral histories and myth that identify southern Arizona as a place of origin for these tribes.
The Apaches also lived in the region for hundreds of years and therefore they too can claim an ancestral connection to the land and the places of traditional value to them that it may contain.
Places of traditional cultural value, as defined, are special to the community and must often remain secret to non-members; there are no specific traditional cultural places recorded in the San Pedro Subarea.
This, however, does not mean they don't exit.
These might be places where in the past natural resources were collected for ceremony or where natural features on the landscape are still recognized as having significance.
Native Americans in particular identify prehistoric rock art sites of which there are two and all archaeological sites containing human graves as having qualities that make them recognizable as traditional cultural places.
Habitation sites often contain graves and since there are 22 prehistoric and three historic Native American sites of this type in the subarea used for habitation, it is reasonable to assume that Native Americans would identify these places as having traditional cultural value.
III.
SUMMARY By far the most common cultural resource known with the San Pedro Subarea is archaeological, of which the majority are prehistoric sites.
To illustrate the point, the attached map entitled, "Zone of Archaeological Sites Along the Lower San Pedro River," prepared by the Center for Desert Archaeology in Tucson, shows the distribution of archaeological sites within the middle and lower San Pedro River, including the subarea.
It clearly demonstrates the richness of the flood plain and the adjoining river terraces.
As of 1997, a total of 559 archaeological sites were recorded in the area between Benson and Winkelman.
The San Pedro Subarea, which encompasses the valley floor and Buehman Canyon on the west and Redfield Canyon on the east, has been a focal point for human occupation for over 1200 years dating from at least A.D. 800 to the present day.
This area has a large number of relatively undisturbed archaeological sites that have high scientific and educational value.
Redington is a historic community that is a product of 19th century frontier settlement with potential archaeological and architectural assets.
Lastly, Native American claims identify the San Pedro as part of their traditional use areas and so the possibility that places with traditional cultural value exist in the subarea is high, especially those places associated with the archaeological record.
In short, the subarea is rich in cultural and historical resources value.
In effort to predict the locations of areas with high sensitivity for cultural and historical resources, proximity to water is used under the assumption that places closer to water will tend to have been used more heavily by past human populations than places more removed from water sources.
The map entitled "Cultural Resources High Sensitivity Areas" identifies areas within the subarea that are predicted to be highly sensitive for cultural resources.
These areas include springs in the subarea, almost all of which are located in the foothills of the Santa Catalina and Rincon Mountains and the San Pedro River drainage, an area known to have been the primary focus of human occupation for several thousand years.
[ Next ]
return to top of page
TABLE OF CONTENTS _________________________________________________________________
SDCP Footer Image SDCP Home
