[sdcphead.jpg] 4.
Avra Valley Subarea I. SUBAREA: The subarea is defined on the west by the Roskruge, the Waterman, and the Silverbell Mountains, which drain runoff into three major washes, the Blanco, the Brawley and the Los Robles, which in turn empty into the Santa Cruz River north of the Pima/Pinal County line.
The southern boundary is defined by the Garcia Strip of the Tohono O'odham Nation and the eastern edge passes through Tucson Mountain Park and Saguaro National Monument West District following the east side of Los Robles Wash to the Pima/Pinal County line as indicated on the map entitled, "Modern Communities, Transportation, and Ownership."
This area encompasses approximately 346 square miles.
Unlike most of eastern Pima County where state land makes up the majority of the land base in the Avra Valley subarea, federal lands rank first, followed by private property, state lands, and finally Pima County parks and Indian lands in descending order as indicated in Table 1 below.
Table IV.4.1.
Avra Valley Subarea - Land Ownership by Acres and Percent Ownership Acres Percent Bureau of Land Management 85,388 38.6 County Park 4503 2.0 Indian Lands 806 0.3 National Parks/Monuments 13,434 6.1 Private Lands 68,619 31.0 State Lands 48,634 22.0 Other 20 
This area includes the community of Picture Rocks, a large unplatted settlement east of the Saguaro National Park (West) and residential subdivisions located to the north of Avra Valley Road on either side of Anway Road.
The town of Silverbell, located at the base of the Silverbell Mountains on the western edge of the subarea, is the only "historic" community in the subarea, having been established in 1948.
In all, the subarea is on the northwestern edge of the growing Tucson Metropolitan area and is characterized by rapid private development.
The pattern of growth is dominated by unregulated development of individual lots and to a lesser degree, platted residential subdivisions.
Historically, the subarea has depended upon a mixture of mining, ranching and farming, all of which continue today.
The year 2000 population estimate for the Avra Valley subarea is 10,052.
This reflects growth in the east and southeast portions of the subarea as settlement expands along the margins of the greater Tucson Metropolitan area.
II.
CULTURAL RESOURCES: This section presents information and analysis of current data on archaeological sites, historic resources and traditional cultural places within the subarea.
A. Archaeological sites "Archaeological sites are any material remains of past human life or activities which are preserved in their original setting that are important to understanding prehistory or history.
These sites or districts may include occupation sites, work areas, farming sites, burials and other funerary remains, artifacts, campsites, hearths, rock art, intaglios, trails, battle sites, religious or ceremonial sites, caves and rock shelters, the architectural or other remains of structures of all kinds, such as pit houses, pueblo rooms, adobe or rock foundations, and other domestic features, usually dating from prehistoric or aboriginal periods, or from historic periods at least 50 years old, for which only archaeological vestiges remain" (Preserving Cultural and Historic Resources, Pima County, May 1999).
Archaeologists learn about the past by collecting and analyzing information in two ways: through survey and by excavation.
Survey involves inspecting the ground surface in a particular area and recording concentrations of artifacts and features (hearths, roasting pits, pit houses, etc.) as archaeological sites.
A site represents the physical remains of past human behavior in a single location dating to one or more periods of use through time.
Surveys are often done systematically by groups of archaeologist who walk the land in regularly spaced lines looking for artifacts.
Some surveys, however, are judgmental in that archaeologists only look where sites are expected to be found and not elsewhere.
In all cases, survey offers an extensive perspective on past land use.
The second kind of information on archaeological sites is gained through excavation.
This is the systematic recording, recovery, and analysis of artifacts and features from within a site's limits.
Critical information is gained by understanding the spatial relationship of all artifacts and features within a three dimensional context.
This enables interpretation about how the site was used, by whom, when, whether the site was used more than once and what happened after it was abandoned.
Often, archaeological sites are not fully excavated but are only partially sampled.
This saves what is left of the site for future investigations.
Archaeological excavation provides highly detained information about the use of one limited spatial area during one or more use episodes.
Archaeologist use survey and excavation data together to interpret the past; however, as new information becomes available and as new ideas about the past are developed, this interpretation changes over time.
Previous Research: Like the Altar Valley to the south, early archaeological investigations in the Avra Valley were conducted by Byron Cummings, head of the Department of Anthropology at the University of Arizona, and his students during the 1920s and 1930s.
These efforts were largely directed at Cerro Prieto in the Samaniego Hills at the northern end of the valley and just outside of the subarea.
Cerro Prieto is the location of a well known and highly significant hill side settlement or "trincheras" site occupied in the 13th century A.D., and both this prominence and nearby hills contain extensive rock art images.
Despite the richness of the area, the Avra Valley saw little formal investigation until the 1960s, beginning with survey inventories conducted by the National Park Service within the Saguaro National Park.
It wasn't until the 1980s, however, that large scale site inventory surveys began to accumulate significant information on past land use within the subarea.
During 1983-1984, the first of many large scale archaeological surveys was conducted in the subarea as part of the Tucson Aqueduct Project (Central Arizona Project).
This resulted in a formal investigation of a strip of land running down the eastern margins of the Avra Valley from the Santa Cruz River to west of Black Mountain.
In all, 34 archaeological sites were recorded almost all of which were occupied late in prehistory by the Hohokam Indians, although evidence of earlier Archaic Period occupation was also found (See Site Data - Chronology).
Follow up excavations of a Hohokam village site and two smaller farmsteads produced highly detailed information on Hohokam society in a single slice of time between A.D 850 and A.D 950.
In 1985 and 1986 two large block surveys were conducted on Indian lands for the Papago Water Supply project.
One of these was located just to the south of the subarea within the Garcia Strip of the Tohono O'odham Nation.
In all, some 6800 acres were inventoried recording 71 sites.
Subsequent excavation of ten of these sites added new information about the late prehistoric and early historic eras in the Avra Valley.
At the same time, survey was conducted on two parcels in the south central basin by the U.S. Bureau of Land Management.
The Chon study area centered on Blanco Wash and the Cocoraque Study area to the east totaled 6200 acres and resulted in the recording of 39 sites.
A second survey was conducted just east of the Garcia Strip in 1986, also in conjunction with the Central Arizona Project, involving 2700 acres producing 10 newly recorded sites.
More recently, 2880 acres west of Brawley Wash were surveyed in 1996 for the Central Avra Valley Storage and Recovery Recharge Project sponsored by the City of Tucson.
The project identified 10 sites, including three Archaic Period occupations, eight of which were tested.
Also in the mid 1990s, survey in the Saguaro National Park Tucson Mountain District in 1995 and 1996, covered approximately 2280 acres in the uplands of the Tucson Mountains identifying 12 new sites, including several historic mines, and revisiting 31 that had been previously recorded.
While much new information has been gathered on the historic and prehistoric uses of the southern and central portions of the subarea, the northern Avra Valley and portions of the lower Santa Cruz Valley have also been investigated.
Between 1981 and 1989, three archaeological surveys were conducted by the Arizona State Museum in Pinal County that also included portions of the northern end of the subarea.
These investigations were sponsored by Bureau of Reclamation as part of the Central Arizona Project.
One of these included the Los Robles Archaeological Survey conducted in 1985 and 1986 to explore a prehistoric community associated with the Los Robles Mound Site, a Late Prehistoric Hohokam settlement on the west bank of Los Robles Wash.
Intensive and non-intensive sample survey was conducted within a 109 square mile area during which 145 new sites were recorded and 31 known sites were revisited.
These sites consisted of prehistoric villages, hamlets, farmsteads, agricultural fields, and special activity areas.
What made this project so informative was the opportunity it provided to view an entire complex of prehistoric occupations relating to a single community that began around A.D. 700 and peaked between A.D. 1150 - 1300.
It was through this work that the the Los Robles Archaeological District was nominated and listed on the National Register of Historic Places (see below).
Lastly, between 1983 and 1986, the Cerro Prieto Mapping Project was conducted by volunteers from the University of Arizona Department of Anthropology.
This survey re-examined Cerro Prieto and thoroughly recorded the trincheras site with all its associated features.
Taken together, archaeological survey and excavation within and adjacent to the subarea has changed the perceptions of the prehistory of the Avra Valley and added to our understanding of the historic era.
While previously viewed as a "marginal" area between the Tucson Basin and the Hohokam heartland in the Phoenix basin, archaeological investigation in the Avra Valley has revealed evidence of intensive and long term occupation in prehistory over many thousands of years.
In particular, this work has contributed to knowledge on Hohokam chronology, settlement, subsistence, social organization, and community development and interaction.
Survey Data: Archaeological survey is the first step in characterizing the nature, age and distribution of archaeological sites within an area like the Avra Valley and there area two different kinds of survey that archaeologists typically perform: Linear surveys and block surveys.
Linear survey involves inspecting a right-of-way for construction of a road, sewer line, telephone cable or other linear feature.
These surveys tend to be done in compliance with legal mandates requiring environmental studies during project planning.
Block survey involves examining non-linear properties ranging in size from a few acres to 1000s of acres, such as the large scale inventories mentioned above.
These are performed either in compliance with legal mandates, or through academic or preservation related research projects.
The Map entitled "Archaeological Survey and Site Locations" shows the areas within the subarea that have been archaeologically surveyed and the sites that have been recorded.
Overall, the map demonstrates that the eastern and southern portions of the subarea have received the bulk of intensive survey in the past.
Noticeably absent in this figure are surveys on the west and northwest side of the valley.
This area has been surveyed to a limited degree; however, survey coverage has not been intensive (does not cover 100% of the area) and thus these surveys are not represented on the map.
Nonetheless, archaeological sites are reported in these areas.
Presented in Table 2 below is a breakdown of survey data by acreage and survey type including the percentage of the subarea that has been intensively investigated.
The data are provided by Arizona State Museum but have been augmented by information on two additional block surveys totaling 6200 acres not in the Museum's data files.
Table IV.4.2.
Avra Valley Subarea -Archaeological Survey Acreage by Survey Type Survey Number Acres Percent of Subarea Linear 14 498 0.2 Block 38 17,402 7.8 Total 52 17, 900 8.0
The survey total indicates that despite numerous archaeological surveys conducted within the subarea, only a small portion of the landscape has been intensively investigated, and that conversely the vast majority of the land within the subarea, 92 percent, has not.
Despite this shortcoming, 141 archaeological sites, representing thousands of years of human occupation, are reported within the Avra Valley subarea.
Site Data - Chronology:
Table IV.4.3 presents information on the number of prehistoric sites in the subarea by time period as reported by the Arizona State Museum.
Table IV.4.3.
Avra Valley Subarea - Prehistoric Archaeological Site Data by Time Period TIME PERIODS PaleoIndian 12,000 B.C. - 8,000 B.C Archaic 8,000 B.C.- A.D. 200 Ceramic A.D. 200- A.D. 1540 Unknown Total Site Counts 0 6 94 12 112
While no sites dating to the PaleoIndian Period have yet been reported in the subarea, four sites dating to this time period are known in the San Pedro River Valley to the east and several diagnostic spear points have been found on the Tohono O'odham reservation to the west.
The term "PaleoIndian" describes the earliest period of human occupation in the Americas.
This was a time following the end of the last ice age when the environment was cooler and wetter than it is today.
Many species of now extinct animals including mammoth, horse, camel, bear, bison, and lions lived during this period.
Numerous archaeological sites found in the west indicate that hunting these large animals was an important part of the subsistence of PaleoIndian people, and as such, archaeologists refer to them as "big game hunters."
While very little is known about these people, it is believed that they lived in small groups or bands by hunting and gathering wild foods as they became seasonably available throughout the year.
Archaeological evidence suggest that they were highly mobile covering thousands of square miles in a year as they moved across the landscape.
Early in the succeeding Archaic Period, the environment became warmer, the large game animals disappeared, and modern plant and animal species were established.
The Archaic Period is minimally represented in the subarea with 6 sites, none of which can be more accurately dated.
The Archaic Period represent a time span of almost 8000 years during which human beings adjusted their way of living in response to new environmental conditions.
In order to survive, people became generalists in their subsistence practices, hunting and gathering a wide variety of plants and animals and becoming more efficient in how they processed their food as indicated by the presence of grinding stones found on sites of this period.
Again, people appeared to have lived in small groups by hunting a gathering wild plants and animals over large areas through a seasonal round.
Sites from the early and middle parts of the Archaic are rare in southern Arizona suggesting low population levels in response to the unfavorable environmental conditions believed to exist at that time; however, toward the end of the period several significant changes occurred laying the foundation for subsequent cultural development.
First, the environment stabilized by 4500 years ago approaching modern conditions by that time.
Second, population levels appear to have increased and some evidence suggests that people roamed within more restricted territories as a result.
Third, by approximately 3500 years ago, people began to experiment with growing their own food as a supplement to their diet.
This change also co-occurred with more permanent settlement along well watered reaches of the major drainages in the region.
A total of 94 sites dating to the Ceramic Period are known within the subarea indicating intensive use of the Avra Valley during this time in prehistory.
The Ceramic Period covers the time between the adoption of ceramic technology in the third and fourth centuries after Christ to the end of the prehistoric sequence around A.D 1540.
It was during the early part of the period, between approximately A.D. 200 to A.D. 700, that Archaic Period populations completed the transition from mobile hunting and gathering to settled, village based, agricultural existence in southern Arizona and elsewhere.
The principal pottery bearing people in the region during prehistory were the Hohokam, who emerged as a distinct culture in the eighth century and dominated central and southern Arizona until around A.D. 1450.
The Hohokam flourished along the river valleys of southern Arizona, including the Avra Valley, but were also well adapted to the desert lands to the west.
They lived in settled, permanent villages, grew their own food using irrigation and dry farming techniques, developed a rich ceremonial life, and traded extensively with their neighbors throughout the region.
A period of environmental instability during the A.D. 1300s is believed have weakened the agricultural economy to the point where the Hohokam were no longer able to produce food in sufficient quantifies and with enough consistency to support large populations and the culture collapsed around A.D 1450.
Following the collapse of the Hohokam, the region is believed to have been occupied in very low numbers by an O'odham (upper Piman speaking) people whose settlement and subsistence practices reflect a return to an earlier, simpler way of living.
Life continued to involve the cultivation of crops supplemented by hunting a gathering, but the level of technical sophistication and social and religious cohesion characteristic of the Hohokam is missing in these later populations.
These people are believed to be the descendants of the Hohokam, but are recognized as separate culture groups.
Archaeologists know very little about the period that represents the end of the Hohokam and the beginning of the Spanish Colonial presence in southern Arizona.
It appears to have been a time of flux when the vacuum left by the disappearance of the Hohokam was filled by groups that the Spanish recognized as the Sobaipuri and the Tohono O'odham in the 17th and 18th centuries.
A single site dating to late prehistoric times (A.D. 1300-1500) is known in the Avra Valley; however, it is unknown whether this post dates the Hohokam collapse.
Table IV.4.4.
Avra Valley Subarea - Historic Archaeological Site Data by Affiliation
Euro-Ameri can Mexican American Native American Unknown Total 15 3 0 1 19
Table IV.4.
4 presents archaeological data on the Historic Period, spanning the years between A.D. 1540 and 1950.
Historical information on settlement in the Avra Valley subarea is very sparse.
From what little is known, it appears that settlement in the subarea dates to the latter half of the 19th century and is associated initially with mining.
Copper ore was discovered in the Silverbell Mountains in the 1860s and several companies organized to work claims until the 1880s.
It was not until after the turn of the century that large scale mining began and the town of Silverbell formed (see under Ghost towns below).
Attempts to mine in the Tucson Mountains were also made beginning in the 1880s and evidence from the Saguaro National Park Western District indicates that both mining for ore and limestone for quicklime production occurred periodically into the 1930s.
Today, limestone quarrying at Twin Buttes is an extension of this historic activity.
The 1893 Roskruge map shows a few ranch/farmsteads in the valley, mostly along foothills of the Roskruge Mountains.
These were the Cocoraque, Agua Blanco and Grismare settlements.
The original Avra Ranch is shown just to the north of the Ajo road in the Altar Valley subarea.
The ranch moved to the north in the vicinity of the present day community of Picture Rocks after the Garcia Strip was created in 1916.
The 1941 Cocoraque Butte 15' USGS topographic map shows the Garcia Ranch on tribal lands, the Cocoraque Ranch just to the north and the La Tortugas Ranch located south of the Garcia Strip.
No settlement activity is shown for the northern end of the subarea.
It wasn't until the 1950s that large scale agriculture was possible in the subarea and only after wells were drilled, the land was leveled, and concrete irrigation canals were constructed.
Today, lands along the east branch of the Brawley Wash are still under agricultural production.
A total of 19 Historic Period sites have been identified in the subarea by the Arizona State Museum, 15 of which are Euro-American, three are Mexican American in ethnic origin and one is unknown.
It is notable that no Native American sites are represented given the historic presence of both the Tohono O'odham and the Apache in the region.
Low sample size, the greater visibility of some sites and not others, and a lack of research interest in the archaeology of the historic time period distorts the true picture of historic period land use in the subarea.
Site Data - Function: The site data from both the historic and prehistoric eras can also be examined from a functional perspective to highlight land use trends within the subarea.
The following is a summary of archaeological site data for the subarea that is presented by gross time period and site function.
These data are made available by the Arizona State Museum, University of Arizona.
Please note: the data presented in table 5 represents the most current information available at the Museum.
The data used by Pima County to prepare Table 6 and the map figures showing site distributions are current as of 1999 and so there are minor differences between the two in their total site counts.
Table IV.4.
5.
Avra Valley Subarea - Archaeological Site Data by Time Period and Site Function PERIOD Prehistoric Historic Both Unknown Total FUNCTION Agriculture 1 2 0 1 4 Art 17 0 0 0 17 Communication 0 1 0 0 1 Disposal 1 0 0 1 2 Government 0 2 0 0 2 Habitation 9 6 1 0 16 Resource Processing 10 1 1 1 13 Resource Procurement 1 1 0 0 2 Religion 2 2 0 0 4 Unknown 71 4 0 5 80 Total 112 19 2 8 141
As can be seen in Table IV.4.5, prehistoric sites out number the historic by almost six one, and in a few cases, occupations from both major time periods are present on the same site.
The prehistoric site counts are dominated by Art (rock art), Resource Processing (food and non food resources) and Habitation (residential) as the most common of the identifiable functions.
If the counts for Religion (ritual/ceremonial) are combine with those of rock art, which is religious in nature, then spiritual uses of the subarea are highly represented, followed by Resource Processing and Habitation in that order.
This reflects the large number of prehistoric rock art sites that have been found in the Roskruge Mountains, the Samaniego Hills, and the Tucson Mountains.
That Agriculture (i.e. fields, water control features), Disposal (trash), and Resource Procurement (food and non food resources ) activities are so under represented is probably a function of low sample size and bias towards recording larger, more visible sites.
The historic components emphasize residential needs, with Habitation being the primary functional category represented.
However, Communication (i.e. claim markers, telegraph/telephone) and Government (civic) related functions are present as well, with places associated with religion , such as a church or a cemetery, being represented to a limited degree.
The greatest number of sites with unknown functions is in the prehistoric column where often survey data are not sufficient to either date or assign functional use to archaeological remains.
To sum the information on archaeological sites, the Avra Valley subarea has witnessed intensive archaeological survey and site excavation, but only in certain areas.
Most of the subarea is either unknown or known through small, isolated or non-intensive surveys.
Nonetheless, the subarea exhibits evidence of prehistoric settlement systems consisting of villages, hamlets, farmsteads, agricultural features, and a variety of specialized activity areas including resource procurement and processing sites as well as an unusually high number of petroglyph or rock art sites.
To a lesser degree, historic archaeological sites associated with mining and homesteading have also been recorded.
In addition, two archaeological site districts have been listed on the National Register of Historic Places - Los Robles Archaeological District and the Cocoraque Butte Archaeological District (see under National Register Properties below).
Taken as a whole, the archaeological record within the subarea has high research potential that will grow as more is learned about the subarea.
B. Historical Resources "Historical resources are sites, districts, structures, objects, or other evidences of human activities that represent facets of the history of the nation, state, or locality.
Also places where significant historical or unusual events occurred even though no evidence of the event remains, or places associated with persons significant in our history that have gained importance in the last 50 years" (Preserving Cultural and Historic Resources, Pima County, May 1999).
Historical resources are largely constructed or engineered elements of the built environment including buildings used for residential purposes, such as houses, but also commercial stores, industrial facilities, civic centers, and places of worship.
Roads, bridges, irrigation canals, mining works, and railroad tracks are also historical resources.
Information on these places is recovered through drawings and design plans, photographs, maps, surveys, and personal recollections.
The Avra Valley subarea has several places of historic importance including one abandoned settlement or ghost town and two places that have been recognized for their historic value and registered on the National Register of Historic Places.
These are represented on the attached map entitled, "Avra Valley Subarea Historic Resources."
Historic Communities: Historic Communities are those settlements that are in existence today that were established 50 years or more ago as indicated by a founding date or the date the first post office opened.
EUR The town of Silverbell, established in 1948, is the modern descendent of the Silverbell mining camp, now a ghost town.
Ghost Towns: Many communities were established only to be abandoned.
These places were typically mining towns, or in some cases, milling towns, that thrived until economic forces eliminated the driving force of their existence.
Established during the later part of the 19th and early 20th centuries, these places remain time capsules that reflects a by-gone era.
The following description is derived from "Ghost Towns of Arizona" by James E. and Barbara H. Sherman, University of Oklahoma Press, 1969.
EUR Silverbell known as the "Hell hole of Arizona" was a copper mining boom town that sprung up in the Silverbell Mountains following the organization of the Imperial Copper company in 1902.
With the construction of a rail link between Red Rock and Silverbell in 1904, the pace of mining increased and the size of the camp swelled to 3000.
In 1911 the company went bankrupt, but the mines were bought out by the American Smelting and Refining Company, which began operations in 1915 and continued until 1921 when low copper prices shut down operations.
In 1934 the rail road tracks linking the mine with Red Rock were torn up and the smelter was dismantled.
The new town of Silverbell is located some four miles southeast of the old mining camp.
National Register Properties: The National Register of Historic Places was created as a part of the National Historic Preservation Act of 1966.
It is the nation's premier honor roll for places deemed of national, regional, or local historic importance.
The criteria for listing include: a) association with a person who has contributed to history; b) association with an event important to history; c) associated with the work of a master artist or craftsman or typical of a style or type of workmanship; d) yielding or having the potential to yield information important to history or prehistory.
Listing in no way effects the rights of private property owners to do what they wish with their property.
Federal agencies, however, are required to consider the effects of their actions on listed properties.
The following descriptions are derived from the individual National Register nomination forms available at the State Historic Preservation Office in Phoenix, Arizona.
EUR Cocoraque Butte Archaeological District.
This property is one of the best recorded examples of ancient "Desert Hohokam" village sites in the Avra Valley.
The Desert Hohokam are not as well known as the Hohokam Indians who practiced canal irrigation farming along the river bottoms in southern and central Arizona between A.D. 700 and A.D. 1450.
Instead, these people were flood water farmers who settled in the vast Papagueria to the west of the Santa Cruz Valley adapting to an environment that lacked perennial rivers and streams.
The district is located on 480 acres of BLM and private lands and contains evidence of prehistoric residential activity, but is also well known for extensive and well preserved rock art panels that are exceptional for their complexity of design and the number of elements.
Like many rock art sites, Cocoraque Butte is considered to be a traditional cultural place by the Tohono O'odham and Hopi Indian tribes.
The district was listed on the National Register in 1975 in recognition of its contribution to understanding the prehistory of southern Arizona.
EUR Los Robles Archaeological District.
This is one of two National Register Districts included under the thematic listing of "Hohokam Platform Mound Communities of the Lower Santa Cruz River Basin," which was created to preserve and give recognition to the high archaeological values associated with a dense concentration of Hohokam sites located along the western edge of Los Robles Wash dating between approximately A.D. 1050 and A.D 1450.
During this time, Hohokam society under went radical change resulting the emergence of new forms of social control centered on communities with a kind of public architecture referred to as "platform mounds."
The district contains a total of 129 archaeological sites within an area encompassing 12, 894 acres of state and Bureau of Land Management land that includes Cerro Prieto in Pinal County.
Cerro Prieto is also the location of one of the most important examples of prehistoric hillside settlements called "trincheras" sites in southern Arizona.
The district was nominated for its contribution to understanding the late prehistoric period in southern Arizona and the southwest region as a whole and listed on the National Register in 1989.
EUR Santa Anna del Chiquiburitac Mission Site: The mission site of Santa Anna del Chiquiburitac was placed on the National Register in 1975.
This property is located adjacent to the Tohono O'odham reservation outside and to the west of the Avra Valley subarea.
On an 80 acre parcel of land lie the ruins of a small mission founded and constructed in 1811 for the Tohono O'odham Indians by Father Juan Bautista Llorens, the priest who completed construction of the Mission San Xavier del Bac in 1797.
It was the last of the missions constructed in the Primeria Alta and the farthest north of any within the mission system linking the frontier with what is today Sonora, Mexico.
The church was abandoned in the 1840s and never re-occupied.
While not located in the subarea and not shown on the map, it is nonetheless an important National Register site with a historic connection to the Avra Valley.
Rural Historic Landscapes: There may also be individual ranches or farmsteads within the subarea that qualify as having importance to the history of the settling of the Avra Valley subarea.
Some of these may be part of larger historic landscapes that are recognizable entities that have historic value.
Historic Landscapes a special subcategory of historic resources.
As defined by the National Park Service, a rural historic landscape is "that portion of the exterior natural environment that has been modified, influenced, or given special cultural meaning by people who shaped the landscape to serve human needs.
A rural historic landscape is a geographical area that historically has been used by people or shaped or modified by human activity, occupancy, or intervention, and that possesses a significant concentration, linkage, or continuity of areas of land use, vegetation, buildings and structures, roads and waterways and natural features.
Historic landscapes may reflect the beliefs, attitudes, traditions, and values of these people."
(National Register Bulletin 30, Department of the Interior) The most likely candidates for places with these values in the subarea are ranches where the connection between historic ranch properties, ranch lands and ranching as a traditional activity remains intact.
The Cocorque Butte Ranch may be a viable candidate as a rural historic landscape.
C.
Traditional Cultural Places "A traditional cultural place is a historic site or district that is important because of its association with cultural practices or beliefs of a living community that (a) are rooted in that community's history, and (b) are important in maintaining the continuing cultural identity of the community.
The traditional cultural significance of an historic property is derived from the role the property plays in a community's historically rooted beliefs, customs, and practices" (Preserving Cultural and Historic Resources, Pima County, May 1991).
Pima County has been occupied by indigenous peoples for thousands of years and the modern descendants of these prehistoric cultures still live in the region today.
All of Pima County is claimed as ancestral lands by the Ak-Chin Indian Community, the Gila River Indian Community, and the Tohono O'odham Nation.
The Piman speaking groups (including the Salt River Pima Maricopa Indian Community) claim direct ancestral affiliation with the prehistoric Hohokam Indians who inhabited much of southern and central Arizona.
Other Indian groups also claim ancestral ties to the Pima County area including the Zuni of central western New Mexico and the Hopi of northeastern Arizona based on oral histories and myth that identify southern Arizona as a place of origin for these tribes.
The Apaches also lived in the region for hundreds of years and therefore they too can claim an ancestral connection to the land and the places of traditional value to them that it may contain.
Other groups with potential claims to places of traditional cultural value include the Hispanic and Anglo communities.
Places of traditional cultural value, as defined, are special to the community and must often remain secret to non-members; this is particularly true among Native Americans.
These might be places where in the past natural resources were collected for ceremony or where natural features on the landscape are still recognized as having significance.
Other places with traditional cultural value of particular importance to Native Americans are rock art sites and all archaeological sites containing human graves.
Seventeen sites within the subarea are identified as prehistoric rock art localities and Cocoraque Butte is claimed as such by the Tohono O'odham and Hopi Indian tribes.
In addition, nine prehistoric sites were used for habitation, which often contain human graves.
It is reasonable to assume, that Native Americans would identify these places as having traditional cultural value.
More than likely, there are many places with these kinds of values that exist in the Avra Valley subarea.
III.
THREAT ASSESSMENT: The next map, entitled "Archaeological Sites and Land Ownership" shows the distribution of sites in relation to land status.
Most of the 131 sites reported in the subarea by the Arizona State Museum are on state lands followed in order by federal lands (BLM and National Park Service), private property, and Pima County land (Tucson Mountain Park) in that order.
This reflects the dominance of the state and federal governments as land holders within the subarea.
Legal protections against unauthorized disturbances are afforded archaeological sites and other cultural and historical resources on state and federal lands, but only one law, the Arizona State Burial Protection Act, applies on private land.
Cultural resources on county lands are also covered by legal protections defined under county law and policy.
Data are presented in Table 6 below showing the number of archaeological sites by land status and degree of legal protection for cultural resources.
Table IV.4.
6.
Avra Valley Subarea - Archaeological Sites by Landownership and Legal Protection Jurisdiction No. of Archaeological Sites Protection Status/Level BLM 21 Protected/high National Parks/Monuments 20 Protected/high State Lands (Trust) 48 Protected/moderate County Parks 4 Protected/moderate Private Lands 38 Unprotected/low Total 131
A total of 41 of the 131 sites have high protection status because of their location on federal lands.
Fifty-two are moderately protected from public and private actions, 48 of which are on state lands and four are within County parks.
The remaining 38 sites are on private lands and thus have low protection status.
Since state lands can be sold for development, and private lands are subject only to local zoning, 86 of the 131 or 65% of the total number of known archaeological sites are potentially threatened by future development in the subarea.
Furthermore, since the majority of the land base in the subarea has never been archaeologically surveyed (92%), hundreds even thousands of sites may exist in the subarea that could be affected.
One way to estimate this number is to divide the number of square miles surveyed in the subarea by the number of reported archaeological sites to get an average of the number of archaeological sites per square mile.
This is complicated by the addition of survey and site information that the Arizona State Museum does not have in its data base and is not reflected in their figures.
The Cohn and Cocoraque surveys on BLM land covered 6200 acres of land in which 39 sites were recorded.
This information added to the Museum's data gives a total of 17,900 acres (27.96 square miles) surveyed and 170 sites recorded for an average of 6.1 site per square mile.
The Museum's data reports 11,700 acres (18.28 square miles) and 131 sites recorded for 7.2 acres per square mile.
These averages are consistent with site density estimates of 6.8 sites per square mile for all of eastern Pima County estimated by county staff (See "Preserving Cultural and Historical Resources" May, 1999).
The subarea is approximately 346 square miles.
If the site density averages from both calculation are used, then by one estimate as many as 2102 sites potentially exist in the subarea and as many as 2477 sites exist by the other.
State lands represent 22% of the subarea and private lands represent 31%.
Using the lower, more conservative site density average of 6.1 sites per square mile and multiplying the state and private land percentage into 2,102, indicates that as many as 462 sites may be located on state lands and another 651 sites may be on private land.
In all, over 1000 archaeological sites could be vulnerable to future developmental pressure.
This figure is even greater if the higher density figure of 7.16 sites per square mile is used for a total of 1313 estimated sites on state and private land.
Archaeological sites are not evenly distributed across the landscape because people do settle on or utilize the land in a uniform manner; some areas are far more heavily occupied than others.
As such, site densities will be lower than the average of approximately 6 sites per square mile in some places and higher in others.
Low survey coverage and bias in survey recording makes the foregoing exercise a guess at best.
Even so, the results suggests the scale of the potential loss in the subarea and the conversely the size of the conservation problem.
The loss of cultural and historical resources and the threat of further loss in the Avra Valley subarea can be summarized as follows.
Resource Loss: Intensive agricultural development in the subarea during the 1950s has damaged or destroyed an unknown number of archaeological sites through land leveling, canal construction, and plowing.
Archaeologists encounter the remains of these sites on the valley floor, but it is not possible to quantify the full extent of the disturbance to the archaeological record without additional research.
Within recent years, unplatted residential growth in the Picture Rocks area, subdivision development along Anway Road, and continued mining activity on the western edge of the subarea have contributed to loss, which again, cannot be quantified since there are few if any requirements to check for cultural resources prior to construction.
The reality is that there is little means of knowing what is being lost.
Site vandalism is a perennial problem in all areas of the state including the Avra Valley subarea, but the relatively low levels of population to date and the remote locations of archaeological sites and historic resources have mitigated against widespread resource loss.
The presence of the Saguaro National Park Western District and the Sonoran Desert Museum, both of which espouse a conservation message may actually contribute to a greater sensitivity towards natural and cultural resources conservation in the subarea.
Resource Threat: The area of highest threat to cultural resources in the subarea is in the eastern half of the valley along the valley bottom and the foothills of the Tucson Mountains.
This is where development is occurring and will continue to occur in the future.
Since private land can be split into five lots or less and developed without platting under current state law, and state trust land is vulnerable to sale for residential development, the potential for resource loss in the future will increase with population growth.
In unincorporated Pima County, development of unplatted land as individual parcels or in "lot split subdivisions" is not subject to the same environmental regulations, including cultural resources requirements, as formally platted subdivisions.
Thus, cultural resources may be destroyed without first being recorded and no opportunities exist for in place preservation through avoidance.
Even in cases where development is subject to full review by the county, cultural resources may be destroyed provided they are first investigated.
Thus both platted and unplatted residential growth threatens cultural resources, particularly archaeological sites.
The map entitled, "Modern Communities, Transportation, and Ownership" shows the extent of private holdings concentrating along the valley bottom on either side of the major washes.
Pima County currently defines this portion of the subarea as "urbanizing."
Moreover, as discussed above, there is evidence to suggest that high concentrations of archaeological sites, especially prehistoric villages and other residential sites, can be expected in this same area.
Continued development on the valley bottom and eastern mountain foothills therefore will have a highly negative effect on the archaeology of the Avra Valley subarea.
State lands west of the Silverbell Mountains, along Los Robles Wash, and between Brawley Wash and the Santa Cruz River, also have high potential for archaeological sites and other cultural resources.
On the west side of the valley, less information is available about cultural and historical resources, but development pressures are lower too.
This area is mostly federal lands (BLM) and thus has a higher degree of protection for cultural resources.
Sensitivity Zone: Because the distribution of the majority of cultural resources is unknown, assessing risk and making conservation recommendations is difficult.
In an effort to predict areas with high sensitivity for cultural and historical resources, proximity to water is used as an objective predictor under the assumption that in the desert places closer to water will tend to have been used more heavily by past human populations than places more removed from water sources.
The map entitled, Cultural Resources High Sensitivity Areas, identifies zones within the subarea that are predicted to be highly sensitive for cultural resources.
These include the Blanco, Brawley and Los Robles Washes, as well as the Santa Cruz River to the east of the subarea.
Different buffers widths are used for the sensitivity model.
The three major washes in the area are each buffered by two miles on either side for a total of four miles in width.
There are no springs in the subarea but shallow ground water is indicated east of the Silverbell Mountains in the vicinity of Cocio Wash.
One mile buffering is used for this area.
The distribution of known archaeological sites is also provided in this figure and demonstrates that many, but not all known sites are captured within the sensitivity area as defined.
It is notable that the buffered area around the Blanco, Brawley and Los Robles Washes encompasses most of the private land in the valley, an area believed to have high concentrations of archaeological sites based on survey data.
What is not captured within the buffered areas are historic resources associated with ranching and mining that are predominantly located in the upland bajadas of the Roskruge, Waterman, Silverbell and West Silverbell Mountains on the west side of the Valley, and the Tucson Mountains on the east side.
Other factors besides the availability of surface water conditioned use of these areas for ranching and mining and drilling for ground water was another option available to historic era populations.
In addition, the buffered areas do not include the extensive prehistoric rock art sites that are known to exist in these same areas.
Again, proximity to large drainages was not the sole determiner in conditioning the use of the uplands for rock art.
While the model presented here is simplistic, it does indicate where some, but not all, areas with high cultural resources sensitivity may be expected within the subarea.
IV.
SUMMARY: The cultural resources of the Avra Valley subarea are the product of thousands of years of human settlement from the earliest prehistoric times to the modern day.
In that sense, they represent a collective history of the Valley that can inform and educate future generations about the past.
But these resources are non renewable: there are only so many archaeological sites, historic buildings or places with traditional cultural value, and once they are gone there are no replacements.
It is for this reason that Pima County has included cultural resources in its planning for the Sonoran Desert Conservation Plan.
This report provides information on known cultural resources within the subarea describing their nature and distribution and attempts to predict where other cultural resources may be found.
Clearly, much more is known about the archaeological record than either historic resources or traditional cultural places.
This is because more formal study has been directed to the archaeological record, whereas research on historic resources is limited, and ethnographic information on traditional cultural properties is almost completely lacking.
It is also apparent that the subarea has received different levels of research attention in different locations over the years.
While archaeological survey data indicate that approximately 8% of the subarea has been intensively investigated, the primary focus of this research has been in its eastern half, and as a consequence, less is known of the western subarea.
Despite the low survey coverage, those areas that have been studied suggests that up to 10,000 years of human history is represented in the subarea, and that the peak use of the Valley occurred during late prehistory when the subarea was occupied by the Hohokam Indians.
Historic uses of the valley for mining, ranching and agriculture contribute to its importance as a place with high scientific, educational and recreational potential, an assessment that is further supported by site density estimates indicating that as many as several thousand archaeological sites may be within the subarea
The town of Silverbell and its precursor, the Silverbell ghost town, are examples of communities historically linked to mining in the west, an major economic force that contributed to opening the western frontier in the 19th and 20th centuries.
The Silverbell ghost town is now completely part of the archaeological record and thus represents a sealed time capsule on an important period in the history of the Avra Valley.
The subarea has two places that have been listed on the National Register of Historic Places and a third is located just to the west of the subarea boundaries.
These locations have been recognized for their contribution to understanding the prehistory and history of the region and stand as a tribute to the Avra Valley.
Lastly, Native American claims identify the Avra Valley as part of their traditional use areas and the possibility that places with traditional cultural value exist in the subarea is high, especially those associated with the archaeological record.
In short, the subarea, while still mostly unrecorded, has rich record of cultural and historical resources with a high potential for many more resources than are currently known.
Since the majority of the Subarea is composed of private lands and state trust lands that are potentially convertible into private lands for development, there is a further need to identify cultural and historical resources, evaluate their significance, and where warranted protect them for future generations.
It is worth noting that the Ironwood Preserve proposed by Pima County encompasses areas in the Silverbell, Waterman, and Roskruge Mountains is known to contain prehistoric sites, including extensive rock art, as well as evidence of historic ranching and mining, and has a high potential for containing additional cultural resources.
The Preserve would thus extend a measure of protection for these resources in a manner that is consistent with the goals of the Sonoran Desert Conservation Plan.
[ Next ]
return to top of page
TABLE OF CONTENTS _________________________________________________________________
SDCP Footer Image SDCP Home
