[seal.gif] __________________________________________________________________ MEMORANDUM __________________________________________________________________ Date: August 16, 2000 To: The Honorable Chair and Members Pima County Board of Supervisors From: C.H. Huckelberry County Administrator
Re: Preliminary Mountain Parks Element
I. Background
One year ago we issued a discussion paper entitled Mountain Parks and the Sonoran Desert Conservation Concept Plan that described the relation of the current and proposed system of mountain parks and reserves to the ongoing multi-species conservation planning process and the larger Sonoran Desert Conservation Plan.
Today the draft Preliminary Mountain Parks Element is being forwarded to the Board.
During the past year, community-based initiatives have inspired action at the local and federal level.
This has accelerated the planning process and implemented aspects of the Mountain Parks Element.
Examples of progressive conservation commitments include the Board of Supervisors significant expansion of Pima County's Tucson Mountain Park by over 1,500 acres, the establishment of the Ironwood National Monument by the President of the United States, and the introduction of legislation by Congressman Jim Kolbe to create the Las Cienegas National Conservation Area.
Conservation activity at this scale has not occurred in Pima County since the early part of the century, when most of the existing major reserves were created between 1902 and 1933.
Pima County has, since the creation of Tucson Mountain Park in 1929, established two relatively small parks and a natural preserve.
But we now realize, as we find that approximately 50 imperiled species create federal compliance issues and signal a general decline in our natural systems, that our incremental approach to conservation over the last 70 years has not been sufficient, and the activity of the of past year will have to continue in order for Pima County to begin to stabilize our resource systems and strike a balance that ensures our quality of life for many future generations.
We have stated this before, but it is a point that warrants repeating: Our riparian environments have experienced great losses, and these losses relate to wildlife declines.
The Science Technical Advisory Team for the Sonoran Desert Conservation Plan has identified over 50 priority vulnerable species for potential coverage under the Sonoran Desert Conservation Plan.
Stated simply, regardless of the amount of open space that exists across Pima County, we have not assembled an open space system that effectively preserves and conserves native species.
Map of Existing Reserves (548k PDF)
There are reasons for the mismatch between past preservation efforts and the reality of our declining natural systems.
* First, parks in Pima County and across the country have often been created to set aside areas of great beauty, but plant and animal communities do not make location decisions based on aesthetics.
* Second, areas that have been set aside for wildlife protection purposes often are too small to support a viable population of the species.
It was not until 1985 that scientists in the relatively new field of conservation biology could calculate how badly we have misjudged the area needs of wide ranging carnivores.
Large animals are becoming extinct within the boundaries of the very parks that were created to protect them.
* And third, existing protected areas are disconnected.
This fragmentation between even large public areas relegates the existing open space patches to the role of a zoo, when the natural functions of the system are replaced by human management and maintenance of the plant and animal communities.
The difficult inheritance of past conservation decision making is that as a rule, federal and local public parks were established without a full understanding of the relationship between open space and species conservation, and, as currently configured, they simply will not support suites of species.
This applies to parks on a national scale, and it is true in Pima County too.
Unlike many communities, however, Pima County still has the opportunity to assemble an effective reserve.
We are fortunate to have a number of open space areas, often connected by riparian linkages.
The County's parks and preserve system is flexible so that a future open space and preserve system involving federal, state, and private land can include County-owned land managed at the level of conservation that is necessary.
This gives the community an opportunity to meet conservation compliance requirements at a regional level, in part through the County's parks and preserve system, while at the same time creating and implementing an adaptive management strategy which can adjust over time to actually improve implementation of the Sonoran Desert Conservation Plan as better scientific information becomes available.
The Preliminary Mountain Parks Element suggests where connections exist and it provides a look at the resources within existing and proposed parks and preserves, based on current management and planning documents.
The comprehensive biological assessment conducted as part of the Sonoran Desert Conservation Plan is expected to result in changes to proposed preserve boundaries and preserve management.
The Preliminary Mountain Parks Element frames open space possibilities by outlining the known potential of one ranch conservation area, parks, and preserve areas in Eastern Pima County.
II.
Potential to Protect, Enhance and Create Mountain Parks and Preserves
Since the establishment of Tucson Mountain Park in 1929, Pima Countys mountain parks and natural preserves have played an important and diverse role in the life of the community.
This role will be expanded with the development of the Sonoran Desert Conservation Plan through the design and implementation of a comprehensive open space parks and reserve system that meets endangered species compliance standards for the region.
A potential ranch conservation area, parks and preserves are described below by watershed planning unit, in order to facilitate discussion of the regional reserve network.
1.
Middle San Pedro Subarea
The Middle San Pedro watershed subarea covers 174,315 acres.
Within that area, the United States Forest Service and United States National Parks Service manage substantial land areas.
A small reserve exists in the Bingham Cienega Natural Preserve, and the draft Preliminary Sonoran Desert Conservation Plan proposes the following addition.
Buehman-Bingham Natural Preserve -- The proposed 7,489-acre Buehman-Bingham Natural Preserve would assure a permanent link between the Catalina Mountains and the San Pedro River corridor and the protection of the sensitive plant and wildlife resources that presently exist in this area.
Vegetation -- The Buehman Canyon corridor is rich in vegetation, and is home to large stands of a variety of trees, including cottonwood, ash, walnut, willow, mesquite, hackberry, oak, sycamore, and juniper.
Animal species -- Riparian species are particularly abundant, and include such high-value inhabitants as leopard frogs (a species of special concern) and the longfin dace.
Over 300 species of birds can be found in the area, two-thirds of which are neotropical migrants.
Seldom-seen bird species identified in the area include the western yellow-billed cuckoo, the northern gray hawk, the zone-tailed hawk, and others, including the endangered Southwestern willow flycatcher.
Other wildlife known to frequent the area include coatimundi, black bear, whitetail and mule deer, javelina, bobcat, and ring-tailed cats.
Part of the San Pedro corridor is within the critical habitat designation for the pygmy-owl.
2.
Cienega Rincon Subarea
The Cienega Creek watershed represents one of the most important, if not the most important area in Pima County for aquatic and riparian dependent species.
Pima County and the Bureau of Land Management hold sensitive lands, but expansion of current holdings, whether through the proposed Las Cienegas National Conservation Area or achieving additional conservation commitments in the area, are necessary to the success of the Sonoran Desert Conservation Plan.
The draft Preliminary Sonoran Desert Conservation Plan proposals include additional conservation actions in the Cienega Creek Preserve area, Colossal Cave Mountain Park area, Davidson Canyon, Santa Rita Mountains, and the most sweeping and significant proposal, the Las Cienegas National Conservation Area.
Cienega Creek Natural Preserve --The 3,979-acre Cienega Creek Natural Preserve was Pima Countys first Natural Preserve.
The Preserve encompasses approximately 12 miles of the Cienega Creek, and roughly half of the protected stretch of the creek experiences perennial stream flow.
Important purposes served by keeping this reach of the Cienega Creek in its existing undiminished state are the facilitation of natural aquifer recharge, and the assistance it offers in lessening the severity of flood events capable of impacting the developed area of the Tucson Basin.
The utility of the Preserves flood control capability alone makes it of exceptional value to the Tucson metro area.
The lands within the preserve are in excellent natural condition, and few man-made improvements exist within its boundaries.
The most significant of the existing improvements is the Vail Water Company diversion, where the perennial base flows of the river are diverted and carried off the preserve via a pipeline.
For purposes of planning, the Sonoran Desert Conservation Concept Plan suggests the expansion of the preserve by 7,293 acres, and the protection of Mescal Arroyo which links to Cienega Creek, adding another 1,856 acres to the preserve.
Vegetation - The preserve, which is located within a transitional zone between the Sonoran and Chihuahuan Deserts and thus exhibits some of the features of each region, is home to nine plant associations.
These associations include: ^(1)
T T Mixed Grass - Mixed Scrub Association (2%)
T Burroweed - Mesquite Association (5%)
T Creosote - Mariola Association (12%)
T Ocotillo - Mixed Scrub Association (1%)
T Creosote Association (9%)
T Creosote - Mixed Scrub Association (14%)
T Velvet Mesquite Association (20%)
T Velvet Mesquite - Mixed Deciduous Tree Association (4%)
T Velvet Mesquite - Mixed Scrub Association (21%)
Two special status plants are known to occur in the area, and the possibility exists that these plants may exist in the preserve and/or on the preserves adjacent expansion lands identified in the Sonoran Desert Conservation Concept Plan: the Needle-Spined Pineapple Cactus and the Pima Pineapple Cactus.
The Pima Pineapple Cactus is a listed endangered species.
Animal species -- Two principal types of wildlife habitat exist within the existing boundary of the preserve and on its surrounding expansion lands -- those associated with the preserves riparian areas, and those associated with its upland areas.
The more significant of the two are the habitats associated with the preserves riparian areas, because of the high level of biological productivity and species diversity they foster.
As a result of its quality, the preserves wildlife habitat sustains a diverse and large population of mammals, birds, fish, reptiles, amphibians, and invertebrates.
Three special status species are known to exist in the preserve: the Lowland leopard frog,the Mexican long-tongued bat, and the Mexican garter snake.
Other special status or species of concern may also be present in the preserve: the Gila chub, the Gila topminnow, the Lesser long-nosed bat, and the Sonoran desert tortoise.
Recreation potential -- The Cienega Creek Natural Preserves lush vegetation and scenic values, clean running water, outstanding mountain vistas, and sense of solitude and natural quiet make it a very attractive place to visit.
However, because resource protection is the principal imperative in the preserve, recreational activities are limited to those that do not adversely impact its sensitive resources:
T Hiking, walking, backpacking, picnicking and related activities;
T Railroad train watching, photography and painting;
T Non-intrusive bird and wildlife observation, photography and painting;
T Wading in the creeks pools and stream;
T Scientific research and environmental education;
T Other low impact recreational or educational activities.
T Access is limited to 50 people per day, and a permit is required to enter the preserve.
Presently about 10 people per weekday visit the Cienega Preserve.
Colossal Cave Mountain Park -- At approximately 2,000 acres, Colossal Cave is Pima Countys smallest existing mountain park, but it too has the potential to grow considerably to meet the regions conservation goals in the Rincon Valley area.
While best known for the tourist attraction from which it draws its name, the park has outstanding scenic resources, and includes the 1870s Posta Quemada Ranch.
As might be expected from a park that features a natural cave, the geology of Colossal Cave Mountain Park is extraordinary, and is undoubtedly its most significant characteristic.
According to experts who have conducted studies on the site, the parks geology is uncommonly diverse, and represents a "mosaic" array of 20 different geologic units.
Honoring a request received during the public comment period, the Sonoran Desert Conservation Concept Plan suggests, for planning purposes, that the park be expanded by 14,160 acres in addition to the 4,814 acres recommended by County staff.
Vegetation - Colossal Cave Mountain Park is also notable for its wide range of vegetative communities.
This exceptional diversity can be attributed to its variety of rock and soil types (21 soil types occur within the parks planning area), as well as to the fact that the park is located in a transition area between the Chihuahuan and Sonoran deserts, and includes some of the characteristics of both regions.
Six vegetative communities have been identified within the parks planning area, including the Creosote Bush, Palo Verde-Saguaro, Chihuahuan Desertscrub, Semidesert Grassland, Deciduous Riparian Forest, and Evergreen Woodland associations.
Animal species -- Special status wildlife species that are known to occur in the park include the desert tortoise, the American peregrine falcon, the Lesser long-nosed bat, the Mexican long-tongued bat, the California leaf-nosed bat, the western red bat, and Townsends big-eared bat.
The species that inhabit the park range from predatory mammals such as ringtail cats and mountain lions to at least 11 species of bats.
The park is especially diverse in bird and reptile species, at least partly owing to the lush riparian habitat in the Posta Quemada Wash and along the nearby Agua Verde Creek.
Cultural resources -- Colossal Cave and the area surrounding it, including the suggested expansion lands, have considerable archeological and historical significance.
The lands, with natural springs and riparian corridors, have long attracted the interest of humans and were inhabited for an extended period.
To date, 13 prehistoric sites have been identified in vicinity of the park and the adjacent Pistol Hill area.
Recreation potential -- Colossal Cave Mountain Park presently offers a wide range of passive recreation opportunities, including picnicking, birdwatching, hiking, horseback riding and camping.
Davidson Canyon Natural Preserve -- Davidson Canyon is a broad, deep and impressive natural wash corridor approximately 12 miles long that contains high-quality riparian habitat and is extraordinarily picturesque.
The canyon, situated a short distance east of the Sonoita Highway and south of Cienega Creek, connects the Cienega Creek Natural Preserve with the Nogales Ranger District of the Coronado National Forest.
The proposed Davidson Canyon Natural Preserve, a 6,191-acre unit, and would encompass the roughly 11 miles or so of the canyon not presently protected by Pima County or any other land management agency.
The preserves significance as a corridor between protected natural areas is difficult to overstate; no other linkage proposed in the Sonoran Desert Conservation Concept Plan would connect as many existing or proposed units.
The canyons hydrologic characteristics are also important.
Davidson Canyon collects drainage from the northeastern slopes of the Santa Rita Mountains and the northern and western faces of the Empire Mountains, and this runoff ultimately flows into Cienega Creek and through the Tucson Basin.
Protecting the canyon in its natural form will maintain its important flood control capacity, as well as its natural recharge capabilities.
Vegetation -- The Davidson Canyon Natural Preserve encompasses both riparian and Sonoran Desert upland habitat, and its plant associations include the Velvet Mesquite-Mixed Scrub Association, Velvet Mesquite Association, Burroweed-Mesquite Association and the Creosote Association.
The canyons riparian habitat and spring-fed stream flows are its most significant and valuable features.
Like the Cienega Creek corridor, the canyons interior hosts an exceptional variety of plant and animal species, including velvet mesquite, whitethorn and catclaw acacia, cottonwood trees, seepwillow, saltbush, desert hackberry, graythorn, prickly pear, sacaton and deergrass.
Upland plant species include the mesquite, palo verde, creosote, barrel cactus, ocotillo, yucca, and potentially the Pima Pineapple cactus, a listed endangered species.
Animal species -- Wildlife species likely to be found within Davidson Canyon include endangered leopard frogs, fish such as the long-finned dace, waterbirds, Mexican garter snakes, coyote, gray fox, skunk, collared peccary, bobcat, mule deer, and several varieties of bats, including the Mexican long-tongued bat.
The Canyons scenic values are another of its outstanding natural resources.
Santa Rita Mountain Park -- The proposed 10,703-acre Santa Rita mountain park is situated in the picturesque foothills of the Santa Rita Mountains south of Sahuarita Road and west of Davidson Canyon.
The extensive natural resources encompassed by the Santa Rita Mountain Park include Fagan Lake, a man-made pond just outside the Coronado National Forest.
Vegetation -- The dominant vegetative community within the park is Semi-desert grassland that includes a variety of grasses, including grama grasses at higher elevations.
According to the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service, the parklands formerly featured an oak savannah with large trees; however, the agency believes that this plant community has been diminished over time.
Lehmanns lovegrass, an exotic grass species, has infiltrated the park and continues to propagate.
Animal species -- One of the most notable features of the Santa Rita Mountains is the tremendous diversity of wildlife that inhabits the range.
In addition to the usual desert species that can be found in the area, such as mule deer, white-tailed deer, javelina, quail, cottontails and the like, the area is also home to the Mexican opossum, the coatimundi and mountain lions.
A large variety of birds can also be found in the area, including hummingbirds, several kinds of hawks, Golden eagles, and the tropical kingbird.
Reptiles are also plentiful, and include several kinds of rattlesnakes, frogs such as the lowland leopard frog, (a species of special concern) and the western barking frog, gila monsters, and the Sonoran desert tortoise.
The area is noteworthy for its large population of bats, which features the Mexican long-tongued bat, the Pale Townsends big-eared bat, the California leaf-nosed bat, the Ghost-faced bat, and the Western red bat.
The Santa Ritas may also support a broad range of threatened and endangered species.
Listed-endangered species known or believed to exist in the range and on surrounding lands include the American peregrine falcon, the cactus ferruginous pygmy owl, the jaguarundi, the Lesser long-nosed bat, the pima pineapple cactus, and the Gila topminnow.
Listed-threatened species include the Mexican spotted owl.
Recreation potential -- The area is presently lightly used for recreational purposes, partially because of its distance from urban Tucson and partially because it is not well-known.
The park does have several existing primitive roads and trails, some of which are listed on the Eastern Pima County Trail System Master Plan.
3.
Upper Santa Cruz Subarea
The Upper Santa Cruz Subarea encompasses the Santa Rita Experimental Range and substantial holdings by the United States Forest Service.
Ongoing discussion related to the Canoa Ranch conservation initiative could lead to additional protected acreage within this subarea.
4.
Middle Santa Cruz Subarea
Despite being the most highly urbanized subarea of Eastern Pima County, the Middle Santa Cruz area includes the large reserve of the Coronado National Forest, part of Saguaro National Park, and part of Tucson Mountain Park.
Pima County's Agua Caliente Park is also within this watershed subarea.
A number of proposals to preserve acreage of less than one section each are included in the draft Preliminary Mountain Parks Element.
Many of these relate to Tucson Mountain Park, which is described briefly below.
Tucson Mountain Park -- Tucson Mountain Park, formed from volcanic and fault block activity that began an estimated 70 million years ago, is presently Pima Countys largest Natural Resource Park and is one of Tucsons most-visited natural areas.
Pima County manages 2,514 acres owned by the Bureau of Reclamation adjacent to the western boundary of the park.
Saguaro National Park adjoins the County park to the north, adding 24,034 acres to this area.
The vegetation within the Tucson Mountains is classified as a subtropical desertland located within the Arizona Upland subdivision of the Sonoran Desert.
A variety of plant communities and associations are represented within this category, with the most prevalent being the palo verde-saguaro association.
Several uncommon species, including night-blooming cereus and Tumamoc globeberry, are known to occur.
The park is home to large and healthy populations of saguaro, prickly pear, barrel, cholla and ocotillo cactus, mesquite, palo verde and ironwood trees, and a variety of other Sonoran desert vegetation.
Animal species found in the park include coyotes, javelina, cottontail and jackrabbits, and mule deer.
Other noteworthy wildlife found in the park include bobcats, gray foxes, mountain lions, desert tortoises, gila monsters and a variety of bats and bird species.
More than 230 vertebrate species are common to the area, as well as literally thousands of invertebrates.
Sensitive species that may be found in the park include the Lesser long-nosed bat and the California leaf-nosed bat.
The possibility that the cactus ferruginous pygmy-owl may use the park, and the suitability of its habitat for this listed endangered species, led to the inclusion of Tucson Mountain Park in Unit 2 of the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Services recent critical habitat designation for the owl.
Cultural resources -- Tucson Mountain Park contains a variety of valuable cultural resources, including prehistoric archaeological sites, rock art sites, historic structures, old mines and trails, traditional O'odham saguaro fruit gathering sites and other traditional cultural places, and natural features of the land that together form a significant cultural and historic landscape.
Recreation potential -- The park includes 26 miles of trails open to hikers, equestrians and mountain bicyclists, an archery range, a rifle range, a campground and picnic areas, and is home to the Arizona-Sonora Desert Museum, the Sonoran Arthropod Research Institute, and Old Tucson Studios.
5.
Tortolita Fan Subarea
The Tortolita Fan subarea includes Forest Service and National Park land, in addition to the Catalina State Park and the County's Tortolita Mountain Park.
The major proposal to protect open space and endangered species habitat in the subarea is Pima County's application to the State Land Department to expand the Tortolita Mountain Park area.
Tortolita Mountain Park -- Tortolita Mountain Park was established in 1986, when the Pima County Board of Supervisors approved the expenditure of 1986 bond funds to acquire 3,055.75 acres of private property in the rugged backcountry of the Tortolita Mountains for park purposes.
The first 2,426.75 acres was purchased in 1986, and another 629 acres was added in 1988.
Several recent acquisitions have brought Pima Countys current holdings in the Tortolitas to 3,445.75 acres.
The Tortolita Mountains are one of the oldest geological features in the Tucson area, and include 4,651 foot tall Tortolitas Peak, the highest point in the range.
On November 10, 1998, the Board approved County applications to the Arizona Preserve Initiative to expand Tortolita Mountain Park by 25,744 acres.
The application includes the Tortolita alluvial fan and Ironwood Forest area, which would serve as a key area for the recovery of the pygmy-owl.
Vegetative communities located within the present boundary of the park include Sonoran Desertscrub, Paloverde-Cacti-Mixed Scrub Series, Interior Chaparral, Scrub Oak Series, Sonoran Riparian Deciduous Forest and Woodland, Mesquite Series; Sonoran Riparian Deciduous Forest and Woodland, Cottonwood-Willow Series, and Sonoran Riparian Scrubland, Mixed Scrub Series.
The majority of the park is considered to be within the Sonoran Desertscrub biotic community.
The alluvial fan area is home to a large and impressive ironwood forest, and some of the trees within the forest are believed to be hundreds of years old.
The density and superlative quality of the ironwood forest make it prime potential habitat for the cactus ferruginous pygmy-owl, and led to its inclusion in the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Services critical habitat designation for the owl.
While Park's staff knows of no special status plant species identified within the current boundaries of the park, the lands do contain large, undisturbed, healthy stands of saguaro, barrel, ocotillo and cholla cactus, mesquite, palo verde and ironwood trees, as well as a wide variety of native grasses, bushes and other plants.
Animal species -- The Tortolita Mountains area supports a wide range of wildlife, and is capable of supporting certain special status wildlife species.
The parks proposed expansion lands contain habitat considered suitable for the pygmy-owl.
The Sonoran desert tortoise, a species of special concern, is commonly found within the kind of Paloverde-Cacti Mixed Scrub Series habitat found in and around the park, and may be present there.
Other special status wildlife found on and around the subject lands include the American peregrine falcon, the Lesser long-nosed bat, the Mexican long-tongued bat, and the California leaf-tongued bat.
A wildlife survey conducted as a part of the master planning process for the park in 1996 identified a wide range of animal and bird species, including mountain lion, peccary, mule deer, and large numbers of birds and lizards.
The Tortolita Mountains are also home to a small herd of wild horses--one of the few such herds remaining in southern Arizona.
Cultural resources -- The Tortolita Mountains area is rich in cultural resources.
Evidence of occupation by Hohokam Indians can be found throughout the area.
On the eastern side of the park, the most significant resource is the large and well-known "Indian Town" site, which is the parks first priority acquisition area.
However, this area has not yet been systematically surveyed, and additional sites are expected to exist -- particularly along Honeybee Canyon and Sausalito Creek within the adopted park expansion boundary, and along Big Wash in the proposed Tortolita East Biological Corridor.
Catalina State Park Expansion -- The 5,511-acre Catalina State Park is situated in the western foothills of the Catalina Mountains adjacent to the Town of Oro Valley between the Coronado National Forest and the Oracle Highway.
Catalina State Park's position and significance in the regional open space network led to its inclusion in both the 1997 Open Space Bond Program and the Sonoran Desert Conservation Concept Plan.
The Bond Program identified about 1000 acres, and the Sonoran Desert Conservation Concept Plan identified approximately 2,500 acres of property north of the park for possible protection.
The central purpose of the proposed expansion is to facilitate the establishment of a biological corridor that would link the Coronado National Forest, the Sutherland Basin, and Catalina State Park to the Tortolita East Biological Corridor and the Tortolita Mountains.
Vegetation -- Sections of two major wash corridors -- the Canada del Oro and the Sutherland washes--pass through the park, which protects the valuable riparian habitat within them.
These washes and their tributaries support an extensive mesquite bosque.
Other plant associations that occur within the parks riparian community include Arizona ash, cottonwood, sycamore, desert willow, oak, netleaf hackberry, Arizona walnut and Arizona cypress.
Other major vegetation types found in the park include desert scrub, desert grassland, and foothill communities.
Animal species -- Species typically found throughout Catalina State Park and on the parks proposed northern expansion lands include javelina, coyote, jackrabbit, cottontail, bobcat, skunk, squirrels, mule deer, and bats, as well as a multiplicity of snakes, lizards and birds.
The park provides habitat for migratory neotropical birds and also wintering peregrine falcon.
Desert bighorn sheep have been sighted in the park and on surrounding lands in the past, although their numbers have declined to a bare few in recent years.
The parks northern expansion lands contain habitat considered suitable for the endangered cactus ferruginous pygmy-owl.
The Sonoran desert tortoise, a species of special concern, can be found within the habitat that exists in the area, and could conceivably be present on the expansion lands.
Other special status wildlife that may exist on and around the subject expansion lands include the American peregrine falcon, the Lesser long-nosed bat, the Mexican long-tongued bat, and the California leaf-tongued bat.
Cultural resources -- The lands presently within the boundaries of Catalina State Park are home to a wide range of valuable cultural resources.
Investigations conducted by the Arizona State Museum and others have found tools, flakes and projectile points that are believed to date back to 5000 B.C.
These investigations also suggest that the area was occupied by Hohokam Indians from about 300 B.C. to around 1500 A.D.
Some 38 archeological sites have been located and recorded in the park, the most significant of which is the Romero Ruin or "Pueblo Viejo."
The Romero Ruin is a classic Hohokam habitation site and historic ranch compound that covers approximately 30 acres, and features a stone compound wall, several rooms of stone masonry construction, rock and trash mounds, rock alignments that are believed to have been irrigation troughs, and two depressions that may have been used as ball courts.
Recreation potential -- Catalina State Park offers approximately 12 miles of recreational trail opportunities for hikers, equestrians and mountain bicyclists.
6A.
Altar Valley Subarea
The major federal land holder in the Altar Valley the United States Fish and Wildlife Service.
The National Forest Service and the Bureau of Land Management also manage land in Altar Valley, with other stewardship occurring primarily by ranchers in the vast land base.
Conservation initiatives in the area have been discussed primarily in the context of the Ranch Conservation Element of the plan.
Similarly, the Cerro Colorado Ranch Conservation Area is a proposal that is cast in the framework of ranchland use.
Cerro Colorado Ranch Conservation Area -- Compared to the sprawling mountain ranges that house county conservation areas, the Cerro Colorado Mountains, which cover an area of about 13 square miles, are relatively small.
Despite its less-than-imposing stature, this compact range, named for its rocky red volcanic form, is among the most scenic and biologically diverse in southern Arizona.
The craggy peaks of the Cerro Colorados, located less than 6 miles due south of the Sierrita Mountains and immediately north of the Arivaca Road, rise above the surrounding countryside to a height of 5,319 feet.
Vegetation -- Plant communities in the mountains and its surrounding area include grasslands at lower elevations, as well as additional grassland and the Madrean evergreen-oak community at higher elevations.
The Pima pineapple cactus, a listed endangered plant species, exists in the area and may also occur within the boundaries of the park.
Animal Species -- The Cerro Colorados boast an impressive roster of wildlife species, including, as previously noted, mule deer, white-trail deer, javelinas, and coatimundis, as well as cliff-dwelling raptors such as the rarely-seen golden eagle.
Special status wildlife species in the area include the jaguar and the masked bob-white quail--both of which are listed endangered species--and the Northern gray hawk, Pale Townsends big-eared bat and Sonoran desert tortoise, all species of special concern.
The proposed Ranch Conservation Area will also protect a key portion of the areas watershed.
The Cerro Colorados watershed features are of critical importance because they help sustain several nearby riparian areas, including riparian habitat in the nearby Buenos Aires Preserve.
Wildlife authorities have noted that this habitat is especially important for migrating neotropical birds.
6B.
Avra Valley Subarea
Earlier proposals included discussion of conserving the Silverbell Mountains and Waterman Roskruge mountain area.
This has been achieved through the establishment of the Ironwood Forest National Monument on June 9, 2000.
Managed by the Bureau of Land Management as part of the Department of Interior's new National Landscape Conservation System, this Monument signals that the conservation ethic can and should be a part of multiple land uses promoted by a wide variety of interested members of the community.
We are looking forward to continuing our partnership with the Bureau of Land Management as they conduct the planning process for the Ironwood Forest National Monument.
A goal of future planning will be to connect the land between the Tucson Mountain Park and Saguaro National Park (West) area to the Ironwood Forest National Monument.
III.
Conclusion
The draft Preliminary Mountain Parks Element is summarized on the map that follows.
It includes: * The proposed Las Cienegas National Conservation Area.
* The proposed new Santa Rita Mountain Park.
* Two proposed Natural Reserves: Davidson Canyon and the Buehman Bingham Reserve.
* Expansions of existing Mountain Parks, including the Tortolita Mountain Park, Colossal Cave Mountain Park, and Catalina State Park..
* A Ranch Conservation Area proposed for the Cerro Colorado Mountains.
Total acreage for these Mountain Park proposals, including the Las Cienegas National Conservation proposal, is approximately 250,000 acres.
Greater conservation committments will be achieved through the Ranch Element, as we find ways to prevent the fragmentation of ranch land.
The Riparian Element, and the habitat and corridors conserved to meet the biological goals of the Sonoran Desert Conservation Plan will add dimension to the ultimate reserve and address practical compliance issues at the same time.
A new era for Pima County parks has arrived.
Not only do parks protect viewsheds, they serve a corridors, connecting biologically significant areas.
Mountain Parks will preserve in perpetuity both the beauty and long term sustainability of our resource base.
The parks and open space aspects of the Sonoran Desert Conservation Plan will take many years to implement.
Almost a full century after the first land was conserved in Eastern Pima County, it is our privilege to find that we still have patches of valuable land in our midst and are inspired to take actions to conserve them.
Mountain Parks Master Map (1.7MB PDF)
___________________________________
1.
The remaining 12% of the Preserve not included in one of the plant communities listed above consists of abandoned ag fields (4%) and bedrock/sandy wash channel (8%).
Previous Table of Contents Next Introduction 
SDCP Footer Image return to top of page
