Black Canyon of the Gunnison National Park/Curecanti National Recreation Area [lang_blank_half2.gif] Main Page Ranger Programs Current Updates Activities Resources Maps Outreach Education Info Zone History [lang_blank_half2.gif]
Black Canyon of the Gunnison National Park and Curecanti National Recreation Area Outreach Education is committed to: Creating an awareness and fostering an appreciation for the mission of the National Park Service and the natural, cultural, and historic resources of Curecanti National Recreation Area and Black Canyon of the Gunnison National Park.
Education Lesson Plan Curriculum enhancing activities designed to complement national and state content standards across a variety of disciplines.
Title: The Active Earth Grade level: Eighth Grade Time length: 4 hours Subject areas: Science, language arts, math Teacher: Two NPS Education Specialists Theme: The geology of the Gunnison area illustrates the ever-changing nature of the earth.
NPS focus: Public Law 39-535 (Organic Act), Public Law 95-250 (Redwood National Park Expansion Act), Vail Agenda Education Committee Report, Curecanti and Black Canyon Themes: Natural Resources/Wildlife Environmental concepts: Everything must fit how and where it lives (adaptation).
Everything is going somewhere (cycles).
Everything is becoming something else (change).
Environmental learning hierarchy: Problem solving processes, decision making procedures Materials: Glass, wooden spoon, plastic fork, zip-lock plastic bag, video, CD, tape cassette, computer disc, pencil, paper clip, lipstick, nail polish, baseball/football/soccer ball, baseball cap; jar filled with water and sand, silly putty, can of soda; era cards, one set of laminated cards bearing the definitions of Cenozoic, Mesozoic, Paleozoic, and Precambrian time eras; 4 time line starters: one piece of paper with a black arrow drawn on it to be the basis of the time line (0 years to billion years), 4 red, orange, green, and blue markers corresponding to colors on laminated era cards; examples of rock: igneous, sedimentary, metamorphic, breccia, welded tuff; journal notebooks with a diagram of the Dillon Pinnacles, a scavenger hunt, and two worksheets for describing the pinnacles to a scientist and an artist and drawing the pinnacles in the past, present, and future; 16 concentration cards; surveyors tape; clue cards; pencils.
I. INSTRUCTIONAL OUTCOMES Knowledge: The students will be able to verbally state the definition of geology.
The students will be able to verbally name three major rock categories and give an example of each.
Comprehension: The students will be able to describe three earth building forces and three weathering forces, giving examples of each.
The students will be able to describe one way scientists learn about how the earth formed and how it is changing.
II.
ANTICIPATORY SET "When you woke up this morning did you realize how much impact geology has on your daily routine and life? Did you say to yourself, 'What a great geological day this will be?" Pick up an item common to their life style, items of importance to them (glass, wooden spoon, CD, video, baseball cap, nail polish, etc).
Ask student(s) "Who used this today/yesterday/last night."
Have the student who used that particular item come to the front and explain how they used it.
"Where did this item's components originate - geologically speaking?" "Correct, silica/sand, petroleum products, trees, etc."
After three or four students have participated ask, "Now, let me ask you again, did the study of the earth's crust, geology, have an impact on your life today?" III.
TEACHING PROCEDURE/METHODOLOGY "Basically, we haven't a clue about many things on this planet.
Geology gives us a chance to look backwards.
Without the rocks on the earth and the story they tell, we would have no idea of what the planet's history is.
Geology tells us the: who, what, why, and when of planet earth.
What are some facts that the study of geology has given us? Well, we know that fossils are evidence of past life that is now extinct.
Seashells have been found on mountaintops, and volcanoes were in the Gunnison area, for example.
What are some unsolved mysteries?" Ask students to name some of their own mysteries they wonder about geology.
"What happened to dinosaurs may be one mystery along with how the earth formed."
"Who speaks another language other than English here? Have any of you ever opened a book written in another language? You know there's a story or some information in there, but, unless you know the language, it is silent.
Look around you, anywhere on the planet, but especially here in the Gunnison country/Western Slope.
There is a fascinating story simply screaming from the landscape around you, but unless you know the language of geology, you won't know the story.
What are some of the words we need to know in this new language? Geo-logy.
Compare to Zoo-logy, Bio-logy."
Demonstrate the main geological forces that shaped the Gunnison Basin, DEPOSITION, DEFORMATION, and EROSION.
Ask students to: shake a jar filled with water and sand then set it on the table to represent deposition; pull and break silly putty representing deformation; take a drink of soda holding it in their mouth to feel the fizz showing how chemical erosion works.
Continue reviewing vocabulary words.
"How old is the earth? How long have these geological forces been at work? Let's do an experiment to see if you can figure out the order of eras and how long each lasted."
Geologic Time Line "There are some other words we need to know to understand the time of the earth's processes."
Divide class into groups of four.
Give each group a complete set of four era cards with the following definitions: Precambrian- first earth crust formed, first clouds, rain and seas, and first primitive organisms; Paleozoic- appearance of hard-shelled marine life, first fish, and land plants appear; Mesozoic- dinosaurs appear, first birds and mammals; Cenozoic- Rocky Mountains created, extinction of dinosaurs, and earliest hominoid.
Make sure the cards are in a random order.
"These cards make up the time from the formation of the earth to the present.
Put the cards together as best you can by looking at the various attributes of each era."
Hand out one time line starter to each student.
Each group should come up with one idea of where each period starts and ends, but each person makes his/her own version of the time line.
"Everyone complete your time lines by drawing with the matching colored marker underneath the time line starter how far along the time line that era lasted."
When the groups have finished have them present their time lines.
When each group has presented, show them the true time line of when each era began and ended.
Have students draw the corrected eras on top of the time line.
Deposition, Deformation and Erosion Slide show (approximately 30 slides) "We, in Colorado, are very fortunate to live in one of the more beautiful states in this country.
What makes this state so unusual and also so beautiful is the geology we see around us every day, including the mountains, the canyons, and the rocks.
Today you are going to learn how this land came to be as it is today.
A little about the rocks, a little about the mountains, and a little about the canyons."
"First, let's talk about the kinds of rocks that are found on this earth of ours.
Geologists classify rocks into three different and distinct groups.
Igneous rocks are formed when magma cools and hardens.
Sedimentary rocks are composed of minerals or organic matter deposited by ice, water or air, and compressed together.
Metamorphic rocks are formed when the other two types of rocks are altered by the action of heat, pressure, or chemically active fluids."
"About 90% of geologic history is interpreted from sedimentary rocks, let's look at deposition.
Nearly all deposition occurs because of fluids, like water or air, and materials sifting down through fluids, deposit themselves in horizontal layers.
Examples of sedimentary deposition, which occurred horizontally, are the Grand Canyon in Arizona, or Dead Horse Point and Bryce Canyon in Utah, and many more.
With so many examples of the horizontal structure, one might believe this is the way all sediments are deposited.
Some deposition, however, occurs in a different manner.
Volcanic activity plays an important part in the geology of this area.
Molten rock oozes from cracks in the earth and is deposited as hard basaltic materials.
The top of Grand Mesa is an example of this.
Sometimes explosive and volcanic material, varying in size from large boulders to fine microscopic grains, was ejected into the atmosphere and settled into formations such as the West Elk Breccia found at the Dillon Pinnacles.
If the material is very fine and well sorted as it is ejected, the resultant material will be fine unconsolidated cinder.
If, however, the material is still incandescent or white hot, then it will be welded together as the welded tuff found on the mesa tops of this area."
"Looking at these formations notice that they are not horizontal.
If these layers were originally deposited horizontally, then some process has altered them.
That process is deformation.
Rocks in many ways act as silly putty.
Remember when we stretched the silly putty it bent and stretched as does rock.
Here we see a fold or monocline.
The pressure was slow and steady and the rock was bent and took the form seen here.
However, when the silly putty was moved quickly it broke.
Rocks also break when moved quickly in a process called faulting.
It is obvious that at one time this and this were together, but the pressure was rapid and the rock could not respond, therefore it broke."
"We have seen examples of deposition, and deformation.
If these were the only processes active, the earth would have changed very little since its beginning.
The process that alters and changes our planet the most is erosion, which takes place after the deposition and the deformation.
Erosion is defined as the weathering and transporting of earth materials and the most active weathering agent is water.
Rain being one of the most important weathering agents.
All rain is acid! One of the components of the atmosphere is a gas called carbon dioxide.
As water falls from clouds, it absorbs some of the carbon dioxide, forming a weak acid called carbonic acid.
This is the same acid found in soda pop, the thing that makes your tongue tingle when you drink Coca-Cola, Dr. Pepper or 7-up.
This acid begins to work on the earth's materials by dissolving the cementing agents, which hold the rocks together.
Some would have you believe that the wind can blow a hole in a cliff.
If that were true, how do they explain that the water stain starts at the hole and goes down? Once the cavity becomes enlarged, the sand grains fall to the bottom and the wind will swirl them around and further enlarge the opening.
This is an example of both chemical and mechanical weathering.
Chemical, because the water dissolved the cementing agent.
Mechanical, because the loosened sand grains abraded the cavity.
"Plants also weather rocks both chemically and mechanically.
Here we see a very primitive plant, lichen.
[Freddie Fungus and Alice Algae, took a lichen too each other.]
Lichen is in reality two plants, a fungus and an algae, which live together in a symbiotic relationship.
The fungus provides a place for the algae to grow and the algae provides food for the fungus.
In this process, chemicals are formed which begin to break down rocks.
Once soil is formed more advanced plant life can grow.
Tree seeds fall into cracks, germinate and grow.
As the tree grows, the roots expand, not only from growth, but also by swelling from the water they absorb and the rock is deteriorated even more."
"Ice also plays an important role in the erosion process.
Water trickles down into the cracks of rocks and upon freezing it expands, wedging the rocks apart.
As long as the water stays frozen the rocks stay where they are, but in the spring when melting occurs, the rocks fall from the cliffs.
This is why most rockslides in Colorado happen in the spring.
The sun also acts as a weathering agent.
Rock being heated by the sun begins to expand.
Rock, however, is not a good conductor of heat, thus the rock below the surface does not expand, causing the rock to shatter, much like a glass taken out of a freezer and filled with hot water.
These processes, deposition, deformation, and erosion are what shape the land and give it character which we see and appreciate.
Let us now take a pictorial trip through the different formations we find here at Curecanti National Recreation Area.
We shall start at the bottom, as those rocks are the oldest, and that is the way deposition occurred.
The oldest formation is called Precambrian, and is dated between 1.4 and 1.7 billion years old.
This formation is best exposed at Morrow Point Lake, and there we find some of the best Precambrian geology in the entire United States, if not the world.
Many of the structures are so spectacular they have been accredited with names.
Examples we see here are Moses tablet page 1 and Moses tablet page 2.
Curecanti Needle, the Arrow and Chipeta Falls are more examples.
Notice in this view of Chipeta falls the water is falling directly into the lake, and in this view the water is falling onto an alluvial fan, which has been built.
Before the dam was in place, the current of the Gunnison River was sufficient to carry away any material washed over the cliff by the creek, which forms the falls.
Since the lake has formed, there is no current and the fan has formed.
The Precambrian rocks in this area are predominantly gneiss, quartz monzonite, and granite type rocks.
They are very hard and weather resistant.
This is why the canyons are so deep and narrow.
The next formation present, about 150 million years old, is the Junction Creek member of the Wanakah formation.
This formation is found West of the Blue Mesa Dam, along both highways 50 and 92.
This material represents a sand dune deposit and shows the crossbedding associated with dunes, particularly in the red-orange layer.
Next, we find the Morrison formation.
The bright Easter egg colors denote different depositional environments, which is typical of an area where streams meander back and forth along a coastal plain.
This formation contains most of the dinosaur bones found in the Western United States, and most of the Uranium deposits.
Above the Morrison is the Dakota sandstone.
A fine to very fine-grained sandstone, much like beach sand.
In fact it is beach sand, as during cretaceous time, about 100 million years ago, a shallow sea covered this area.
The Dakota sandstone was the beach at its edge as it came on the land.
Directly above the Dakota formation is found the Mancos shale, which is the material deposited at the bottom of the Cretaceous sea.
This shale is up to 5,000 feet thick near Grand Junction, but 250 to 400 feet thick near Blue Mesa Lake.
Resting uncomfortably upon the Mancos is the most spectacular formation in this area, the West Elk Breccia.
The Dillon Pinnacles best represent the breccia formation.
West Elk Breccia is the remnants of multi sized volcanic materials from the West Elk volcanic activity, which was washed to its present location by extensive rain and melted snow.
This breccia is not well cemented, and therefore erodes into very unusual shapes.
Shapes, which seem to change as the sun moves across the sky, or as seasons change.
The last rock type found is the welded tuffs of the mesa tops.
Ash from the volcanic activity in the San Juan Mountains to the south fell upon the land.
The ash was still white hot when it landed, and welded itself together to form a very weather resistant cap.
As long as this cap remains intact, the mesa will remain high and only mildly weathered.
You have now been introduced to the process and the formations here at Curecanti National Recreation Area.
Later today you will be walking the trail to Dillon Pinnacles.
On your way, try to pick out the examples of deposition, deformation, and erosion, and see if you can determine where the contact areas of the different formation exist.
IV.
CHECK FOR STUDENT UNDERSTANDING Show examples of rocks found along the trail and review the different kinds of rocks and where you can find them.
Have the student's name the different rock layers seen around the pinnacle area and how and when they got there.
Students can also read their journal entries when completed to share their ideas on the scavenger hunt and worksheets (Section V).
V. GUIDED PRACTICE Dillon Pinnacle Hike Before arriving at the Dillon Pinnacles give each student a journal with a diagram of the pinnacles, scavenger hike, and two worksheets.
While hiking along the trail have the students locate objects for their scavenger hunt.
Stop occasionally and have the students share what they have found.
Along the hike also direct the students to describe in their journal the pinnacles to a scientist and to an artist.
During the hike point out the different types of rocks, and rock layers.
"How can you tell the difference between the different types of rocks?" Find examples of deposition, deformation and erosion.
"Do you notice how the vegetation along the trail changes? Where is there more vegetation? Volcanic rocks form acidic soils, which requires more time for vegetation to become established.
Conifers grow well in acidic soils."
Have the students draw, in their journals, what the pinnacles looked like millions of years ago, present, and what they may look like millions of years from now.
"Why have the pinnacles changed? Why will they change in the future? What are the forces working on them right now? Can you feel any of these weathering forces right now, the wind against your face? Think of all these factors and the vegetation changes when drawing your pictures."
After the students have drawn their pictures have them share why they drew them certain ways.
"Is the earth always changing? Do you think it is important to learn about the subjects we learned about today? Hike students back to the bus.
Geology Concentration You can do this activity if weather does not permit you to perform the Dillon Pinnacle hike or if you have extra time.
Prepare the concentration cards and review the facts and matches with the students.
The matches are as follows: igneous rocks-formed from the molten earth; sedimentary rocks-deposited by water, wind or ice; metamorphic rocks-changed by heat and pressure; elements-basic building blocks of the earth like silica, iron, oxygen, gold; minerals-combination of elements, feldspar, mica, quartz; rocks-combination of minerals, granite, sandstone; geology-study of earth's history; petroleum products-plastics, gasoline, Styrofoam; graphite-pencil "lead"; examples of deformation-faulting and folding; weathering agents-water, wind, ice, sun, plants; examples of volcanic rocks-breccia, welded tuff; volcanoes-extrusive igneous activity; example of igneous rock-granite; example of sedimentary rock-sandstone; example of metamorphic rock-gneiss; common cementing material-calcite or calcium carbonate; law of superposition-bottom layer is oldest; Precambrian-before life; San Juan Mountains-deposited welded tuff; West Elk Mountains-deposited breccia; Black Canyon-place where Precambrian rock is exposed; lichens-plants that grow on rocks and can lead to formation of soil; age of the earth-about 4.6 billion years.
Shuffle the cards and lay them on the floor, face down in four rows and four columns.
Divide the group into two teams.
"Now that we have reviewed the terms and matches, the first person turns two cards over and reads them aloud.
Make sure you are somewhere where you can see all the cards.
If you obtain a correct match take those cards back to your team and the next person on your team will get a turn.
If you do not get a correct match, the cards are turned back over and the other team gets a turn.
You need to concentrate on the facts and the location of the cards to be successful.
The team who has the most matches at the end of the game wins!" Awareness of Change This is another extra activity that can be done along the Dillon Pinnacle trail, or any suitable outside location.
Divide the students into groups of four.
"Each group is to find and mark, with the tape, natural things that are not the same now as they were a long time ago.
You can look for clues and attempt to explain the change.
Each group will need to fill out clue cards telling: what was changed, how you think it was changed, and the name of the agent that may have caused the change.
When you have completed five clue cards, you will share them with another group and choose one card to share with the entire class."
VI. INDEPENDENT PRACTICE Not appropriate.
VII.
CLOSURE "Why did we come here today? Why do we need to learn about geology? Do you think learning about the history of the pinnacles and this area is important today? The earth is constantly changing, thus learning about geology is not only important for manufacturing items, but for understanding the past, and the future."
VIII.
SELF-EVALUATION Indicate what you judge to have been the strengths of the lesson, what changes you made during the lesson and what changes you would make if you were to teach the unit again.
IX. REFERENCES CITED Not Appropriate.
X. RELATED WWW SITES http://geology.usgs.gov [smallran.gif] [smallran.gif]
