HUD Homes and Communities Photo [space.gif] [space.gif]
This plan will continue to use armed security officers.
These security officers will patrol within the interior areas of all three sites, including the lobbies and stairwells of the buildings.
Education services will assist residents in gaining marketable skills.
Elizabeth HA Field Office: New Jersey Amount Funded: $355,434 State: New Jersey
PROJECT SUMMARY:
The EHA's Plan will focus on Drug Prevention through economic development.
Developments served will be Farley Towers, Ford Leonard, Kennedy Arms, Migliore Manor, Mravelag Manor, O'Donnell-Dempsey, and Pioneer Homes
Union City Housing Authority Field Office: New Jersey Amount Funded: $100,073 State: New Jersey
PROJECT SUMMARY:
The 1999 Public Housing Drug Elimination Program plan developed by the Housing Authority of the City of Union City continues to build on the successful past drug elimination efforts.
The goals of this plan are to implement services that will reduce the present level of drug activities in and around Union City's public housing.
This plan was developed with considerable input from the Chief of Police and residents from all Housing Authority sites.
Police visibility, drug prevention and awareness workshops, and employment opportunities and job search skills opportunities will be available for residents.
East Orange Housing Authority Field Office: New Jersey Amount Funded: $100,293 State: New Jersey
PROJECT SUMMARY:
The Housing Authority of the City of East Orange plans to continue its existing comprehensive Drug Education/Prevention and economic Development strategies implemented through previous PHDEP funding.
Job development strategies and drug education programs will be used in conjunction with our existing Family Self Sufficiency program to address the State's Welfare to Work initiatives.
Atlantic City Housing Authority Field Office: New Jersey Amount Funded: $363,782 State: New Jersey
PROJECT SUMMARY:
The Atlantic City Housing Authority's Drug Elimination Plan will serve approximately 1,400 residents in our targeted developments.
The program will place major emphasis on education, job skills training, job placement, youth programming and substance abuse treatment.
The targeted sites are Buzby Village, Stanley Holmes Village, Shore Terrace, Shore Park Low-Rise, and scattered sites.
Irvington Housing Authority Field Office: New Jersey Amount Funded: $144,281 State: New Jersey
PROJECT SUMMARY:
The Irvington Housing Authority's PHDEP plan consist of a comprehensive strategy that focuses on youth programs, and drug prevention and intervention activities.
Highlands Field Office: New Jersey Amount Funded: $27,493 State: New Jersey
PROJECT SUMMARY:
The primary focus of the program will be prevention and intervention.
The Authority will enter into a Cooperative Agreement with the Tri-District Schools and Community Substance Abuse Program to implement programs that include: drug education and awareness, substance abuse counseling, treatment referrals, homework/tutoring assistance, mentoring, parenting education, peer mediation and conflict resolution, and recreational and social activities.
An on-site homework/tutoring program will be implemented.
Hightstown Housing Authority Field Office: New Jersey Amount Funded: $25,000 State: New Jersey
PROJECT SUMMARY:
The Hightstown Housing Authority 1999 PHDEP grant is designed to meet the objectives of the Authority's on-going drug-related crime elimination plan, to provide for the increased safety and security of the tenant community as well as to prevent vandalism and other damage to Housing Authority property.
The Authority is requesting funds for the repair, maintenance and upgrade of the CCTV Security Video Monitoring system as originated under the Authority's 1994 and 1996 PHDEP grant awards.
The Authority is requesting funds for the expansion of project HELP., the afterschool homework and tutoring program which includes an anti-drug awareness program for children of the community (established under the 1991 and 1992 PHDEP grant awards).
Lakewood Housing Authority Field Office: New Jersey Amount Funded: $58,944 State: New Jersey
PROJECT SUMMARY:
The Lakewood Housing Authority plans to implement the following activities to combat crime and drug abuse: employment of security guards, employment of a Resident Initiatives Coordinator to coordinate recreation, educational, and social activities and continuation of the summer program for youth (funded from other sources).
Drug education will be incorporated into the various program activities.
West New York Housing Authority Field Office: New Jersey Amount Funded: $157,257 State: New Jersey
PROJECT SUMMARY:
The Program proposed by the Housing Authority of the Town of New York will use a comprehensive security and preventive-based approach to attack the drug related crime in the eight housing developments (consisting of 715 total units with approximately 1482 residents).
We also plan to continue our drug prevention activities and drug awareness education programming.
We will continue to emphasize the training and employment of residents and the provision of community space for residents' education under our drug prevention program.
Woodbridge Housing Authority Field Office: New Jersey Amount Funded: $124,266 State: New Jersey
PROJECT SUMMARY:
The Housing Authority of the Township of Woodbridge proposes a comprehensive Drug Elimination Program for 1999, incorporating the activities of previously funded PHDEP programs (1997 set aside and 1998).
The targeted developments include the Woodbridge Garden Apartments, Stern Towers, Finn Towers, Adams Towere, Cooper Towers, lsen Towers and Grenier Towers.
The Woodbidge Police Department will provide walking uniformed police officers and operate DARE in the public schools.
The Housing Authority will continue criminal background checks and the One Srike and You're Out policy.
Three personnel staff which consists of a DEP Coordinator, DEP assistant and Outreach Assistant will plan, supervise, and operate alternative programs.
Orange Housing Authority Field Office: New Jersey Amount Funded: $116,348 State: New Jersey
PROJECT SUMMARY:
The Orange Housing Authority's Drug Elimination program provides services to tenants residing in the W.G. Alexander Courts, Father Rasi Homes and Washington Manor.
There are a total of 529 units that comprise the development.
The primary components of the Orange Housing Authority PHDEP are increased police patrols, collaborations with community based organizations that promote and encourage self-sufficiency, referrals to drug treatment programs, and youth activities.
Newark Housing Authority Field Office: New Jersey Amount Funded: $2,040,168 State: New Jersey
PROJECT SUMMARY:
The program of the Housing Authority of the City of Newark will use a combination of enhanced law enforcement surveillance, security enhancement and resident programs to combat and ultimately remove the illegal drug trafficking and drug related crime.
New entrance doors equipped with intercom systems will be installed at all low-rise complexes over the next five years beginning with this grant at the Baxter Terrace Family Complex in the Central Ward.
Major drug prevention strategies, i.e. computer training, GED Certification training, Emergency Medical Technician Training for adults will be undertaken at all the complexes for which this grant is being submitted: Pennington Court, Hyatt Ct, Terret Homes, Seth Boyden Terrace, Stephen Crane Village, Felix Fuld, Stella Wright and Brandley Courts.
Paterson HA Field Office: New Jersey Amount Funded: $440,761 State: New Jersey
PROJECT SUMMARY:
The PHA's PHDEP will target security, prevention, intervention and Education/Training elements to reduce and eliminate drug related crime.
Targeted developments include Riverside Terrace, Alexander Hamilton, Sojourner Douglass homes and six elderly sites.
Rahway HA Field Office: New Jersey Amount Funded: $60,924 State: New Jersey
PROJECT SUMMARY:
The Rahway Housing Authority proposes the continuation of the Supplemental Police Protection at the Glendenning-Kennedy- Scott-Homes which contains 273 units.
This program will continue to focus on the development of Voluntary Tenant Patrols and the delivery of enriching activities by the Resident Association targeting the youth population.
.
Carteret HA Field Office: New Jersey Amount Funded: $55,425 State: New Jersey
PROJECT SUMMARY:
The PHDEP will provide the CHA with a comprehensive supplemental police program and a multifaceted drug prevention program.
The Resident Association will continue to administer the youth drug prevention and year round recreation program.
Hoboken HA Field Office: New Jersey Amount Funded: $297,579 State: New Jersey
PROJECT SUMMARY:
The HHA has created a comprehensive approach to reduce drug abuse and drug-related crime through prevention, intervention, and targeted security services.
The program incorporates a continuum of care approach that addresses risk factors for youth as well as welfare to work and self sufficiency training.
The main goal of the program is to build the HHA into a community that is safe for residents, provides opportunities for skill-building and education, and provides alternatives to drug abuse and drug sales.
The developments that will targeted are Jackson Gardens, Harrison Gardens, and Columbus Gardens.
Morristown HA Field Office: New Jersey Amount Funded: $103,372 State: New Jersey
PROJECT SUMMARY:
The PHDEP reflects the Morristown Housing Authority's approach to addressing the root causes and violence of the drug culture.
An aggressive, coordinated program will link the resources of the Housing Authority, residents, law enforcement agencies and local civic organizations.
These funds will provide increased law enforcement, drug prevention activities along with educational, recreational, and cultural activities for children and adults provided through the Manahan Village Resident Center.
A Drug Advisory Board will be responsible foe developing, coordinating, communicating and evaluating the diverse programs.
Bridgeton HA Field Office: New Jersey Amount Funded: $98,973 State: New Jersey
PROJECT SUMMARY:
The PHDEP reflects the BHA's approach to addressing the root causes and violence of the drug culture.
A coordinated program will link a contract with the Police for two full-time officers, prevention activities for children, teens and adults, and working with various local agencies and organizations.
An Advisory Board will be responsible for helping to develop, coordinate, communicate and evaluate the programs.
Harrison HA Field Office: New Jersey Amount Funded: $58,944 State: New Jersey
PROJECT SUMMARY:
The PHDEP reflects the Harrison Housing Authority 's approach to addressing the root causes and violence of the drug culture.
An aggressive, coordinated program will link the resources of the Housing Authority, residents, law enforcement agencies, state, county and local government, social services agencies and local civic organizations.
These funds will provide increased law enforcement, drug prevention activities, along with educational, recreational and cultural activities for children and adults.
Pleasantville Housing Authority Field Office: New Jersey Amount Funded: $51,466 State: New Jersey
PROJECT SUMMARY:
The Pleasantville Housing Authority is requesting a second year of funding under the DEP that will allow the PHA to continue the process of elimination drug sales, drug use, and criminal behavior at the PHA's three sites.
The major activities of this project include a close working relationship with residents, PHA, the Pleasantville Police Department and implementation of the One Strike and You're Out policy to remove undesirable tenants.
Three high rise sites will be targeted.
Plainfield HA Field Office: New Jersey Amount Funded: $104,032 State: New Jersey
PROJECT SUMMARY:
The components of the Plainfield's Comprehensive Plan include drug prevention, drug intervention, youth and family services, and the training of residents to become economically self-sufficient and to actively partake in neighborhood safety programs.
The programs cover a population of 2,000 children, youth and adult residents at West End Gardens and Elmwood Gardens, and for a population of 500 Senior Citizens of Richmond Towers.
Garfield Housing Authority Field Office: New Jersey Amount Funded: $100,293 State: New Jersey
PROJECT SUMMARY:
The Housing Authority of the City of Garfield will use a comprehensive and coordinated security and image enhancing training program to reduce drug-related crime.
Resident monitoring and police patrols will be used to address the problem of drug availability in the developments.
Physical improvements to athletic fields will make them safer, more attractive thus increasing youth to utilize them more.
After school programs will help residents obtain educational and job skills.
A gardening program will be established that serves both the youth and senior citizens.
It is anticipated that the produce grown will enable the participants to learn skills.
Edison Housing Authority Field Office: New Jersey Amount Funded: $35,190 State: New Jersey
PROJECT SUMMARY:
The Edison Housing Authority will utilize these funds to continue: (1) employment of a Program Coordinator to coordinate security, prevention and intervention activities; (2) an on-site computer training program, (3) a Life Success Prep program, and (4) support groups (i.e. NA, AA).
These programs shall focus on providing positive alternatives for residents of all ages.
Drug education and awareness will be integrated into all program activities.
Asbury Park Housing Authority Field Office: New Jersey Amount Funded: $129,105 State: New Jersey
PROJECT SUMMARY:
The Asbury Park Housing Authority will use a comprehensive security and prevention-based approach to attack the problem of drug related crime.
Resident patrols, as well as a 24 hour security guard based at all sites, will be used to eliminate drug activity.
In addition, security lighting is planned for Washington Village.
A comprehensive drug prevention and outreach program will continue to be funded to further provide youths and adults with educational and other organized prevention programs.
These programs are aimed at reducing the risks of drug use and drug trafficking in the developments.
Glassboro Field Office: New Jersey Amount Funded: $39,589 State: New Jersey
PROJECT SUMMARY:
The Glassboro Housing Authority's drug elimination program consist of a comprehensive program designed to eradicate drug activity through increased police patrols and operations, counseling, a voluntary tenant patrol, and the provision of alternative cultural, educational, vocational, and life skills activities.
Franklin Housing Authority Field Office: New Jersey Amount Funded: $25,000 State: New Jersey
PROJECT SUMMARY:
The Franklin Housing Authority's Public Housing Drug Elimination plan will create a comprehensive drug elimination plan.
This plan will implement services that will reduce the present level of drug activities in and around Franklin Township's public housing.
This plan was developed with input from the Chief of Police of Franklin Township and residents of public housing.
This plan will increase police visibility at Parkside.
Utilizing the HAFT's KID's CAFE, the involved youth gain marketable employment skills.
Drug prevention and awareness workshops will be provided to the resident population.
This program will provide job opportunities for residents.
Salem Housing Authority Field Office: New Jersey Amount Funded: $58,745 State: New Jersey
PROJECT SUMMARY:
The Salem Housing Authority will utilize its funds to hire a security guard and install surveillance cameras at it's housing developments.
These activities will complement current activities that include; drug prevention, self-sufficiency services, and on site Police patrols which are funded from other sources.
In combination with prior PHDEP funding and COPS Program funding from the Department of Justice, the Authority will implement a comprehensive program to reduce drug use and drug related crime.
Millville Housing Authority Field Office: New Jersey Amount Funded: $113,269 State: New Jersey
PROJECT SUMMARY:
The Millville Housing Authority will reduce crime through security, law enforcement, and PHDEP supported activities targeting youths and adults.
Security personnel will continue to patrol all public housing sites, while the Millville Community Police will maintain a mini-precinct in Holly Berry Court.
Support activities will include drug education training for adults; homework assistance targeting 10 youth for improved grade levels, alternative activities in conjunction with Police and other low income sites, and case management information and referral services.
Jersey City Housing Authority Field Office: New Jersey Amount Funded: $754,836 State: New Jersey
PROJECT SUMMARY:
The Jersey City Housing Authority proposes to reduce the use of illegal narcotics, fear of crime and related criminal behavior and promote safe residential environments throughout all JCHA public housing developments, targeting 3375 units.
Specific activities include: off-and on-duty police coverage, after school programs, support services for families at risk of eviction due to "One Strike and You're Out" violations, a comprehensive security initiative at our HOPE VI development, Curries Woods, and a resident self-sufficiency Welfare to Work demonstration.
Objectives will be pursued in a comprehensive and coordinated strategy in concert with JCHA resident organizations, the City of Jersey City, and especially the Jersey City Police Department, and other law enforcement agencies, as well as supporting educational institutions, social service provides and other inter-governmental, public and private sector Partners.
North Bergen HA Field Office: New Jersey Amount Funded: $216,641 State: New Jersey
PROJECT SUMMARY:
The North Bergen Housing Authority will utilize its funds to combat drug and drug related crimes at its family site.
These funds will be used to provide additional on site police patrols and the employment of an anti-drug coordinator who will coordinate the anti-drug activities.
The Housing Authority will provide a comprehensive anti-drug program by leveraging and coordinating activities with local funded educational programs.
The Housing Authority will target its family site (NJ4-1) for funding activities.
The site is located within the North Bergen township and house a total of 1200 residents.
Passaic HA Field Office: New Jersey Amount Funded: $153,958 State: New Jersey
PROJECT SUMMARY:
The Passaic Housing Authority proposes to continue implementation of its Drug Elimination Program which has been underway for several years.
The program includes: (1) additional law enforcement by the Passaic Police Department; (2) Economic Development and Supportive Services provided to enable residents to become more self sufficient, (3) Teen Services Program, and (4) a College Tour Program.
The program shall also include components funded through other sources: a comprehensive youth development program, resident patrols, physical improvements, and resident leadership development.
Neptune HA Field Office: New Jersey Amount Funded: $75,879 State: New Jersey
PROJECT SUMMARY:
The Neptune Housing Authority will continue its successful fight against drugs through PHDEP.
The program includes supplemental community policing, and a comprehensive drug prevention program.
The prevention program components include an After School Tutoring and Recreational Program, a Computer Training Program, Economic Self-Sufficiency, through community partnership, and leveraging resources, will be a key theme of this comprehensive strategy to fight the drug and associated criminal activity.
Funded activities will be targeted at the Housing Authority's 660 residents from sites (NJ48-1, 3, 5) which are located within the Township of Neptune.
Perth Amboy HA Field Office: New Jersey Amount Funded: $127,565 State: New Jersey
PROJECT SUMMARY:
The Authority intends to continue expanding it's comprehensive activities designed to combat drugs and related criminal activity.
The program will include: off duty police patrols at Delaney and Dunlap Homes,Otlowski Gardens and Hanson apartments.
A long standing and successful Recreation Program will be continued.
The operation of Neighborhood Centers located at Delaney Homes, Dunlap Homes and Otlowski Gardens will continue to provide a wide range of resident services.
Catholic Charities has been hired to provide comprehensive drug prevention and intervention services.
Long Branch Housing Authority Field Office: New Jersey Amount Funded: $141,422 State: New Jersey
PROJECT SUMMARY:
The Long Branch HA proposes to continue the implementation of it's DEP which has been underway for several years.
The Program includes: (1) additional law enforcement by the Long Branch Police Dept., (2) drug counseling and drug intervention activities which include drug education, referrals to treatment providers, support groups, etc., (3) prevention activities for teens and young adults which include social and recreational activities, for teens and young adults which include social and recreational activities, educational support, and mentoring; and (4) a voluntary tenant patrol.
Camden Housing Authority Field Office: New Jersey Amount Funded: $490,247 State: New Jersey
PROJECT SUMMARY:
The Camden Housing Authority is building upon its previously successful program modes that it has developed as an across-the-board attack against eliminating drugs from its units and communities.
Primarily, this is through the combination of protecting and stabilizing the physical environment and developing family "anti-bodies" to the influences of drugs by creating a Future Investment Center" network, where graduation from school for children and teenagers, and self-sufficiency is the outcome.
A number of community-based and resident organizations will be involved on the CHA team.
Monthly corrections will be made to the program through a comprehensive evaluation component.
Trenton Housing Authority Field Office: New Jersey Amount Funded: $427,564 State: New Jersey
PROJECT SUMMARY:
In a continued effort to eradicate drug abuse and drug related crime in public housing, the Trenton Housing Authority will continue to provide on-site security personnel to provide surveillance, patrols, crime-tracking, and resident counteract services at family developments.
Additionally, THA will continue to provide centralized educational, social, and recreational activities for all public housing youth in an effort to provide a continuity of assistance for academic and personal achievement; and to provide a viable alternative to drug involvement.
Finally, THA will collaborate with local social services agencies to provide economic development opportunities for residents receiving public assistance.
Vineland HA Field Office: New Jersey Amount Funded: $139,222 State: New Jersey
PROJECT SUMMARY:
The Vineland Housing Authority proposes to continue the DEP that has been developed over the last eight years.
Activities include an intensified police surveillance and enforcement program.
The Voluntary Tenant Patrol has established a Crime Watch Program.
Physical improvements designed to enhance security and discourage drug distribution and drug- related crime will be continued.
Funds will be allocated to continue key Youth Service programs, education/employment program, and the Computer Learning Campus Program as alternatives to crime and substance abuse for youth and adolescence.
The PHDEP shall provide funds to employ an investigator, a program director for the PHDEP Program and coordinator of the Resident/Youth Services Programs.
Wildwood Housing Authority
State: New Jersey Amount: $37,390
PROJECT SUMMARY: DETAILS ARE AVAILABLE TODAY FROM THE HOUSING AUTHORITY .
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION WILL BE POSTED ON THE HUD WEB IN COMING DAYS.
Bayonne Housing Authority Amount: $292,741 State: New Jersey PROJECT SUMMARY: DETAILS ARE AVAILABLE TODAY FROM THE HOUSING AUTHORITY .
ADDITIONAL INFORMATION WILL BE POSTED ON THE HUD WEB IN COMING DAYS.
