[sdcphead.jpg] 6.
Western Pima County I. SUBAREA: The subarea defines western Pima County extending from the west side of the Tohono O'odham Nation to Pima County's border with Yuma County.
The northern border is defined by Maricopa County and the southern boundary runs along the international border.
Historically, this is part of the vast western Arizona desert known as the Papagueria that in the southwest corner of the state stretches from the western edge of the Tucson Basin to the Colorado River.
This is an extremely arid landscape characterized by low mountain ranges and dry washes that trend in a northwesterly direction.
Total rainfall ranges from 3 to 15 inches a year depending on location; overall, the desert become harsher and drier from east to west.
The land base is dominated by federal lands, followed by Indian, private, and state land, in descending order as indicated on the map entitled, Modern Communities, Transportation, and Ownership.
This area encompasses approximately 1,691 square miles.
There are three principle communities west of the reservation: Ajo, Why and Lukeville.
These communities are in close proximity to the only private lands in the subarea and are surrounded by lands administered by the National Park Service (Organ Pipe National Monument), the U.S. Fish and Wildlife Service (Cabeza Prieta National Wildlife Refuge, the Bureau of Land Management and the U. S Air Force (the Goldwater Gunnery Range) and the Tohono O'odham reservation as indicated in Table 1 below.
Table IV.6.1 Western Pima County Subarea - Land Ownership by Acres and Percent Ownership Acres Percentage Bureau of Land Management 174,846 16.1 Indian Lands 104,805 9.7 National Parks/Monuments 327,107 30.2 National Wildlife Refuge 400,487 37.0 State Lands 2,672 0.2 Private Land 13,485 1.2 Goldwater Gunnery Range 58,796 5.4 Other 83 
Traditionally, the economy has been dominated by mining and ranching.
However, Ajo in particular has become a favored location for over winter visitors and there is a growing residential and commercial sector that is associated with this growth.
II.
CULTURAL RESOURCES: This section presents information and analysis of current data on archaeological sites, historic resources and traditional cultural places within the subarea.
A. Archaeological sites "Archaeological sites are any material remains of past human life or activities which are preserved in their original setting that are important to understanding prehistory or history.
These sites or districts may include occupation sites, work areas, farming sites, burials and other funerary remains, artifacts, campsites, hearths, rock art, intaglios, trails, battle sites, religious or ceremonial sites, caves and rock shelters, the architectural or other remains of structures of all kinds, such as pit houses, pueblo rooms, adobe or rock foundations, and other domestic features, usually dating from prehistoric or aboriginal periods, or from historic periods at least 50 years old, for which only archaeological vestiges remain" (Preserving Cultural and Historic Resources, Pima County, May 1999).
Archaeologists learn about the past by collecting and analyzing information in two ways: through survey and by excavation.
Survey involves inspecting the ground surface in a particular area and recording concentrations of artifacts and features (hearths, roasting pits, pit houses, etc.) as archaeological sites.
A site represents the physical remains of past human behavior in a single location dating to one or more periods of use through time.
Surveys are often done systematically by groups of archaeologist who walk the land in regularly spaced lines looking for artifacts.
Some surveys, however, are judgmental in that archaeologists only look where sites are expected to be found and not elsewhere.
In all cases, survey offers an extensive perspective on past land use.
The second kind of information on archaeological sites is gained through excavation.
This is the systematic recording, recovery, and analysis of artifacts and features from within a site's limits.
Critical information is gained by understanding the spatial relationship of all artifacts and features within a three dimensional context.
This enables interpretation about how the site was used, by whom, when, whether the site was used more than once and what happened after it was abandoned.
Often, archaeological sites are not fully excavated but are only partially sampled.
This saves what is left of the site for future investigations.
Archaeological excavation provides highly detained information about the use of one limited spatial area during one or more use episodes.
Archaeologist use survey and excavation data together to interpret the past; however, as new information becomes available and as new ideas about the past are developed, this interpretation changes over time.
Previous Research Previous research in the Western Papagueria can be described within three main periods of time: exploration, modern research, and cultural resources management.
Exploration A.D. 1540 - 1920.
The area was explored by Euro-Americans following the Spanish Colonial entrada into what is today southwestern Arizona.
Francisco Vasquez de Coronado sent one of his lieutenants, Melchior Diaz, to explore the vast desert westward to the Colorado River in 1540 marking the first time this region was described historically.
Later, in 1698 Father Eusebio Kino passed through what is today Organ Pipe National Monument visiting the Indian villages in the area.
Kino would make a total of four trips from San Marzelo del Sonoidag to the Colorado River near Yuma and in the process established an important east/west trail known as the "Camino del Diablo."
After Kino's death in 1711, efforts were made to continue the conversion of the native population to Catholicism until the Pima Revolt of 1751.
The first prospects for copper and silver ore in the vicinity of Ajo were made around mid century.
In 1774, Captain Juan Bautista de Anza used the trail as a means of linking the Santa Cruz River Valley with San Gabriel, California.
The dairies of De Anza and Father Juan Diaz and Father Francisco Garces, all written in the later part of the 18th century, noted native settlements and important details of native life that would form the historic basis upon which subsequent archaeological and ethno-historic research would be conducted.
Early Anglo explorer-soldiers passed through the region as well, both before and after the Gadsden Purchase of 1853, and ruins were reported across the region.
In 1894 M. J. McGee of the Bureau of American Ethnology passed through the region as did noted geographer Ellsworth Huntington in 1919-1912.
Huntington participated in the Carnegie Institute study of the arid Southwest and saw evidence of extensive prehistoric occupation within the Papagueria.
He was followed in 1916-1917 by Kirk Bryan a geologist with the U.S. Geological Survey who recorded details of the environment, history and the people that inhabited the western desert.
Modern Research 1920-1960.
Academic and institutional research began in earnest in the 1920s.
In 1929 Frank Midvale worked in the area for the Gila Pueblo, a private research foundation.
His work defined the western and southern extent of red-on-buff decorated pottery helping to define the spatial and temporal limits of the prehistoric Hohokam culture.
Malcom Rogers began exploring the desert of eastern California and western Arizona beginning in 1918.
Hired in 1928 by the San Diego Museum of Man, Rogers spent the next 20 years scouring the desert lands.
In the process, he defined another of the region's main prehistoric populations, the Patayan, ancestors of the Yuman speakers of the Lower Colorado River.
During the 1930s, Bryan Cummings, head of the Anthropology Department at the University of Arizona, visited and recorded archaeological sites in the Papagueria and in 1938, Emil Haury also of the U of A., initiated the "Papagueria Project" to explore the western extent of the Hohokam people.
It was during this research that he defined the stratigraphic relationship between the Hohokam and their Archaic Period predecessors at Ventana Cave.
He also coined the terms "river" Hohokam and the "desert" Hohokam to describe two different adaptations by essentially the same people.
Paul Enzell of the National park Service and later the Arizona State Museum worked in the region between 1947 and 1952 and discovered a break in the distribution of prehistoric pottery types in the vicinity of the Growler Mountains, west of Ajo, defining the boundaries between the Patayan people and their contemporaries, the Hohokam.
This work was followed in the 1950s by research conducted by Julian Hayden in the Sierra Pinacate region of northern Mexico, where lacking any other means of dating, he used "desert varnish" or the patina that builds up on the exterior of rocks in the dessert over time as relative dating technique.
Lastly, Bernard Fontana conducted archaeological research within the Cabeza Prieta Game Range (now National Wildlife Refuge) on a project funded by the Papago (Tohono O'odham) Indians to determine the extent of the tribe's presence in the area.
Cultural Resources Management 1960-2000.
Environmental laws passed in the 1960s and enforced beginning in the early 1970s changed the nature of archaeological and ethnographic investigations in the subarea by requiring that federal agencies conduct research in advance of actions that may affect cultural resources that are eligible for listing on the National Register of Historic Places.
The resulting effect on the subarea and federal lands in the surrounding region dramatically increased the number and scale of survey projects in particular.
The Air Force has been especially active in conducting archaeological surveys on land that they administer beginning in the 1970s and continuing to present day.
The Barry M. Goldwater Bombing Range is an area of approximately 4163 square miles that includes portions of Maricopa, Yuma and Pima County.
The Cabeza Prieta Wildlife Refuge is also used for flyover as a part of training missions.
The range has seen 100s of archaeological surveys over the years ranging in size from half an acre to over 15,000 acres.
Hundreds of archaeological sites have been recorded spanning the Archaic, Ceramic, and Historic Periods ranging from ancient campsites to mining prospects.
A sophisticated computer data base has also been developed to help manage information on 10,000 years of human occupation in the Papagueria.
Ironically, of all the sites that have been recorded during survey, only three projects have involved excavation to any degree.
As a consequence, data on the archaeological record is almost completely two-dimensional.
The National Park Service has also conducted survey work within Organ Pipe National Monument in order to meet their obligation to manage the cultural resources under their administrative control.
A judgmental survey was conducted within the Monument between 1989 and 1991 to provide a sample of what is within the Monument's boundaries.
This involved inspecting places in close proximity to water where archaeological sites were expected, as well as, areas a mile or more away from water where fewer sites were predicted to be found.
The survey resulted in the recording of 178 archaeological sites within 7,675 acres.
This too produced sites spanning many thousands of years of time including temporary camps for procuring food and making tools, small habitations, and prehistoric trails, as well as historic ranching sites and mining features.
Additional surveys since then have contributed to the survey coverage such that approximately 7800 acres of land have been inventoried for cultural resources representing about 2% of the Monument's land area.
The BLM reports that less than one percent of the land under their control has been surveyed, mostly in response to permit applications to mine gravel.
Approximately three dozen archaeological sites from all time periods are known within the 175,000 acres that the agency manages.
Survey within the Cabeza Prieta National Wildlife Refuge is represented by fewer than a dozen projects conducted between 1965 and 1994.
Only a few sites have been recorded during these inventories, which collectively cover only a tiny faction of the area.
Cultural resources on private lands have been similarly limited to a few instances where Pima County development requirements have mandated investigation as part of rezoning land or as a part of grading approval in advance of construction.
Exploration, academic research, and modern day cultural resource management have resulted in a limited understanding of the human occupation of the subarea spanning the last 10,000 years.
The extreme conditions of the land and its vastness have not attracted as many researchers as other more pleasant places to work.
Those areas that have been explored have largely been the subject of research because of the military's need for environmental clearance and not because of the needs of academic research projects.
As a consequence, the picture of the past is distorted by how we have come to learn about it.
Despite this limitation, it can be said that the subarea has been occupied by human beings over the past 10,000 years or more and that uplands settings in the mountains appear to have been favored over other locations.
Survey data Archaeological survey is the first step in characterizing the nature, age and distribution of archaeological sites within an area like the Western Pima County subarea and there are two different kinds of survey that archaeologists typically perform: Linear surveys and block surveys.
Linear survey involves inspecting a right- of-way for construction of a road, sewer line, telephone cable or other linear feature.
These surveys tend to be done in compliance with legal mandates requiring environmental studies during project planning.
Block survey involves examining non-linear properties ranging in size from a few acres to 1000s of acres.
These are typically done either in compliance with legal mandates, or through academic or preservation related research projects like those discussed above.
Survey data for the subarea is not currently available through the Arizona State Museum data base.
This is because the different federal agencies within the subarea have historically maintained their own records and have not provide them to the Museum or any other central repository.
Second, the information that the Museum does have in the form of reports and paper maps has not been entered into their computer data base.
It is fair to say, however, that based on what is known about cultural resources research in the subarea, only a very small percentage of the total area has ever been formally investigated, perhaps as little one or two percent.
Site Data - Chronology Table 2 presents information on the number of prehistoric sites in the subarea by time period as reported by the Arizona State Museum.
Much of this data comes from research within Organ Pipe National Monument.
Table IV.6.2.
Western Pima County Subarea - Prehistoric Archaeological Site Data by Time Period TIME PERIODS PaleoIndian 12,000 B.C. - 8,000 B.C Archaic 8,000 B.C.- A.D. 200 Ceramic A.D. 200- A.D. 1540 Unknown Total Site Counts 0 22 160 155 337
While no sites dating to the PaleoIndian Period have yet been reported in the subarea, Ventana Cave on the Tohono O'odham Nation contains evidence of occupation dating to this time period.
The term "PaleoIndian" describes the earliest period of human occupation in the Americas.
This was a time following the end of the last ice age when the environment was cooler and wetter than it is today.
Many species of now extinct animals including mammoth, horse, camel, bear, bison, and lions lived during this period.
Numerous archaeological sites found in the west indicate that hunting these large animals was an important part of the subsistence of PaleoIndian people, and as such, archaeologists refer to them as "big game hunters."
While very little is known about these people, it is believed that they lived in small groups or bands by hunting and gathering wild foods as they became seasonably available throughout the year.
Archaeological evidence suggest that they were highly mobile covering thousands of square miles in a year as they moved across the landscape.
Early in the succeeding Archaic Period, the environment became warmer, the large game animals disappeared, and modern plant and animal species were established.
The Archaic Period is represented in the subarea with 22, which cannot be more accurately dated based on survey data.
The Archaic Period represent a time span of almost 8000 years during which human beings adjusted their way of living in response to new environmental conditions.
In order to survive, people became generalists in their subsistence practices, hunting and gathering a wide variety of plants and animals and becoming more efficient in how they processed their food as indicated by the presence of grinding stones found on sites of this period.
Again, people appeared to have lived in small groups by hunting a gathering wild plants and animals over large areas through a seasonal round.
Sites from the early and middle parts of the Archaic are rare in southern Arizona suggesting low population levels in response to the unfavorable environmental conditions believed to exist at that time; however, toward the end of the period several significant changes occurred in southeastern Arizona laying the foundation for subsequent cultural development.
First, the environment stabilized by 4500 years ago approaching modern conditions by that time.
Second, population levels appear to have increased and some evidence suggests that people roamed within more restricted territories as a result.
Third, by approximately 3500 years ago, people began to experiment with growing their own food as a supplement to their diet.
This change also co-occurred with more permanent settlement along well watered reaches of the major drainages in the region.
In the western desert, however, there is no evidence to indicate that people there participated in the origins of agriculture and instead continued to hunt and gather their food as always.
A total of 160 sites dating to the Ceramic Period are known within the subarea suggesting population increase in the subarea during this time in prehistory.
The Ceramic Period covers the time between the adoption of ceramic technology in the third and fourth centuries after Christ to the end of the prehistoric sequence around AD. 1540.
It was during the early part of the period, between approximately A.D. 200 to A.D. 700, that Archaic Period populations completed the transition from mobile hunting and gathering to settled, village based, agricultural existence in southern Arizona and elsewhere.
There are three ceramic bearing prehistoric cultures that lived in and utilized the western Pima County subarea: the Patayan, the Trincheras, and the Hohokam, all of whom were contemporaries.
The Hohokam emerged as a distinct culture in the eighth century and dominated central and southern Arizona until around A.D. 1450.
They flourished along the river valleys of southeastern Arizona, but were also well adapted to the desert lands to the west.
They lived in settled, permanent villages, grew their own food using irrigation and dry farming techniques, developed a rich ceremonial life, and traded extensively with their neighbors throughout the region.
These are the "river Hohokam" as defined by Emil Haury.
To the west, however, archaeological evidence indicates that Hohokam populations in the Papagueria practiced flood water farming supplemented by hunting and gathering wild foods.
Haury called these people the "desert" Hohokam who appear to have had ties to Hohokam population centers in the Gila Bend area as well as in the Tucson Basin.
One of the main differences between the two Hohokam groups is the lack of public architecture (ball courts, platform mounds) on sites occupied by the desert Hohokam.
A period of environmental instability during the A.D. 1300s is believed have weakened the agricultural economies of the Hohokam to the point where they were no longer able to produce food in sufficient quantifies and with enough consistency to support large populations and the culture collapsed around AD. 1450.
The Hohokam are believed to be the ancestors of the Pima speakers including the Tohono O'odham
The Patayan lived to the west of the Hohokam occupying much of the western Arizona Desert from Ajo and Gila Bend to the Colorado River northward to the Grand Canyon between A.D. 600- AD. 1850.
Very little is known about this group.
What is known suggest that the Patayan practiced a diverse economy traveling through riverine, lowland and uplands areas, growing corn and other crops where circumstances permitted, and otherwise gathering wild foods according to seasonal availability.
The Colorado River provided access to fish, waterfowl and soil and water to grow crops, whereas the uplands provided game, pinon nuts and agave.
They lived in small dispersed settlements; however, larger communities were established along the Colorado River.
Their distinctive pottery is found on western Hohokam sites suggesting considerable contact and interaction between the two cultures.
It is believed that the Patayan were the ancestors of the Yuman speakers who historically occupied the Lower Colorado and Gila Rivers, as well as, the Upper Colorado River area.
The Tincheras culture was primarily Mexican in origin and has been identified on sites in the Altar Valley of Sonora and areas to the south.
Sites of this culture have been dated from approximately A.D. 600 to A.D. 1690.
The Trincheras people also practiced agriculture, lived in distinctive hill side communities, produced an easily recognized purple on red decorated pottery that is found on sites throughout the region indicating trade and exchange with the Hohokam and the Patayan.
Following the collapse of the Hohokam in A.D. 1450, the region is believed to have been occupied in very low numbers by an O'odham (upper Piman speaking) people whose settlement and subsistence practices reflect a return to an earlier, simpler way of living.
Life continued to involve the cultivation of crops supplemented by hunting a gathering, but the level of technical sophistication and social and religious cohesion characteristic of the Hohokam is missing in these later populations.
These people are believed to be the descendants of the Hohokam, but are recognized as separate culture groups.
Archaeologists know very little about the period that represents the end of the Hohokam and the beginning of the Spanish Colonial presence in southern Arizona.
It appears to have been a time of flux when the vacuum left by the disappearance of the Hohokam was filled by groups that by the 17th and 18th centuries the Spanish recognized as Quechan and Cocopa and other Yuman speakers of the Lower Colorado and Gila Rivers, the Hia C-ed O'odham (Sand People), the Tohono O'odham (desert People) who occupied the arid Papagueria, and the Sobaipuri of the Santa Cruz and San Pedro River Valleys to the east
Several sites dating between the time following the Hohokam collapse and the beginning of Spanish settlement are known in the Tucson Basin and the San Pedro River and several more have been reported in the Ajo Range and along the Santa Rosa Wash within the subarea.
Organ Pipe National Monument reports a small number of O'odham sites dating to this time period and a few more sites of unknown ethnic identity are known from the State of Sonora in Mexico.
The one characterization that is true of all of these areas is just how little physical evidence there is for this time period.
Most of what is known comes from the accounts written by Spanish explorers who entered into the region in the 16th 17th and 18th centuries.
Table IV.6.3.
Western Pima County Subarea - Historic Archaeological Site Data by Affiliation Euro-Americ an Mexican Tohono O'odham Hia-Ced O'odham Unknown Total 26 3 30 1 1 61
Table IV.6.3 presents archaeological data on the Historic Period, spanning the years between A.D. 1540 and 1950.
The historic period covers that time during which Euro-Americans entered into the southwest region and established permanent settlements beginning with Santa Fe in 1610 and later in Tucson in 1692.
As mentioned above, little is known of the Native American Population until Father Eusebio Kino established his mission in the Santa Cruz and began to explore the region.
Historically, the Tohono O'odham lived in small, dispersed settlements or rancherias consisting of circular, dome houses made of mesquite saplings, course grasses, ocotillo stalks and saguaro ribs covered with dirt.
They were agriculturalists who followed a dual settlement pattern where during the summer the settled in the lower bajadas of the river valleys to plant and in the winter moved to the upper bajadas near springs to hunt.
They also used cactus camps to harvest saguaro fruit in the summer.
This is the pattern of life that Kino and others described when visiting with the O'odham, a pattern that continued into the late 19th century.
Three major forces influenced Euro-American use of the region: travel, mining and ranching.
As mentioned, the Camino del Diablo was established as an important east west trail early in the history of Spanish occupation in the region.
A second north south route was also used during the 18th and 19th centuries that started in Sonora and followed the Quijotoa Valley to settlements along the Gila River.
While copper and silver deposits in Ajo were well known to the Spanish by the mid 18th century, Anglo-American efforts to make the Ajo mines produce didn't begin until 1854 and focused initially on the limited silver deposits.
After that time, copper ore was mined at Ajo but had to hauled by wagon to the Colorado River, a venture that quickly proved prohibitively expensive.
It wasn't until 1916 that a rail link was established between Ajo and Gila Bend that the mines in Ajo were able to produce copper in large, commercially viable quantities.
Copper mining boomed throughout Arizona during the First World War, but later suffered terribly during the depression years of the 1930s.
The Second World War revived the local economy, which once again slumped in the 1950s with a downturn in world copper prices; this boom and bust cycle continues to effect the fortunes of the community of Ajo.
Ranching too followed the Gadsden purchase with ranches being established in the mid to late 19th century.
Of necessity, ranching tended to concentrate around sources of dependable water.
One of the most successful ranchers in the subarea was Thomas Childs, Sr, who following the Civil War, established a large ranching operation out near Ajo that eventually extended from Ajo to Gila Bend and west to the Mohawk Mountains.
By the early 20th century, other ranchers had moved into the subarea.
To the south, Robert Louis Gray and his three sons, established a large ranching operation involving 15 properties within the area that is today Organ Pipe National Monument.
The Gray Ranch was in operation from the 1920s to the 1970s.
Homesteading also occurred, but the lack of water together with the severity of the climate made this a risky venture despite changes to the Homestead Act of 1862 that expanded the acreage homestead claims.
Before the end of the Second World War, the department of defense began to develop military bases and training facilities in southern Arizona, which were greatly expanded as the United States entered in the "cold War" from 1945 to 1989.
The Barry Goldwater Bombing Range, established in 1986 as a part of Luke Air Force Base, is a direct result of the geo-political forces that have shaped the modern world.
Sixty-one Historic Period sites have been identified in the Western Pima County subarea as presented by the Arizona State Museum.
Most of these data were collected within the Organ Pipe National Monument.
Twenty-six are Euro-American, three are Mexican American in ethnic origin, 30 have been identified as Tohono O'odham, one is believed to be Hia C-ed O'odham and one is unknown.
As mentioned, extremely low survey coverage, the greater visibility of some sites and not others, and a lack of research interest in the archaeology of the historic time period distorts the true picture of historic period land use in the subarea.
It is notable, and to be expected, that the largest number of sites identified as O'odham in any subarea in Pima County should be in this subarea, which is a part of the traditional use lands of the Tohono O'odham people.
Despite the scarcity of data, it is apparent that the Western Pima County subarea has much more to offer in the study of long term human adaptation to desert environments.
It is also apparent that jurisdictional responsibilities have in the past lead to a failure to share information in a way that could facilitate comprehensive analysis of all that is known of the region.
While past academic research has pointed in a number of interesting directions, the dictates of cultural resources management have taken over, and as such, little research is being done that is not directed by either management needs or development.
Site Data - Function The site data from both the historic and prehistoric eras can also be examined from a functional perspective to highlight land use trends within the subarea.
The following is a summary of archaeological site data for the subarea that is presented by gross time period and site function.
These data are made available by the Arizona State Museum, University of Arizona.
Table IV.6.4.
Western Pima County Subarea Archaeological Site Data by Time Period by Site Function PERIOD Prehistoric Historic Both Unknown Total FUNCTION Agriculture 2 2 0 0 4 Art 6 0 0 1 7 Defense 0 0 0 2 2 Disposal 1 1 0 0 2 Government 0 0 0 0 0 Habitation 24 9 0 0 33 Resource Processing 33 1 0 2 36 Resource Procurement 17 10 0 3 30 Religion 2 7 0 0 9 Storage 1 0 0 0 1 Transportation 9 3 0 1 13 Unknown 242 28 0 36 306 Total 337 61 0 45 443
The site counts presented in Table IV.6.4 show that prehistoric sites out number the historic by more than five to one; none of the reported sites had occupations from both major time periods are present on the same site.
The prehistoric site counts are dominated by Resource Processing (food and non food resources) and Habitation (residential) as the most common of the identifiable site functions.
Resource Procurement, such as a hunting blind or a rock quarry are third in frequency.
Transportation, which includes trails and roads, is usually a site function that is associated with historic period occupations; however, in this case, the region is known to be cris-crossed with trail systems that were developed and used in prehistoric times.
Nine such trails are recorded .
Six sites functionally categorized as Art (rock art) are present; sites with a religious or ritual function are represented by two sites as are sites associated with agriculture.
Storage uses and trash disposal are represented with one site each.
As is the case in the other subareas in Pima County, the largest number of prehistoric sites cannot be functionally identified based on survey data.
The historic sites emphasize resource procurement (11) and residential (10) uses in almost equal numbers.
Its interesting to note that seven sites are identified as having religious functions, which proportionably is very high, much higher than prehistoric sites with the same function.
Sites of this nature include shrines as well as graves.
Transportation functions (roads and trails) are represented with three sites.
Site counts for Agricultural uses (2), trash disposal (1) and Resource Processing (1) are last.
Since half the Historic Period sites are O'odham in ethnic origin, the functional breakdown presented above reflects a high degree of use by Native Americans, thus it is notable that so few sites are functionally identified as Resource Processing.
It may be that some of the 36 sites that temporally and functionally unknown include sites associated with Historic Period Resource Processing.
Of all sites from both the prehistoric and historic time period, the data presented in Table 4 indicates that site use within the subarea is dominated by Resource Processing at 36 sites.
Residential needs are represented by Habitation sites and is the second highest site function by count (33), followed by Resource Procurement with the third highest frequency of sites (30).
The site counts for Transportation (13) and Religion (9) have very high proportional representation in comparison with other subareas and perhaps reflect a different reality to life in the desert.
The counts for sites with functions associated with Art (7), Agriculture (4), Defense (2), Disposal (2) , and Storage (1) finish out the site data.
To sum the information on archaeological sites, the Western Pima County subarea suffers from a lack of archaeological attention and only a fraction of the area has witnessed intensive archaeological survey and even less site excavation.
Because of this temporal and spatial patterning can only be guessed at.
Nonetheless, the following statements can be made based on the archaeological record: 1) It is evident that human beings have occupied the subarea for many thousands of years, with a peak occupation occurring during the period between approximately A.D. 800 and A.D. 1450; 2) Three district cultural groups lived side by side and interacted with each other during this time period; 3) certain parts of the landscape have been more heavily utilized than others particularly the uplands of the regional mountain chains where water and certain plant communities co-occur; 4) the predominant use of the landscape relates to procuring and processing food and non food resources and meeting residential needs.
B. Historical Resources "Historical resources are sites, districts, structures, objects, or other evidences of human activities that represent facets of the history of the nation, state, or locality.
Also places where significant historical or unusual events occurred even though no evidence of the event remains, or places associated with persons significant in our history that have gained importance in the last 50 years" (Preserving Cultural and Historic Resources, Pima County, May 1999).
Historical resources are largely constructed or engineered elements of the built environment including buildings used for residential purposes, such as houses, but also commercial stores, industrial facilities, civic centers, and places of worship.
Roads, bridges, irrigation canals, mining works, and railroad tracks are also historical resources.
Information on these places is recovered through drawings and design plans, photographs, maps, surveys, and personal recollections.
The Western Pima County subarea has a number of places of historic importance including occupied historic communities, abandoned settlements or ghost towns, places that have been recognized for their historic value and registered on the National Register of Historic Places, and a historic trail.
These are represented on the attached map entitled, "Western Pima County Historic Resources."
Historic Communities: Historic communities are those settlements that were established 50 or more years ago as indicated by either a founding date or the date the post office was first opened.
Unless otherwise indicated, the following descriptions are derived from"Arizona's Names" by Byrd Howell Granger, The Falconer Publishing Company, 1983.
EUR Ajo: Ajo is a copper mining town that formed around one of the oldest mines in the state having been worked continuously since 1855.
The name Ajo means "garlic" in Spanish, which was bestowed on the settlement in 1854 for the garlic like plants that grow in the area.
Historically, the mines were worked off and on during the later half of the 19th century, starting first with silver ore and then switching to copper.
During these years, the mining was limited by the high cost of transporting ore by wagon to the Colorado River.
Ore reduction became feasible in the early 1900s and the New Cornelia Copper Company was formed to take advantage of this technology.
After a rail link was established between Gila Bend and Ajo in 1916, copper production boomed.
Busts followed during the Great Depression years with another boom-bust cycle starting with the Second World War and the years that followed.
The mines at Ajo have been silent since 1984; however, winter tourism has gained increasing popularity bringing with it economic benefits to the community.
Ajo is also notable as an example of a planned community built by the Calumet and Arizona Mining Company.
In 1914, John C. Greenway, General Manager of the mine, hired several architects to design and build a town for the company's employees.
The plan, inspired by the"City Beautiful" movement of the early 20th century, incorporated landscaping, public facilities and high quality housing to create a pleasing aesthetic for the miners and their families.
The company believed in the progressive notion that happy workers are productive workers and this is reflected in the care and attention that was put into this massive project.
The town site was dedicated in 1917 and built out through a series of phases over the next 30 years.
The historic core of Ajo is currently being nominated to the National Register of Historic Places (See "Ajo: A Model Company Town, Architectural and Historic Context of a Planner Community in Arizona," prepared by Janet H. Stittmatter, Inc., 2000.)
EUR Childs: Thomas Childs arrived in the Ajo Valley in 1884 and by 1890 he and his son Tom Childs, jr. had gone into ranching.
By the early years of the 20th century the Childs family owned a ranch that stretched from Ajo to Gila Bend and west to the Mohawk Mountains, making it one of the largest ranching enterprises in the region.
The community is named after these enterprising ranchers.
Ghost Towns: Many communities became established and thrived only to be abandoned.
These places were typically mining towns, or in some cases, milling towns, that thrived until economic forces eliminated the driving force of their existence.
Established during the later part of the last century and early 20th century, these places remain time capsules that reflect by-gone eras.
Known ghost towns in the subarea are listed below.
The following descriptions are derived from "Ghost Towns of Arizona" by James E. and Barbara H. Sherman, University of Oklahoma Press, 1969.
EUR Clarkstown: Opposition to the company owned town in Ajo lead Mr. Sam Clark to stake out a new town site near the copper mine reduction works.
However, the company would not sell water to the new community and so the residents deepened a test shaft to access water.
By 1917 Clarkstown (or Clarkston) had 1000 residents.
Residents wanted to name the community Woodrow, but this was rejected by the Post Office Department, and so for a time the community was known as Rowood (Woodrow spelled backwards).
In 1931, the town was virtually destroyed by fire and the residents moved to Ajo. EUR Gunsight: In November of 1878, the Gunsight Mine was located by prospectors and named because it was near a mountain that looked like a gunsight.
It proved to be rich in silver ore.
Miners attracted to the new operation formed the Gunsight camp.
By 1892 the mine was producing under the Silver Gert Mining Company.
Forty men were employed and eight buildings were constructed.
The post office opened in 1892 and was closed four years later in 1896.
National Register Properties: The National Register of Historic Places were created as a part of the National Historic Preservation Act of 1966.
It is the nation's premier honor roll for places deemed of national, regional, or local importance.
The criteria for listing include a) association with a person who has contributed to history; b) association with an event important to history; c) associated with the work of a master artist or craftsman or typical of a style or type of workmanship; d) yielding or having the potential to yield information important to history or prehistory.
Listing in no way effects the rights of private property owners to do what they wish with their property.
Federal agencies; however, are required to consider the effects of their actions on listed properties.
The following descriptions are derived from individual National Register nomination forms available at the State Historic Preservation Office in Phoenix, Arizona EUR Bates Well Ranch.
This is the ranch owned by Henry Gray, son of cattleman Robert Louis Gray.
The ranch house is the primary building at Bates Well and is representative of the Early Transitional, Sonoran to Anglo, style of architecture dating to the 1930s and 1940s.
Other buildings are included including a hay barn/bunkhouse, a tack house, an blacksmith shop and two corrals.
Henry was one of three sons of cattleman Robert Louis Gray, who ranched within what is today Organ Pipe National Monument.
The property was listed on the National Register in 1994 (not shown on the Historic Resources Map).
EUR Bull Pasture.
This grassy basin located in the upland of the Ajo Mountains is the site of a natural water hole or tank.
Known as the " Tinajas de los Torres," it is significant for its prehistoric archaeological deposits representing thousands of years of visitation by desert dwelling Indians in the region.
It was also used by ranchers to water their cattle in the early 1900s and by the U.S. military during the Mexican border crisis of 1915-1917.
Today, the site is within the Organ Pipe National Monument.
It was listed on the National Register in 1978 for its association with historic and prehistoric settlement in the area.
EUR Dos Lomitas Ranch.
This is the name given to the main ranch owned by Robert Louis Gray, Sr., and is a good example of 1920s vernacular architecture associated with in the Sonoran Tradition.
Gray was an important figure in cattle ranching in the southern part of the subarea.
The property is within Organ Pipe National Monument and was listed in 1994 (not shown on the Historic Resources map).
EUR El Camino del Diablo.
This historic trail follows a series of tinajas or water holes along a route stretching from northern Mexico to California.
It was first traveled by father Eusebio Kino between the years 1699 and 1702 and was subsequently used by a variety of people including Juan Bautista de Anza, Captain of the Tucson Presidio, who in 1774 traveled along the route in his quest to find a land route to California.
Later, the route was used in the 1840s and 1850s by miners on their way to the gold fields of California.
While treacherous, it provided an "Apache free" corridor to the west; as safer and shorter routes were opened, the trail was abandoned.
Today, portions of the trail are located within the Cabeza Prieta Wildlife Refuge and follows the International Boundary between Mexico and the U.S.
It was listed on the National Register in 1976 for its historical associations.
EUR Gachado Well and Line Camp.
Located close to the U.S. Mexican border, the Gachado Well and Line Camp is a representative feature of the development of the ranching industry in southwestern Arizona early in the 20th century.
The well, named for the Spanish word to "stoop"( agachado), was dug between 1917 and 1919 by Lonald Blankenship, an early rancher in the area; it is possibly the location of a natural spring based on claims made by the Tohono O'odham Indians.
In 1919 the property was sold to Robert Louis Gray, who ranched the area during the 1930s.
Gray built an adobe house and a corral at the site.
In later years, the house served as a line camp where cowboys stayed while attending cattle.
The Gray ranch lasted from the 1920s to 1976.
Today the well and line camp are within the limits of the Organ Pipe National Monument.
The site was listed on the National Register in 1977 for its significance to regional history EUR Growler Mine.
Also located within Organ Pipe National Monument is the Growler Mine.
This mine represents one of the earliest and most extensively worked copper mines south of Ajo, Arizona.
It was named in the 1880s and by the 1890s a small community had developed nearby called Growler Camp.
High grade copper ore was extracted in large quantities beginning in the early 20th century.
Production peaked in 1916 and was closed by 1928.
The mine and related buildings and facilities was listed on the National Register for its association with the history of mining in the region in 1978 (not shown on the Historic Resources Map)..
EUR Milton Mine.
This mine is a surface mine located just north of the Mexican border in the Puerto Blanco Mountains.
The property consists of an open trench dug into the natural rock to expose gold and copper ore.
The cut is about 30 feet deep and 300 feet long and is representative of a simple form of mining used in the early years of the 20th century.
It was used off an on between 1917 and the 1960s.
Today, the mine is located within the limits of Organ Pipe National Monument.
It was listed on the National Register of Historic places in 1977 for its association with historic mining practices of the early 20th century.
EUR Victoria Mine.
This mine is one of the oldest known examples of mining activity in the country immediately adjacent to the U.S. Mexican border in southwestern Arizona and symbolizes one of the first American enterprises to penetrate this part of the Sonoran Desert.
Known for its rich silver deposits, the mine was discovered around 1880 and worked off and on by various owners until 1941.
The site contains ruins of the mining operation including the remains of a store, a cistern, head frame timbers, and a large shaft hole.
Today the mine with within Organ Pipe National Monument.
It was listed on the National Register of Historic Places in that 1977 for its association with historic mining.
Trails: In many places historic and prehistoric trails crossing the landscape often become the basis for historic roads and modern highways.
The subarea has one well known historic trail.
EUR El Camino del Diablo.
As noted above, this historic trail was used by early Spanish missionaries and explorers, and later by Mexican and American miners seeking their fortune in the gold fields of California in the Middle 19th century.
Known for its hardship, it is described as one of the most terrible trails in the southwest.
(See "Arizona Place Names" Will C. Barnes, The University of Arizona Press, 1988) To sum the discussion of historic resources, the subarea contains a variety of places that are symbolic of different historic forces that have affected southern Arizona and the nation as a whole ranging from 18th Spanish Colonial expeditions into the unknown, to 19th and 20 century ranching and mining enterprises.
C.
Traditional Cultural Places "A traditional cultural place is a historic site or district that is important because of its association with cultural practices or beliefs of a living community that (a) are rooted in that community's history, and (b) are important in maintaining the continuing cultural identity of the community.
The traditional cultural significance of an historic property is derived from the role the property plays in a community's historically rooted beliefs, customs, and practices" (Preserving Cultural and Historic Resources, Pima County, May 1991).
Pima County has been occupied by indigenous peoples for thousands of years and the modern descendants of these prehistoric cultures still live in the region today.
All of Pima County is claimed as ancestral lands by the Ak-Chin Indian Community, the Gila River Indian Community, and the Tohono O'odham Nation.
The Piman speaking groups (including the Salt River Pima Maricopa Indian Community) claim direct ancestral affiliation with the prehistoric Hohokam Indians who inhabited much of southern and central Arizona.
Other Indian groups also claim ancestral ties to the Pima County area including the Zuni of central western New Mexico and the Hopi of northeastern Arizona based on oral histories and myth that identify southern Arizona as a place of origin for these tribes.
The Apaches also lived in the region for hundreds of years and therefore they too can claim an ancestral connection to the land and the places of traditional value to them that it may contain.
Other groups with potential claims to places of traditional cultural value include the Hispanic and Anglo communities.
Places of traditional cultural value, as defined, are special to the community and must often remain secret to non-members; this is particularly true among Native Americans.
These might be places where in the past natural resources were collected for ceremony or where natural features on the landscape are still recognized as having significance.
Two such places are known in the Subarea.
EUR I'toi Mo'o (Montezuma's Head) is a natural feature in the Ajo Mountains that is associated with the creator figure, I'toi Mo'o, sacred to the Tohono O'odham people.
EUR Quitobaquito Springs near the international border is the site of a natural Tinaja or water hole that is also sacred to the Tohono O'odham people.
Other places with traditional cultural value of particular importance to Native Americans are rock art sites and all archaeological sites containing human graves.
Six sites within the subarea are identified as prehistoric rock art localities and in addition, 24 prehistoric sites were used for habitation, which often contain human graves.
It is reasonable to assume, that Native Americans would identify these places as having traditional cultural value.
More than likely, there are many places with these kinds of values that exist in the Western Pima County subarea.
III.
THREAT ASSESSMENT: Lack of archaeological site and survey data prevents a detailed analysis of where these kinds of cultural resources are located with regard to land jurisdiction.
However, with 98.4% of the land under federal control and subject to federal and tribal preservation law, it is highly likely that the majority of cultural resources within the subarea area are legally protected.
Private lands, concentrated mostly in the vicinity of Ajo, make up just 1.4 percent of the subarea, and state lands even less at 0.2%.
That is not to say that cultural and historical resources have not been lost, and are not now threatened with loss, but that these are comparatively low.
Resource Loss: There are three principal sources of cultural resource loss in the subarea: Military related development, mining, and urbanization.
military use of the Barry M. Goldwater Bombing range in the north west portion of the subarea is likely to have resulted in some loss, although mitigation of effects is legally required for any cultural resource found to be eligible for listing on the National Register of Historic Places.
As a matter of both policy and practice, the Air Force avoids affecting cultural resources when ever possible and plans around places containing them so the losses to cultural resources are minimized.
Mining in the Ajo area in particular is known to have impacted archaeological and historical resources as the mine works have expanded over the years impacting older areas and the resources they contain.
However, since the mines have been inactive since 1984, little activity has occurred that has resulted in loss.
Development of private land has almost certainly resulted in the loss of cultural resources; however, this is subject to Pima County development controls affecting rezoning and grading.
The extent of these activities has been minimal in recent years.
In short, while cultural resource losses have occurred in the past, the extent of this loss can be characterized as minimal.
Resource Threat: One source of potential threat to cultural resources in the subarea at the moment is private residential and commercial development.
Again, it is fair to say that the extent of this threat in the subarea is low given the degree of private development that is ongoing in the subarea.
Should the mine start up operations, however, the associated increase in private development would pose an elevated threat to cultural resources in the area of Ajo and Childs.
State land holdings are too small and too inaccessible to factor in an analysis of the potential conversion to private lands.
Ranching on BLM lands only poses a threat to cultural resources if projects involve earth moving, such as building new cattle tanks, are proposed for the public lands; however, the BLM would require a survey, and if needed, some form of data recovery.
The Cabeza Prieta National Wildlife Refuge, although used as fly over space by the Air Force, sees little by way of threatening activity towards cultural resource, Lastly, the mission of the Organ Pipe National Monument is to protect its cultural resources.
In general, the threat to cultural resources within the subarea can also be characterized as being minimal.
Sensitivity Zone: While the resource threat is believed to be low, it would still be useful to know where cultural resources area located.
So little of the subarea has been investigated, however, and the data that is available is so fragmented, that it is not possible to visually present site distribution in any meaningful manner.
Site proximity to water is not even possible because the necessary analysis on stream ranking is not available.
As such, the only reasonable way to predict where cultural resources may be located is to use vegetation maps showing the distribution of environmental zones that in the past have been attractive to human beings.
The map entitled GAP Vegetation and Archaeological Sites shows the distribution of major vegetative zones within the subarea.
There are basically two such zones: the Arizona Upland Subdivision of Sonoran Desertscrub characterized by Paloverde and mixed cactus, and the Lower Colorado River Valley Subdivision of the Sonora Desertscrub dominated by creosote and bursage.
Recent research conducted for the Air Force by SWCA, Inc., in the Barry Goldwater Bombing range to the north of the subarea suggest that archaeological sites tend to be found in higher frequencies in upland settings that receive higher rainfall in association with the Palo Verde-cactus vegetative zone.
This is because this vegetative zone is more productive of foods that are edible to human beings.
If this correlation is applied to the subarea, then archaeological sites will tend to be found in the areas colored orange and less so in those areas colored light purple.
Exceptions will include any place where water can be reliably found, such as along major washes and water holes, as well as along trails that cris-cross the valley bottoms.
IV.
SUMMARY: The cultural resources of the Western Pima County subarea are the product of thousands of years of human settlement from the earliest prehistoric times to the modern day.
This report provides information on known cultural resources within the subarea describing their nature and attempts to predict where other cultural resources may be found.
Clearly, more is known about the archaeological record than either historic resources or traditional cultural places.
This is because more formal study has been directed to the archaeological record, whereas research on historic resources is limited, and ethnographic information on traditional cultural properties is almost completely lacking.
It is also apparent that the subarea has received limited research attention over the years.
While archaeological survey data are lacking it is evident that very little of the subarea has been formally surveyed and only a few sites have ever been excavated.
To compound this problem, what data there are is fragmented between federal agencies with their own filing systems preventing comprehensive analysis.
Despite these problems, this short review of the data suggests that up to 10,000 years of human history is represented in the subarea, and that the peak use of the subarea occurred during late prehistory when the region was occupied by people from three different culture groups.
Historic uses of the subarea by Native Americans (O'odham) is evident as is use by Euro-Americans from Spanish Colonial times to the modern day.
The historic communities of Ajo and Childs are products of mining and ranching respectively, both of which significantly contributed to the history of the subarea.
The ghost towns of Clarkstown and Gunsight are further examples of 19th and early 20th century mining communities that historically were a part of the western mining phenomenon that has contributed so much to the building of the nation.
The subarea has eight places that are listed on the National Register of Historic Places, celebrating prehistoric settlement, Spanish Colonial exploration, 19th and 20th century mining and ranching.
Lastly, Native American claims identify the subarea as part of their traditional home lands and two places with traditional cultural value to the Tohono O'odham are known to exist in the subarea.
In short, while still virtually unrecorded, the subarea has evidence of important cultural and historical resources with a high potential for many more such resources than are currently known.
Since the majority of the Subarea is composed of federal lands and since the agencies that manage these lands are mandated by law to protect cultural resources, the potential threat of loss to cultural and historical resource overall is low in comparison to other subareas in Pima County.
While mining and development of private land have the potential to impact the record of the past, that record is still largely intact within the western Pima County subarea.
[ Next ]
return to top of page
TABLE OF CONTENTS __________________________________________________________________
SDCP Footer Image SDCP Home
