[sdcphead.jpg] 3.
Cienega-Rincon Subarea
I. SUBAREA: The subarea defines the watersheds formed by the Santa Rita and Empire Mountains on the west, the Whetstone mountains on the east and the Rincon Mountains to the north and drains Cienega Creek and Pantano Wash, the subarea's primary watercourses.
The southern boundary of the planning unit is marked by the Pima County/Santa Cruz County line and its northern limit passes through the Eastern District of the Saguaro National Park as indicated on the map entitled, "Modern Communities, Transportation, and Ownership."
This area encompasses approximately 498 square miles.
The Cienega-Rincon subarea contains approximately 318,535 acres, within which land status is broken down as presented in the table below.
As is the case for much of eastern Pima County, state land makes up the majority of the land base, followed by private lands and National Forest lands.
National Parks and Monuments, public lands administered by the Bureau of Land Management, Pima County lands, and a small holding of military property follow in order of rank.
Table IV.3.1.
Cienega-Rincon Subarea - Land Ownership by Acres and Percent Ownership Acres Percentage Bureau of Land Management 36,741 11.5 Military Reservations 16 
The year 2000 population estimate for the Cienega-Rincon subarea is 3,312.
There are several communities in the subarea as mentioned above, including the historic town of Vail located on the west side of the subarea adjacent to the Southern Pacific railroad line.
Newer settlements, such as Mescal, exist on the eastern limit of the subarea adjacent to I-10, in Davidson Canyon along the Sonoita Mountain View Highway to the south, and north of I-10 in the vicinity of Old Spanish Trail where urban expansion of the Tucson metropolitan area is rapidly occurring.
Additional population is distributed within the subarea on private ranches in close association with state trust and federal lands open to grazing.
Historically, the subarea has depended upon a mixture of ranching, mining, farming, and since the end of the 19th century, railroad related commerce and transportation services.
Ranching continues in the subarea today and just over 1000 acres remain in cultivation along the Cienega Creek.
II.
CULTURAL RESOURCES: This section presents information and analysis of current data on archaeological sites, historic resources and traditional cultural places within the subarea.
A. Archaeological Sites "Archaeological sites are any material remains of past human life or activities which are preserved in their original setting that are important to understanding prehistory or history.
These sites or districts may include occupation sites, work areas, farming sites, burials and other funerary remains, artifacts, campsites, hearths, rock art, intaglios, trails, battle sites, religious or ceremonial sites, caves and rock shelters, the architectural or other remains of structures of all kinds, such as pit houses, pueblo rooms, adobe or rock foundations, and other domestic features, usually dating from prehistoric or aboriginal periods, or from historic periods at least 50 years old, for which only archaeological vestiges remain" (Preserving Cultural and Historic Resources, Pima County, May 1999).
Archaeologists learn about the past by collecting and analyzing information in two ways: through survey and by excavation.
Survey involves inspecting the ground surface in a particular area and recording concentrations of artifacts and features (hearths, roasting pits, pit houses, etc.) as archaeological sites.
A site represents the physical remains of past human behavior in a single location dating to one or more periods of use through time.
Surveys are often done systematically by groups of archaeologist who walk the land in regularly spaced lines looking for artifacts.
Some surveys, however, are judgmental in that archaeologists only look where sites are expected to be found and not elsewhere.
In all cases, survey offers an extensive perspective on past land use.
The second kind of information on archaeological sites is gained through excavation.
This is the systematic recording, recovery, and analysis of artifacts and features from within a site's limits.
Critical information is gained by understanding the spatial relationship of all artifacts and features within a three dimensional context.
This enables interpretation about how the site was used, by whom, when, whether the site was used more than once and what happened after it was abandoned.
Often, archaeological sites are not fully excavated but are only partially sampled.
This saves what is left of the site for future investigations.
Archaeological excavation provides highly detained information about the use of one limited spatial area during one or more use episodes.
Archaeologist use survey information in conjunction with site excavation information to build regional time lines over broad areas such as a river valley.
Survey data: There are two kinds of surveys that archaeologists perform: Linear and block.
Linear survey involves inspecting a right-of-way for construction of a road, sewer line, telephone cable or other linear feature.
These surveys tend to be done in compliance with legal mandates requiring environmental studies during project planning.
Block survey involves examining non-linear properties ranging in size from a few acres to 1000s of acres.
These are typically done either in compliance with legal mandates, or through academic or preservation related research projects.
The Map entitled "Archaeological Survey Locations" shows the areas within the subarea that have been archaeologically surveyed.
Linear surveys are evident on the map in blue and block surveys appear in purple.
Overall, the map demonstrates that federal lands in the Coronado National Forest and Saguaro National Park Eastern District have received the bulk of formal survey in the past.
Presented below is a breakdown of survey data by acreage and survey type including the percentage of the subarea that has been investigated.
Table IV.3.2.
Cienega-Rincon Valley Subarea - Survey Acreage by Survey Type Survey Type Number Acreage Percent of Subarea Linear 40 2983 0.9 Block 56 34,696 10.9 Total 96 37,854 11.8
The total acreage figures indicate that more than 88 percent of the area has not been formally investigated.
This limits what can be said about cultural resources in general and archaeological sites in particular.
However, recent survey along Cienega Creek within the Cienega Creek Natural Preserve and on Bureau of Land Management lands to the south, has almost doubled this coverage to 65,538 acres representing 20.5 percent of the subareas.
This work, which has yet to be published, was conducted by a graduate student at the University of Arizona and represents only the latest research in an area that has received considerable attention, much of it within the last twenty years.
Archaeological research in the Rincon Valley area began in the 1920s with excavation at the Tanque Verde ruin, a late prehistoric Hohokam village site located south of Saguaro National Park Eastern District.
Between the mid 1960s and the early 1990s, the Saguaro National Park (then a monument) was the subject of multiple survey and follow up excavation projects that resulted in the discovery of hundreds of new archaeological sites along the hilly flanks of the Rincon Mountains.
With the expansion of the Tucson metropolitan area to the south and east in the 1980s and 1990s, private development has also prompted archaeological survey in the Rincon Valley.
The proposed Rocking K Ranch subdivision is the most notable example.
Survey conducted between 1988 and 1996 has covered approximately 5800 acres of private and state lands during which 83 archaeological sites were recorded dating from the Late Archaic through to the end of the Hohokam sequence, a period covering approximately 4000 years.
More recently, private development just south of Rocking K has identified an another 25 sites on 1750 acres within the proposed Rancho del Lago subdivision, adding new data on prehistoric settlement along the Pantano Wash.
Between 1975 and 1982, archaeological investigation within the northern Santa Rita Mountains on the west side of the subarea revealed prehistoric uses of the uplands.
A 23 square mile area of National Forest land was surveyed for the proposed Anamax-Rosemont land exchange, leading to the identification of 621 cultural manifestations dating to Archaic, Hohokam, and Historic Periods (see discussion below).
Excavation of 10 Archaic sites demonstrated ancient use of the highlands at least 7000 years ago.
The Cienega Creek itself has received its share of research attention beginning in the 1920s with investigations conducted by archaeologists from the University of Arizona.
In the 1950s, survey and testing along the Creek identified pre-ceramic (Archaic) sites buried under the deep alluvium covering the Cienega Creek flood plain.
In 1982, a number of these ancient sites were excavated to investigate the origins of agriculture in prehistory.
More recently, beginning in 1995, a doctoral student at the University of Arizona surveyed thousands of acres along Cienega Creek and several of its tributaries.
As a result, site counts have been increased to 554 for the subarea, representing a span of time from approximately 6000 B.C. to the present day.
This effort confirms both the antiquity and the richness of Cienega Creek and its tributaries.
In sum, archeological survey and follow up research continues to demonstrates the importance of the subarea as a source of information on the past.
Site data: The following is a summary of archaeological data for the subarea that is presented by gross time period and site function.
This analysis uses data from the Arizona State Museum, University of Arizona.
Table IV.3.3.
Cienega-Rincon Subarea - Archaeological Site Data by Site Function PERIOD Prehistoric Historic Both Unknown Total FUNCTION Agriculture 7 8 1 4 20 Art 2 1 1 5 9 Communication 0 1 1 0 2 Disposal 4 4 0 2 10 Government 0 5 0 0 5 Habitation 16 12 1 8 37 Resource Processing 29 6 1 22 58 Resource Procurement 9 5 1 12 27 Religion 2 0 0 0 2 Storage 1 0 0 0 1 Transportation 0 3 0 0 3 Unknown 133 8 5 53 199 Total 203 53 11 106 373
As can be seen in Table 3, prehistoric sites out number the historic by four to one, and in a few cases, occupations form both major time periods are present on the same site.
In all, Resource Processing, Habitation, and Resource Procurement, are the most common of the identifiable functions, indicating that residential needs, the acquisition of critical resources (either food or non-food items) and the processing of those resources were the primary activities in the subarea during both prehistoric and historic times.
This is followed by Agricultural uses, Disposal (trash dumps) and Art (rock art) in order of their representation.
The "Unknown" category consists of artifact scatters, such as pottery and stone chips, where function cannot be assessed.
That so many components (199) have unidentifiable functions and cannot be accurately dated (106) is to be expected because the data presented here are collected during survey where only surface characteristics of sites are recorded without the benefit of subsurface excavation.
Table IV.3.4.
Cienega-Rincon Valley Subarea - Prehistoric Archaeological Site Data by Time Period TIME PERIODS PaleoIndian 12,000 B.C. - 8,000 B.C.
Archaic 8,000 B.C.- A.D. 200 Ceramic A.D. 200- A.D. 1540 Unknown Total Site Count 0 20 84 99 203
Table IV.3.4 presents information on both the number of prehistoric sites in the subarea as reported by the Arizona State Museum.
New information not yet available to the Museum boosts the number of recorded Archaic sites to 142 and Ceramic Period sites to 281, marking a huge increase in site from both time periods but especially the earlier Archaic times.
This period was the focus of the doctoral research and demonstrates that cultural deposits of extreme antiquity are present in Pima County.
As a whole, the data presented here clearly indicate that portions of the subarea area in proximity to permanent water were heavily occupied throughout much of the prehistoric sequence.
Missing from the prehistoric sequence is any evidence of occupation of the subarea during the PaleoIndian Period.
While no sites dating to the PaleoIndian Period have yet been reported in the subarea, four sites dating to this time period are known in the San Pedro River Valley to the east.
The term "PaleoIndian" describes the earliest period of human occupation in the Americas.
This was a time following the end of the last ice age when the environment was cooler and wetter than it is today.
Many species of now extinct animals including mammoth, horse, camel, bear, bison, and lions lived during this period.
Numerous archaeological sites found in the west indicate that hunting these large animals was an important part of the subsistence of PaleoIndian people and as such archaeologists refer to them as "big game hunters."
While very little is known about these people, it is believed that they lived in small groups or bands by hunting and gathering as food became seasonably available throughout the year.
Archaeological evidence suggest that they were highly mobile covering thousands of square miles in a year as they moved across the landscape.
Early in the succeeding Archaic Period, the environment became warmer, the large game animals disappeared, and modern plant and animal species were established.
The Musuem has records on 20 sites dating to the Archaic Period.
The Archaic Period represent a time span of almost 8000 years during which human beings adjusted their way of living in response to new environmental conditions.
In order to survive, people became generalists in their subsistence practices, hunting and gathering a wide variety of plants and animals and becoming more efficient in how they processed their food as indicated by the presence of grinding stones found on sites of this period.
Again, people appeared to have lived in small groups by hunting a gathering wild plants and animals over large areas through a seasonal round.
Sites from the early and middle parts of the Archaic are rare in southern Arizona suggesting low population levels in response to the unfavorable environmental conditions believed to exist at that time; however, toward the end of the period several significant changes occurred laying the foundation for subsequent cultural development.
First, the environment stabilized by 4500 years ago approaching modern conditions by that time.
Second, population levels appear to have increased and some evidence suggests that people roamed within more restricted territories as a result.
Third, by approximately 3500 years ago, people began to experiment with growing their own food as a supplement to their diet.
This change also co-occurred with more permanent settlement along well watered reaches of the major drainages in the region.
A total of 84 sites dating to the Ceramic Period in prehistory are known within the Cienega-Rincon subarea.
The shear number of sites and site components dating to this period in prehistory indicates that the subarea was strongly favored by ceramic period populations.
The Ceramic Period covers the time between the adoption of ceramic technology in the third and fourth centuries after Christ to the end of the prehistoric sequence around A.D. 1540.
It was during the early part of the period, between approximately A.D. 200 to A.D. 700, that Archaic Period populations completed the transition from mobile hunting and gathering to settled, village based, agricultural existence in southern Arizona and elsewhere.
The principal pottery bearing people in the region during prehistory were the Hohokam, who emerged as a distinct culture in the eighth century and dominated central and southern Arizona until around A.D. 1450.
The Hohokam flourished along the river valleys of southern Arizona but were also well adapted to the desert lands to the west.
They lived in settled, permanent villages, grew their own food using irrigation and dry farming techniques, developed a rich ceremonial life, and traded extensively with their neighbors throughout the region.
A period of environmental instability during the A.D. 1300s is believed have weakened the agricultural economy to the point where the Hohokam were no longer able to produce food in sufficient quantifies and with enough consistency to support large populations and the culture collapsed around A.D. 1450.
Following the collapse of the Hohokam, the region is believed to have been occupied in very low numbers by an O'odham (upper Piman speaking) people whose settlement and subsistence practices reflect a return to an earlier, simpler way of living.
Life continued to involve the cultivation of crops supplemented by hunting a gathering, but the level of technical sophistication and social and religious cohesion characteristic of the Hohokam is missing in these later populations.
These people are believed to be the descendants of the Hohokam, but are recognized as separate culture groups.
Archaeologists know very little about the period that represents the end of the Hohokam and the beginning of the Spanish Colonial presence in southern Arizona.
It appears to have been a time of flux when the vacuum left by the disappearance of the Hohokam was filled by groups that the Spanish recognized as the Sobaipuri and the Tohono O'odham in the 17th and 18th centuries.
No components dating to late prehistoric times are known in the Cienega-Rincon Valley subarea.
Table IV.3.5.
Cienega-Rincon Subarea - Historic Archaeological Site Data by Affiliation Euro-American Native American Unknown Total 32 1 20 53
Table 5 presents archaeological data on the Historic Period, spanning the years between A.D. 1540 and 1950.
European settlement of the Cienega-Rincon subarea dates from the latter half of the 19th century.
New survey data pushes the total number of sites from the Historic Period to 77, although no breakdown is available as of yet.
Trails existed over the Rincon Mountains and the Cienega Creek was used since Spanish Colonial times to connect the Tucson area with the San Pedro River Valley.
The Mormon Battalion, for instance, constructed a wagon road through Cienega Creek in 1846.
While several early ranches were established in the eastern Tucson Basin as early as the 1860s, large scale ranching in the area did not begin until the 1870s.
Several notable examples include the Empire Ranch, the Cienega Ranch, and the Tanque Verde Ranch.
Smaller ranches and farmsteads were established during the 1870s, but it was the coming of the railroad in 1880 and the cessation of Apache hostilities in 1886, that opened the area up to new settlement.
The largest settlement in the eastern Tucson Basin was at Pantano, founded in the early 1880s by the Southern Pacific Railroad company; it was abandoned in the 1950s.
Historic use of the Rincon Valley in the 1880s and 1890s involved homesteading and ranching, with dairy farming, woodcutting, and quicklime production being the focus of economic activity.
The Cienega Creek saw the San Antonio and San Diego Stage Company pass through it in 1857 and the succeeding Butterfield Overland Mail line in 1858.
Freight from Messilla, New Mexico was carried through the valley in the 1860s and 1870s.
Ranches, such as the Empire ranch mentioned above, were established in the Cienega at this time along with others in the area including the Sanford, Kane and Gardiner Ranches, all of which were absorbed during the 1880s and 1890s by the expansion of the Empire ranch.
Mining, while not an important activity in the lower Cienega, occurred along its western margins in the Empire and Santa Rita Mountains, and communities associated with these enterprises also flourished for a time before disappearing from the valley in the early 20th century.
A total of 32 Historic Period sites have been identified in the subarea by the Arizona State Museum.
Twelve of these are Habitations, six are Resource Processing (mortar/metate, roasting pit, kiln, ore processing, etc), two are transportation (roads, trails, stage stops, etc.) related features and three are related to government (public buildings, park, plaza, big house, etc.).
Four historic Native American occupations have also been identified, three of which are believed to be Tohono O'odham.
There are also two components that could not be securely identified as to cultural affiliation.
The low numbers of components dating to the historic time period is probably a reflection of research bias and not a lack of resources dating to this time period.
Recent research in the area conducted within the Cienega Natural Preserve and to the south along Cienega Creek confirms this observation.
Sixty-five Historic Period sites have been newly recorded including several identified as Sobaipuri and Apache in origin.
Also recorded were the remains of ranches (Empire, Gardiner, O'Leary, Hopley and Kane), historic towns (Greaterville and Pantano), mines (Total Wreck) historic travel routes (Butterfield Stage Line and Southern Pacific Railroad) and historic road alignments (State roads 83 and 88).
The map entitled "Cienega-Rincon Valley Subarea Archaeological Sensitivity Zones" shows the distribution of all known sites and components reported from all sources for the subarea.
This map demonstrates that clusters of archaeological sites exist on the landscape, most notably in association with the major drainages and their tributaries.
Its important to remember that the pattern of site distribution evident in this figure is more a reflection of where archaeological surveys have been conducted than the actual pattern of land use in the past.
Nonetheless, there is enough data to illustrate the co-occurrence of sites with water and additional investigation of springs and the secondary drainages in the subarea will no doubt produce more evidence of intensive occupation.
While this figure lacks topographic relief, the pattern of settlement in the subarea is similar to that seen in other basins in the region.
Two areas of main occupation are suggested, one at the ecotonal break between the upper bajada areas and the mountain highlands in association with known springs, and the other along the valley's primary drainage.
This pattern of settlement between the valley bottom and upper bajadas is consistent with historic Winter/Summer village locations practiced by Tohono O'odham in historic times.
B. Historical Resources "Historical resources are sites, districts, structures, objects, or other evidences of human activities that represent facets of the history of the nation, state, or locality.
Also places where significant historical or unusual events occurred even though no evidence of the event remains, or places associated with persons significant in our history that have gained importance in the last 50 years" (Preserving Cultural and Historic Resources, Pima County, May 1999).
Historical resources are largely constructed or engineered elements of the built environment including buildings used for residential purposes, such as houses, but also commercial stores, industrial facilities, civic centers, and places of worship.
Roads, bridges, irrigation canals, mining works, and railroad tracks are also historical resources.
Information on these places is recovered through drawings and design plans, photographs, maps, surveys, and personal recollections.
The Cienega-Rincon subarea has a number of places of historic importance including occupied historic communities, abandoned settlements or ghost towns, places that have been recognized for their historic value and registered on the National Register of Historic Places, and a historic trail.
These are represented on the attached map entitled, "Historic Communities, Ghost Towns, National Register Properties, and Trails."
Historic Communities: Historic Communities are those settlements that are in existence today that were established 50 years or more ago as indicated by a founding date or the date the first post office opened.
The following description is derived from "Arizona's Names" by Byrd Howell Granger, The Falconer Publishing Company, 1983)
EUR The town of Vail, Arizona, is located south of Pantano Wash and adjacent to the southern Pacific railroad line.
The community owes its existence to the railroad and was originally a station along the line between Tucson and El Paso beginning in 1881.
The Southern Pacific Railroad received permission to cross ranch land owned by brothers Walter and Edward Vail in 1880, hence the name of the settlement.
This station was located between the Empire and Rita stations on old maps of the area.
By 1883, a post office was opened in nearby Pantano, now a historic archaeological site.
Today, Vail continues to exist as a small settlement in a rapidly growing area Ghost Towns: Many communities were established, even thrived, only to be abandoned.
These places were typically mining towns, or in some cases, milling towns, that boomed until economic forces eliminated the reason for their existence.
Established during the later part of the 19th century and early 20th century, these places remain time capsules that reflects a by-gone era.
The following descriptions are derived from "Ghost Towns of Arizona" by James E. and Barbara H. Sherman, University of Oklahoma Press, 1969.
EUR Greaterville The discovery of placer gold in the foothills of the Santa Rita mountains in 1874 sparked the creation of the Greaterville Mining District.
Within a few years, hundreds of miners settled in the village of the same name.
Mining continued until the gravel bearing deposits were depleted in the 1880s.
In its hay day, the town offered several dance halls, saloons, shops, and in 1882 a school opened.
The post office opened in 1879, closing in 1946.
Mining at a much reduced level has continued off and on and a small number of families still occupy this once bustling community.
EUR Rosemont Starting in the 1870s, copper ore was pulled from the Santa Rita Mountains at Rosemont camp, a small community located in the southwest corner of the subarea.
In its day, Rosemont supported 150 people, had a school, a hotel, and some stores.
Mining continued for several decades before the mines closed down and the community was abandoned.
The post office opened in 1894 and closed in 1910.
EUR Total Wreck In 1879, silver/lead ore was discovered in the Empire Mountains.
Named after the appearance of the hill in which the deposits were found, Total Wreck began mining operations in 1881 after the arrival of the railroad.
By 1883, there were two hundred residents, fifty houses, three stores, three hotels, four saloons, a butcher shop and a lumber yard.
By the end of 1884, the mine was closed.
The post office opened in 1881 and was closed in 1890.
National Register Properties: The National Register of Historic Places was created as a part of the National Historic Preservation Act of 1966.
It is the nation's premier honor roll for places deemed of national, regional, or local historic importance.
The criteria for listing include: a) association with a person who has contributed to history; b) association with an event important to history; c) associated with the work of a master artist or craftsman or typical of a style or type of workmanship; d) yielding or having the potential to yield information important to history or prehistory.
Listing in no way effects the rights of private property owners to do what they wish with their property.
Federal agencies; however, are required to consider the effects of their actions on listed properties.
The following descriptions are based on the individual National Register nomination forms available at the State Historic Preservation Office in Phoenix, Arizona.
EUR Empire Ranch The Empire Ranch is located among rolling grasslands adjacent to the Empire Gulch, an intermittent stream in the middle of the Cienega Valley.
Started in 1876 as 160 acre holding, the ranch became one of the largest in the west eventually covering an area 60 miles north/south by 30 miles east/west stretching from the Rincon Mountains to the Mexican Border.
Owned initially by a number of men, the ranch was bought in 1881 by Walter Vail, after which the town of Vail is named in part (see above).
Vail expanded the ranch in the mid 1880s, taking time to also serve in the territorial legislature and on the Pima County Board of Supervisors.
Vail was killed in a street car accident in Los Angeles in 1906.
The adobe ranch house was listed on the National Register of Historic Places in 1975.
EUR Cienega Bridge The Cienega Bridge was built in 1921 as part of the Borderland Highway project across southern Arizona.
The bridge is a concrete and reinforced steel structure designed as a medium-span concrete arch with a two-span concrete girder viaduct over a branch of the Southern Pacific Railroad.
It was one of three virtually identical open-spandrel concrete arches that were build in Pima, Pinal, and Yavapai counties, although the Cienega bridge was the longest with a span of 146 feet.
The bridge was nominated to the National Register for its significance to local transportation history and placed on the National Register of Historic Places in 1988.
EUR Colossal Cave Historic District Discovered in 1879, by a local ranch hand looking for stray cows, Colossal Cave consists of 39 miles of subterranean caverns and connecting tunnels, two miles of which are currently open to the public.
Attempts to develop the cave for public access began in earnest in 1917 and by 1922 a formalized trail system was in place.
Between 1934 and 1937, the Civilian Conservation Corps occupied a portion of the nearby Posta Quemada cattle ranch, and implemented an ambitious plan to upgrade and expand the visitor's facilities.
The results transformed Colossal Cave into a modern tourist destination.
Of note is the visitor's center, a two-story building of southwestern vernacular design constructed from shaped stone quarried from the local hillside.
Other facilities built by the CCC include picnic and barbecue areas, rock walls, paths and footbridges, as well as the trail and lighting system in the cave itself.
These historic features and those of the Posta Quemada Ranch complex were nominated as a historic district for their tourism, educational, and ranching themes and placed on the National Register of Historic Places in 1992.
The cave is now a part of Pima County's Park system and is open to the public.
EUR Kentucky Camp Historic District Located on the Coronado National Forest, the Kentucky Camp Historic District includes buildings, structures, and archaeological sites relating to hydraulic placer mining in southeastern Arizona.
Kentucky Camp was constructed as the headquarters of the Santa Rita Water and Mining company which was founded in 1902 to revitalize the worked-out Greaterville gold placers with intensive hydraulic mining.
Despite its ambitious scale of operations, the endeavor proved an economic failure and closed in 1906.
The District includes elements that together represent the system of hydraulic mining employed at the Kentucky Camp.
The site was nominated to the National Register of Historic Places because of its association with early 20th century mining technology and listed in 1995.
EUR Rincon Mountain Foothills Archaeological District The Rincon Mountain Foothills Archaeological District is located within the Saguaro National Park Eastern District.
The nomination was prepared as a result of multiple archaeological surveys that were conducted in the Park from the mid 1960s to the late 1970s.
These efforts resulted in the discovery of 110 historic and prehistoric archaeological sites dating from the Archaic, Ceramic (Hohokam) and Historic Periods within a 25 square mile area, making it the largest property listed on the National Register in the subarea.
The District was listed in 1979 for its potential to yield information important to understanding the history and prehistory of the eastern Tucson Basin.
EUR Upper Davidson Canyon Archaeological District This district is a by-product of a proposed land exchange in the Coronado National Forest in the mid 1970s that required survey of approximately 23 square miles.
The Davidson Canyon portion of that survey proved so rich in archaeological sites, that in 1980 it was excluded from the proposed land exchange and set aside for listing on the National Register.
A total of 29 prehistoric sites dating from the Archaic and succeeding Ceramic (Hohokam) Period are included within 1300 acres.
The district was listed in 1992 for its potential to yield information important to understanding prehistoric use of the upland areas in southern Arizona.
Historic Trails: In many places historic and even prehistoric trails crossing the landscape often become the basis for historic roads and modern highways.
One historic trail is reported for the subarea.
The following description is derived from "Retracing the Butterfield Overland Tail Through Arizona," by Gerald T. Ahnert, Westernlore Press, 1973).
EUR Butterfield Stage Line.
The Butterfield Overland Company was one of the first continental mail carriers.
It opened in 1858 connecting St. Louis, Missouri and San Francisco, California; however, by 1861 it had ceased operations.
In Arizona, the company used parts of existing trails to forge a route some 437 miles in length.
In 1869, Wells Fargo operated over the old Butterfield stage lines and in the 1870s, the Southern Pacific railroad surveyed along the approximate route.
In the Cienega-Rincon subarea, the trail followed the south side of Cienega Creek for most of its length, crossing to the north to follow Mescal Arroyo.
Vestiges of the Cienega Creek stage stop, located adjacent to the creek in the vicinity of Marsh Station Road, still exists Rural Historic Landscapes: There may also be individual ranches or farmsteads within the subarea that qualify as having importance to the history of the settling of the Cienega-Rincon Valley subarea.
Some of these may be part of larger historic landscapes that are recognizable entities that have historic value.
Historic Landscapes a special subcategory of historic resources.
As defined by the National Park Service, a rural historic landscape is "that portion of the exterior natural environment that has been modified, influenced, or given special cultural meaning by people who shaped the landscape to serve human needs.
A rural historic landscape is a geographical area that historically has been used by people or shaped or modified by human activity, occupancy, or intervention, and that possesses a significant concentration, linkage, or continuity of areas of land use, vegetation, buildings and structures, roads and waterways and natural features.
Historic landscapes may reflect the beliefs, attitudes, traditions, and values of these people."(National Register Bulletin 30, Department of the Interior) The most likely candidates for places with these values in the subarea are ranches where the connection between historic ranch properties, ranch lands and ranching as a traditional activity remains intact.
Examples where these connections may still be demonstrated are the Empire Ranch, the Empirita Ranch and the Posta Quemada Ranch.
C.
Traditional Cultural Places "A traditional cultural place is a historic site or district that is important because of its association with cultural practices or beliefs of a living community that (a) are rooted in that community's history, and (b) are important in maintaining the continuing cultural identity of the community.
The traditional cultural significance of an historic property is derived from the role the property plays in a community's historically rooted beliefs, customs, and practices" (Preserving Cultural and Historic Resources, Pima County, May 1991).
Pima County has been occupied by indigenous peoples for thousands of years and the modern descendants of these prehistoric cultures still live in the region today.
All of Pima County is claimed as ancestral lands by the Ak-Chin Indian Community, the Gila River Indian Community, and the Tohono O'odham Nation.
The Tohono O'odham claim direct ancestral affiliation with the prehistoric Hohokam Indians who inhabited much of southern and central Arizona.
Other Indian groups also claim ancestral ties to the Pima County area including the Zuni of central western New Mexico and the Hopi of northeastern Arizona based on oral histories and myth that identify southern Arizona as a place of origin for these tribes.
The Apaches also lived in the region for hundreds of years and therefore they too can claim an ancestral connection to the land and the places of traditional value to them that it may contain.
Other groups with potential claims to places of traditional cultural value include the Hispanic and Anglo communities.
Places of traditional cultural value, as defined, are special to the community and must often remain secret to non-members; this is particularly true among Native Americans.
These might be places where in the past natural resources were collected for ceremony or where natural features on the landscape are still recognized as having significance.
Other places with traditional cultural value of particular importance to Native Americans are rock art sites and all archaeological sites containing human graves.
Two of the sites within the subarea are identified as prehistoric rock art localities, and an additional 16 more were used for habitation purposes, which often contain human graves.
It is reasonable to assume, that Native Americans would identify these places as having traditional cultural value.
Again, recent survey information suggests that many more places with these kinds of values may exist in the Cienega Creek area.
III.
DISCUSSION: The next map, entitled "Archaeological Sites and Land Ownership" shows the distribution of sites in relation to land status.
Most of the 361 sites reported in the subarea by the Arizona State Museum are on federal or state lands, with a significant clustering of sites in the northwest of the subarea located on private lands.
Legal protections against unauthorized disturbances are afforded archaeological sites and other cultural and historical resources on federal and state lands with varying degrees of efficacy, but only one law, the Arizona State Burial Protection Act, applies on private land.
Cultural resources on county lands are also covered by legal protections defined under county law and policy.
Data are presented in the table below showing the number of archaeological components by land status and degree of legal protection for cultural resources.
Table IV.3.6.
Cienega-Rincon Subarea - Archaeological Sites by Landownership and Legal Protection Jurisdiction No. of Archaeological Sites Protection Status/Level BLM 12 Protected/high National Forest Lands 61 Protected/high National Parks/Monuments 117 Protected/high State Lands 41 Protected/moderate County owned Lands 30 Protected/moderate Private Lands 100 Unprotected/low Total 361
A total of 191 of the 361 sites have high protection status, reflecting the high percentage of federal lands in the subarea (37.8%), but also the effort that has been made by the federal agencies to identify cultural resources on these lands.
Seventy-one sites are moderately protected from public and private actions, 30 of which are within county park lands at Colossal Cave or are located within Pima County's Cienega Creek Natural Preserve.
The remaining 100 sites have low protection status.
Since state lands can be sold for development, and private lands are subject only to local zoning, 141 of the 361 known archaeological sites may be affected by future development in the subarea.
Furthermore, since the majority of the land base in the subarea has never been archaeologically surveyed, potentially hundreds, even thousands of sites that exist but have never been recorded could be affected.
One way to estimate this number is to divide the number of square miles surveyed in the subarea (59.1) by the number of reported archaeological sites (361) to get an estimate of 6.1 archaeological components per square mile.
New site and survey information suggests the site density is lower at 5.4 sites per square mile.
With a total of 498 square miles in the subarea, this produces a total estimate of 2,689 sites using the lower density figure and 3,037 sites using the higher figure.
Thus between 1059 and 1200 sites may be on state land (39.4%) and between 553 and 670 on private land (20.6%) This analysis suggest that on the high end between 1500 and 1900 archaeological sites could be potentially vulnerable.
While crude, this provides some means of measuring the potential loss of archaeological resources in the subarea.
The loss of cultural and historical resources and the threat of further loss in the Cienega-Rincon Valley subarea can be briefly summarized as follows.
Resource Loss: EUR Relatively low levels of public and private development have occurred in the Cienega-Rincon Valley subarea, with the exception of residential growth north of I-10.
The presence of the Saguaro National Park on the northern margins of the subarea area, the listing of six National Register properties, combined with the creation of parks (Colossal Cave), preserves (County Natural Preserve) and conservation areas (Empire-Cienega), have contributed to a greater sensitivity towards natural and cultural resources conservation in the Cienega-Rincon subarea.
Resource Threat: EUR The greatest area of threat continues to be in the north and west of the subarea where large scale platted communities are being constructed.
Subdivision housing and the construction of public infrastructure is occurring and will continue to occur in this area as the Tucson Metropolitan area pushes to the south and east.
Potentially hundreds of archaeological sites and other cultural resources will be affected.
The fact that private land can be subdivided and developed without platting under current state law, and that state trust land is vulnerable to sale for the highest and best use, increases the potential for resource loss in the future.
On the southern end of the subarea, development pressures are far less intense and thus less of a threat to cultural and historical resources.
Because the distribution of the majority of cultural resources is unknown, assessing risk and making conservation recommendations is difficult.
In effort to predict areas with high sensitivity for cultural and historical resources, proximity to water is used as a predictor under the assumption that in the desert places closer to water will tend to have been used more heavily by past human populations than places more removed from water sources.
The map entitled "Cultural Resources High Sensitivity Areas" identifies zones within the subarea that are predicted to be highly sensitive for cultural resources.
These include Cienega Creek and Pantano Wash, areas around shallow ground water in the vicinity of Davidson Canyon and along Agua Verde Creek, and springs, almost all of which are located in the foothills of the surrounding mountains.
Different buffers widths are used for the sensitivity model.
As the major drainages in the subarea, the Cienega Creek and Pantano Wash each are buffered by two miles on either side for a total of four miles in width.
One mile buffering is used for the areas with the shallow ground water along the Agua Verde and Davidson Canyon tributaries, and all springs are buffered with a one mile area.
While the model is simplistic, given human needs for water and the pattern of distribution for archaeological sites in particular, the high sensitivity areas as shown are predicted to capture most cultural and historical resources within the Cienega-Rincon Valley subarea.
A comparison of this map with the archaeological sensitivity zone map and the map showing the distribution of historic resources confirms that much of the subarea determined to be sensitive is included in the buffered areas.
IV.
SUMMARY: The most important observation that can be made about cultural and historic resources in the Cienega-Rincon Valley subarea is how little is actually known of the area.
Only about 12 percent of the area has been previously investigated.
Even with new survey data from Cienega Creek, the majority of the landscape and the cultural resources it contains remain unknown to archaeologists.
Comparison of the maps showing archaeological survey and site locations and land ownership demonstrates that where investigations are conducted, archaeological sites are found, leading to a further conclusion that more inspection will result in more sites being identified.
This is aptly demonstrated by the new survey results along Cienega Creek reported here.
Despite the limited degree of archaeological survey coverage, what information has been collected demonstrates that over 10,000 years of human history is well represented in the Cienega-Rincon Valley subarea enhancing its importance as a place with high scientific and educational value.
The town of Vail is a historic community that is a product of Euro-American frontier settlement in 19th century with potential archaeological and architectural assets.
Three ghost town sites important to the history of mining occur within the subarea and six places have been listed on the National Register of Historic Places for their importance to the history and prehistory of the region.
The subarea also contains one of the few historic trails used to open the West.
Lastly, Native American claims identify the Cienega- Rincon Valleys as part of their traditional use areas and the possibility that places with traditional cultural value exist in the subarea is high, especially those places associated with the archaeological record.
In short, the subarea, while still mostly unrecorded has rich cultural and historical resource values that will only increase as more data are collected.
Since the majority of the Subarea is composed of state trust lands, and since these lands are potentially convertible into private lands for development, there is a further need to identify cultural and historical resources, evaluate their significance, and where warranted protect them for future generations.
To this end, it is worth noting that the proposed National Conservation Area now before Congress is sufficient in size and scope to encompass most of the predicted high sensitivity areas for cultural resources and would thus extend a measure of protection for these resources in a manner that is consistent with the goals of the Sonoran Desert Conservation Plan.
[ Next ]
return to top of page
TABLE OF CONTENTS _________________________________________________________________
SDCP Footer Image SDCP Home
