[sdcphead.jpg] 2.
Altar Valley Subarea I. SUBAREA: The Altar Valley subarea is a long, narrow trough approximately 52 miles (83 km) long and 20 miles (32 km) wide characterized by high mountains on either side and a wide valley floor through which the Altar Wash flows northward from the Mexican border as indicated on the map entitled, "Modern Communities, Transportation, and Ownership.
" The subarea is defined by the eastern edge of the Tohono O'odham reservation along the Baboquivari and Coyote Mountains on the west.
Its northern edge is marked by the Garcia Strip of the Tohono O'odham Nation and passes through a portion of the Tucson Mountains just west of the City of Tucson.
On the east, the boundary follows along the tops of Black Mountain, the Sierrita Mountain chain, the Cerro Colorado Mountains and skirts the town of Arivaca to the east.
The southern limit is defined by the Pima/Santa Cruz County line and the U.S. Mexican international border.
The population level in the Altar Valley Subarea for the year 2000 is estimated to be approximately 23,902.
There are several principle communities in the subarea, the towns of Sasabe and Arivaca on the southern end of the planning unit and the community of Three Points (Robles Junction) at the northern end.
However, significant population is concentrated in the northeast corner of the subarea in the vicinity of the Ajo Highway (State Route 86) and west of the San Xavier District of the Tohono O'odham Nation at Diamond Bell Ranch.
These areas represents settlement along the rural edge of the greater Tucson Metropolitan area, which is experiencing rapid growth.
Other sources of population exist in an unplatted development north and east of the Coyote Mountains and on ranches spread throughout the area on private lands in close association with state trust and federal lands open to grazing.
Grazing remains a principle part of the local economy; however, approximately 6600 acres along the Altar Wash are presently under cultivation.
The Altar Valley subarea contains approximately 713, 807 acres, 320,706 (44.9.%) of which is state trust land.
Private lands follow in rank with 144,230 acres (20.2%).
Third, is the land in the Buenos Aires Wildlife Refuge that covers the southern third of the Alter Wash and its tributaries.
This area contains 112, 345 acres (15.7 % ).
Indian lands, Forest Service lands, BLM lands, and non federal (county) park lands makes up the majority of the remainder as indicated in the table below.
Table IV.2.1.
Altar Valley Subarea - Land Ownership by Acres and Percent Ownership Acres Percentage Bureau of Land Management 27,169 3.8 Indian Lands 73,223 10.2 Military Reservations 21 
II.
CULTURAL RESOURCES: This section presents information and analysis of current data on archaeological sites, historic resources and traditional cultural places within the subarea.
A. Archaeological sites "Archaeological sites are any material remains of past human life or activities which are preserved in their original setting that are important to understanding prehistory or history.
These sites or districts may include occupation sites, work areas, farming sites, burials and other funerary remains, artifacts, campsites, hearths, rock art, intaglios, trails, battle sites, religious or ceremonial sites, caves and rock shelters, the architectural or other remains of structures of all kinds, such as pit houses, pueblo rooms, adobe or rock foundations, and other domestic features, usually dating from prehistoric or aboriginal periods, or from historic periods at least 50 years old, for which only archaeological vestiges remain" (Preserving Cultural and Historic Resources, Pima County, May 1999).
Archaeologists learn about the past by collecting information in the field in two ways: through survey and by excavation.
Survey involves inspecting the ground surface in a particular area and recording concentrations of artifacts and features (hearths, roasting pits, pit houses, etc.) as archaeological sites.
A site represents the physical remains of past human behavior in a single location dating to one or more periods of use through time.
Surveys are often done systematically by groups of archaeologist who sweep the land in regularly spaced lines looking for artifacts.
Some surveys, however, are judgmental in that archaeologists only look where sites are expected to be found and not elsewhere.
In all cases, survey offers an extensive perspective on past land use.
The second kind of information on archaeological sites is gained through excavation.
This is the systematic recording, recovery, and analysis of artifacts and features from within a site's limits.
Critical information is gained by understanding the spatial relationship of all artifacts and features within a three dimensional context.
This enables interpretation about how the site was used, by whom, when, whether the site was used more than once and what happened after it was abandoned.
Often, archaeological sites are not fully excavated but are only partially sampled.
This saves what is left of the site for future investigations.
Archaeological excavation provides highly detained information about the use of one limited spatial area during one or more use episodes.
Archaeologist use survey information in conjunction with site excavation information to build regional time lines over broad areas such as a river valley.
Survey data: There are two kinds of systematic investigations of the ground surface called surveys that archaeologists perform: Linear and block.
Linear surveys involve inspection of a right-of-way for construction of a road, sewer line, telephone cable or other linear feature.
These surveys tend to be done in compliance with legal mandates requiring environmental studies during project planning.
Block surveys involve the examination of properties ranging from a few acres to 1000s of acres.
These are typically done either in compliance with legal mandates, or through academic or preservation related research projects.
The Map entitled "Archaeological Site/Survey Locations" shows the areas within the subarea that have been archaeologically surveyed and the sites that have been found.
Some linear surveys are evident on the map as are the few block surveys most notably south of Tucson Mountain Park and in the Gunsight Mountain area.
Overall, the map demonstrates that very little of the subarea has been surveyed.
Presented below is a breakdown of survey data by acreage and survey type including the percentage of the subarea that has been investigated.
Please note that the data include survey performed on the Tohono O'odham Nation, within the limits of the San Xavier District, and the Pasque Yaqui reservation, but survey locations are not plotted for Indian lands.
Table IV.2.2.
Altar Valley Subarea - Survey Acreage by Survey Type
Survey Number Acres Surveyed Percent of Subarea Linear 43 2,294 0.3 Block 98 35,577 5.0 Total 141 37,871 5.3
The total acreage figures indicate that more than 94 percent of the area has not been formally investigated.
This limits what can be said about cultural resources in general and archaeological sites in particular.
However, the Altar Valley, particularly the northern third, has been the focus of limited research, much of it within the last ten to fifteen years.
The Altar Valley has been investigated on and off since the 1920s with individual researchers conducting informal surveys and excavations in areas of interest to them.
Many of these researchers were from the Arizona State Museum or were members of the faculty at the University of Arizona in Tucson.
However, systematic investigations didn't begin until the 1970s and 1980s and were conducted for both research purposes and in compliance with environmental laws.
Several large scale block surveys were conducted in 1980s, the most notable of which are the Coyote Mountains Project and the Gunsight Mountain survey.
The Coyote Mountains survey conducted in 1989 was a research project directed to investigating the transition between the prehistoric and historic periods in southern Arizona.
The Gunsight Mountain Survey conducted a few years earlier was also research driven and sought to understand the prehistoric occupation of the northern Altar Valley in comparison to other better known locations.
Both surveys identified dozens of site spanning the period from approximately B.C. 7500 to A.D. 1450.
The Gunsight Mountain survey eventually resulted in a nomination to the National Register of Historic Places.
In the 1990s, several smaller surveys have been conducted on the Buenos Aires National Wildlife Refuge on the southern end of the subarea, and two surveys were conducted along 45 miles of State Road 286 to the north.
Beyond these few projects, very little systematic and intensive archaeological investigation has occurred in the Altar Valley subarea.
Site data: The following is a summary of archaeological data for the subarea that is presented by gross time period and site function.
This information is made available by the Arizona State Museum, University of Arizona.
Table IV.2.3.
Atlar Valley Subarea - Archaeological Site Data by Time Period and Function PERIOD Prehistoric Historic Both Unknown Total FUNCTION Agriculture 5 1 0 0 6 Art 11 0 4 0 15 Communication 0 1 0 1 2 Disposal 1 1 1 0 3 Government 2 3 0 0 5 Habitation 45 5 5 1 56 Resource Processing 121 1 8 1 131 Resource Procurement 1 0 0 1 2 Religion 1 0 0 0 1 Storage 3 0 0 0 3 Transportation 1 2 1 0 4 Unknown 245 4 6 31 286 Total 436 18 25 35 514
As can be seen in Table IV.2.3, prehistoric sites vastly out number the historic sites and in some cases, occupations from both major time periods are present on the same site.
In all, Resource Processing and Habitation are the most common of the identifiable functions, followed by Art (rock art ) localities and Agricultural uses.
The "Unknown" category consists of artifact scatters, such as pottery and stone chips, a wall feature, an ambiguous depression, and other items where function cannot be assessed.
That so many sites (286) have unidentifiable functions and dates (35) is to be expected because the data presented here are collected during survey where only surface characteristics of sites are recorded without the benefit of excavation.
Tables IV.2.4 and IV.2.5 tally the number of sites within each of the two major time periods.
Table IV.2.4.
Altar Valley Subarea - Prehistoric Archaeological Site Data by Time Period PaleoIndian 12,000 B.C. - 8,000 B.C.
Archaic 8,000 B.C.- A.D. 200 Ceramic A.D. 200- A.D. 1500 Unknown Prehistoric Total 2 12 95 327 436
Two occupations from the PaleoIndian time period are known with the subarea and twelve components date to the succeeding Archaic Period.
Together, these two time periods represent approximately 12,000 years or 600 human generations.
These low numbers are a product of very low estimated populations levels, the low visibility of these archaeological sites, and a lack of formal investigation in the Altar Valley
The term "PaleoIndian" describes the earliest period of human occupation in the Americas.
This was a time following the end of the ice age when the environment was cooler and wetter than it is today.
Many species of now extinct animals including mammoth, horse, camel, bear, bison, and lions lived during this period.
Numerous archaeological sites found in the west indicate that hunting these large animals was an important part of the subsistence of PaleoIndian people and as such they are commonly referred to as "big game hunters."
While very little is known about these people, it is believed that they lived in small groups or bands by hunting and gathering as food became seasonably available throughout the year.
Archaeological evidence suggest that they were highly mobile covering thousands of square miles in a year as they moved across the landscape.
Toward the end of this period, the climate changed becoming warmer and drier, the big game animals disappeared, and new plant and animal communities emerged.
The Archaic Period represent a time span of approximately 6000 years during which human beings adjusted their way of living in response to new conditions.
In order to survive, people became generalists in their subsistence practices, hunting and gathering a wide diversity of plants and animals and becoming more efficient in how they processed their food as indicated by the advent of grinding stones found on sites of this period.
Again, people appeared to have lived in small groups by hunting a gathering wild plants and animals over large areas through a seasonal round.
Sites from the early and middle parts of the Archaic are rare in southern Arizona suggesting low population levels in response to the unfavorable environmental conditions believed to exist at that time; however, toward the end of the period several significant changes occurred laying the foundation for subsequent cultural development.
First, the environment stabilized by 4500 years ago approaching modern conditions by that time.
Second, population levels appear to have increased and some evidence suggests that people roamed within more restricted territories as a result.
Third, by approximately 3500 years ago, people began to experiment with growing their own food as a supplement to their diet.
This change also co-occurred with more permanent settlement along well watered reaches of the major drainages in the region.
A total of 95 sites dating to the Ceramic Period in prehistory are known within the Altar Valley subarea.
The Ceramic Period covers the time between the adoption of ceramic technology in the third and fourth centuries after Christ to the end of the prehistoric sequence around A.D. 1540.
It was during the early part of the period between approximately A.D. 200 to A.D. 700, that Archaic Period populations completed the transition from mobile hunting and gathering to settled, village based, agricultural existence in southern Arizona and elsewhere.
The principal pottery bearing people in the region during prehistory were the Hohokam, who emerged as a distinct culture in the eighth century and dominated central and southern Arizona until around A.D. 1450.
The Hohokam flourished along the river valleys of southern Arizona but were also well adapted to the desert lands to the west.
They lived in settled, permanent villages, grew their own food using irrigation and dry farming techniques, developed a rich ceremonial life, and traded extensively with their neighbors throughout the region.
A period of environmental instability during the A.D. 1300s is believed have weakened the agricultural economy to the point where the Hohokam were no longer able to produce food in sufficient quantifies and with enough consistency to support large populations and the culture collapsed after A.D. 1450.
Of interest to research in the Altar Valley, another culture group centered in northern Mexico co-existed and interacted with the Hohokam.
The Trincheras culture refers to agriculturalists who lived between approximately A.D. 750 and A.D. 1300.
Trincheras sites, typically identified by rock terraced hillsides and distinctive purple on red pottery, have been recorded in the southern reaches of the Altar Valley; however, little is known of this prehistoric culture.
Following the collapse of the Hohokam, the region is believed to have been occupied in very low numbers by an O'odham (upper Piman speaking) people whose settlement and subsistence practices reflect a return to an earlier, simpler way of living.
Life continued to involve the cultivation of crops supplemented by hunting a gathering, but the level of technical sophistication and social and religious cohesion characteristic of the Hohokam is missing in these later populations.
These people are believed to be the descendants of the Hohokam, but are recognized as separate culture groups.
Archaeologists know very little about the period that represents the end of the Hohokam and the beginning of the Spanish Colonial presence in southern Arizona.
It appears to have been a time of flux when the vacuum left by the disappearance of the Hohokam was filled by groups that the Spanish recognized as the Sobaipuri and the Tohono O'odham in the 17th and 18th centuries.
No sites dating to late prehistoric times are known in the Altar Valley.
Table IV.2.5.
Altar Valley Subarea - Historic Archaeological Site Data by Affiliation Euro-Americ an Mexican-A merican Native American Unknown Total 9 3 4 2 18
The Historic Period spans the years between A.D. 1540 and 1950.
European occupation of the Altar Valley subarea dates to the early 19th century with the establishment of the Rancho del La Osa near Arivaca in 1812.
By the 1860s and 1870s, large ranches were owned by Pedro Aguirre, Estaban Aros, Jesus Robles, and the Redondo family in the Avra and Altar Valleys.
The Aros ranch, established in the 1880s, was situated 17 miles north of Sasabe, and the Santa Marguerita ranch , owned by the Ronstadt family, lies farther to the north.
The Native American populations also lived in the subarea during this time; Arivaca is said to be the location of an 18th century O'odham village site that was abandoned after the Piman revolt of 1751.
A total of 9 Euro-American sites have been identified in the subarea, four of which are habitations, two are transportation (roads, trails, stage stops, etc.) related features.
Three Mexican-American sites have been recorded all of which are relate to government functions in some fashion (public buildings, park, plaza, big house, etc.).
Four historic Native American occupations have also been identified, all of which are believed to be Tohono O'odham.
There are also two sites that could not be securely identified as to cultural affiliation.
The low numbers of sites dating to the historic time period is probably a reflection of research bias and not a lack of resources dating to this time period.
Despite the low survey coverage, or perhaps because of it, clusters of archaeological sites do exist, most notably in the area of Gunsight Mountain (the National Register District), on the western margin of the subarea near the Coyote Mountains, and further to the south along the base of the Baboquivari Mountains.
Individual sites and site clusters have also been reported in other locations scattered throughout the subarea.
Overall, the site distribution pattern suggests occupation of the ecotonal break between the upper bajada areas and the mountain pediment in association with known springs.
Only a few sites are plotted along the central axis of the valley itself, but archaeological research does suggests that Hohokam village sites dating to the period from A.D. 800 - A.D. 1150 will be found close to the Altar Wash.
This pattern of settlement between the valley bottom and upper bajadas is consistent with historic Winter/Summer village locations practiced by Tohono O'odham in historic times.
B. Historical Resources "Historical resources are sites, districts, structures, objects, or other evidences of human activities that represent facets of the history of the nation, state, or locality.
Also places where significant historical or unusual events occurred even though no evidence of the event remains, or places associated with persons significant in our history that have gained importance in the last 50 years" (Preserving Cultural and Historic Resources, Pima County, May 1999).
Historical resources are largely constructed or engineered elements of the built environment including buildings used for residential purposes such as houses but also commercial stores, industrial facilities, civic centers, and places of worship.
Roads, bridges, irrigation canals, mining works, and rail road tracks are also historical resources .
Information on these places is recovered through drawings and design plans, photographs, maps, surveys, and personal recollections.
The Altar Valley has a number of places of historic importance including occupied historic communities, abandoned settlements or ghost towns, and places that have been recognized for their historical value and registered on the National Register of Historic Places.
Historic Communities: Historic Communities are those settlements that are in existence today that were established 50 years or more ago as indicated by a founding date or the date the first post office opened.
The following description is derived from "Arizona's Names" by Byrd Howell Granger, The Falconer Publishing Company, 1983.
EUR Arivaca was the site of a Tohono O'odham village site prior to the Piman Revolt of 1751 and subsequent efforts at silver mining by the Spanish.
In the early 19th century, Spanish settlers attempted to ranch land in the vicinity.
By mid century, silver mining in the nearby Cerro Colorado mining district influenced Euro-American settlement in the area.
A post office was opened in Arivaca in 1878.
EUR Sasabe is also believed to have originated as the site of a village occupied by the Tohono O'odham called "Shashovuk."
Various settlements named Sasabe have existed on both sides of the U. S. Mexican border and for a time the location of the modern town of Sasabe was called "San Fernando" until 1926 when the name was changed.
Ghost Towns: Many communities were established only to be abandoned.
These places were typically mining towns, or in some cases, milling towns, that thrived until economic forces eliminated the driving force of their existence.
Established during the later part of the 19th and early 20th centuries, these places remain time capsules that reflects a by-gone era.
The following descriptions are derived from "Ghost Towns of Arizona" by James E. and Barbara H. Sherman, University of Oklahoma Press, 1969.
EUR Cerro Colorado was a mining town that grew in association with silver mining in the Cerro Colorado mining district on the eastern edge of the Altar Valley.
Mining began after the Gadsden purchase in 1853 and the town site developed near the mine works.
Operations continued through the Civil war until the Union Troops pulled out of the region and Apache attacks disrupted mining activities.
Mining continued intermittently throughout the rest of the 19th century and the town associated with the mines was abandoned in the early 20th century.
A post office was established at the settlement in 1879 (note, the Cerro Colorado ghost town is technically located in the Upper Santa Cruz subarea but historically it is linked to both Arivaca and Tubac, so it will be discussed in both subarea reports).
National Register Properties: The National Register of Historic Places were created as a part of the National Historic Preservation Act of 1966.
It is the nation's premier honor roll for places deemed of national, regional, or local importance.
The criteria for listing include a) association with a person who has contributed to history; b) association with an event important to history; c) associated with the work of a master artist or craftsman or typical of a style or type of workmanship; d) yielding or having the potential to yield information important to history or prehistory.
Listing in no way effects the rights of private property owners to do what they wish with their property.
Federal agencies; however, are required to consider the effects of their actions on listed properties.
The following description is derived from the National Register nomination available at the State Historic Preservation Office in Phoenix, Arizona.
EUR Gunsight Mountain Archaeological District: The Gunsight Mountain Archaeological District was listed on the National Register of Historic Places in 1991 for its extraordinary potential to yield information about the history and prehistory of the Altar Valley.
Located in the northern most peak of the Sierrita Mountains, the District encompasses some 3,334 acres of private and state trust lands containing 123 archaeological sites spanning the last 9000 years of human history.
Rural Historic Landscapes: There may also be individual ranches or farmsteads within the subarea that qualify as having importance to the history of the settling of the Altar Valley.
Some of these may be part of larger historic landscapes that are recognizable entities that have historic value.
Historic Landscapes a special subcategory of historic resources.
As defined by the National Park Service, a rural historic landscape is "that portion of the exterior natural environment that has been modified, influenced, or given special cultural meaning by people who shaped the landscape to serve human needs.
A rural historic landscape is a geographical area that historically has been used by people or shaped or modified by human activity, occupancy, or intervention, and that possesses a significant concentration, linkage, or continuity of areas of land use, vegetation, buildings and structures, roads and waterways and natural features.
Historic landscapes may reflect the beliefs, attitudes, traditions, and values of these people."
EUR The Buenos Ayres Ranch, founded by Pedro Aguirre in 1870, and incorporated within the Buenos Aires National Wildlife Refuge, is an example of a rural historic landscape because of its association with ranching as a historic activity that affected how the land was used and is perceived today.
C.
Traditional Cultural Places "A traditional cultural place is a historic site or district that is important because of its association with cultural practices or beliefs of a living community that (a) are rooted in that community's history, and (b) are important in maintaining the continuing cultural identity of the community.
The traditional cultural significance of an historic property is derived from the role the property plays in a community's historically rooted beliefs, customs, and practices" (Preserving Cultural and Historic Resources, Pima County, May 1999).
Pima County has been occupied by indigenous peoples for thousands of years and the modern descendants of these prehistoric cultures still live in the region today.
All of Pima County is claimed as ancestral lands by the Ak-Chin Indian Community, the Gila River Indian Community, and the Tohono O'odham Nation.
The Tohono O'odham claim direct ancestral affiliation with the prehistoric Hohokam Indians who inhabited much of southern and central Arizona.
Other Indian groups also claim ancestral ties to the Pima County area including the Zuni of central western New Mexico and the Hopi of northeastern Arizona based on both a recognition of prehistoric archaeological sites as ancestral and based upon oral histories and myth that identify southern Arizona as a place of origin for these tribes.
The Apaches also lived in the region for hundreds of years and therefore they too can claim an ancestral connection to the land and the places of traditional value to them that it may contain.
Other groups with potential claims to places of traditional cultural value include the Hispanic and Anglo communities.
Places of traditional cultural value, as defined, are special to the community and must often remain secret to non-members; this is particularly true among Native Americans.
These might be places where in the past natural resources were collected for ceremony or where natural features on the landscape are still recognized as having significance.
One such place is known in the Altar Valley Subarea.
EUR Baboquivari Peak: This natural prominence is located on the western edge of the subarea in the Baboquivari Mountains.
It is well known as a place with high traditional cultural value to the Tohono O'odham who believe it to be the center of their world and part of a cultural landscape that they identify as their homeland.
Other places with traditional cultural value of particular importance to Native Americans are rock art sites and all archaeological sites containing human graves.
Fifteen of the components within the Subarea are identified as rock art localities, and an additional 45 were used for habitation purposes, which often contain human graves.
It is reasonable to assume, that Native Americans would identify these places as having traditional cultural value.
III.
DISCUSSION: The next map, entitled "Archaeological Sites and Land Ownership" shows the distribution of sites in relation to land ownership.
Note that with few exception, the bulk of the 338 reported sites in the subarea are on state and private lands.
Legal protections against unauthorized disturbances are afforded archaeological sites and other cultural and historical resources on federal and state lands with varying degrees of efficacy, but only one law, the Arizona State Burial Protection Act, applies on private land.
Cultural resources on county lands are also covered by legal protections defined under county law and policy.
Data are presented in the table below showing site count by land status and degree of legal protection for cultural resources.
Table IV.2.6.
Altar Valley Subarea - Archaeological Sites by Landownership and Legal Protection Jurisdiction No. of Archaeological Sites Protection Status/Level BLM 6 Protected/high National Forest Lands 1 Protected/high National Wildlife Refuge 14 Protected/high State Lands 216 Protected/moderate County owned Lands 2 Protected/moderate Private Lands 99 Unprotected/low Total 338
Only 21 of the 338 sites have high protection status, 218 are moderately protected from public and private actions, and the remaining 99 have low protection status.
Since state lands can be sold for development, and private lands are subject only to local zoning, the majority of known archaeological sites may be affected by development, should that occur within the subarea.
Furthermore, since 94% of the land base in the subarea has never been archaeologically surveyed, potentially hundreds, even thousands of sites that exit but have never been recorded could be affected.
The loss of cultural and historical resources and the threat of further loss in the Altar Valley subarea can be summarized as follows.
Resource Loss: EUR Relatively low levels of public and private development have occurred in the Altar Valley with the exception of residential growth at the north end of the valley, west of the Tohono O'odham San Xavier District, and north of the District in the vicinity of the Ajo Tucson Highway.
Furthermore, the historic communities of Arivaca and Sasabe have not experienced rapid population growth.
Because of this, cultural resources have not been affected to the same degree as elsewhere.
Resource Threat: EUR The greatest area of threat is in the north valley where private development and the construction of public infrastructure is already occurring and will continue to occur as the Tucson Metropolitan area pushes to the south and west.
The fact that private land can be subdivided and developed without platting under current state law, and that state trust land is vulnerable to sale for the "highest and best use," increases the potential for resource loss in the future.
On the southern end of the Valley, development pressures are far less intense and thus less of a threat to cultural and historical resources Because the distribution of the majority of cultural resources is unknown, assessing risk and making conservation recommendations is difficult.
In effort to predict areas with high sensitivity for cultural and historical resources, proximity to water is used under the assumption that places closer to water will tend to have been used more heavily by past human populations than places more removed from water sources.
The map entitled "Cultural Resources High Sensitivity Areas" identifies areas within the subarea that are predicted to be highly sensitive for cultural resources.
These areas include springs in the subarea, almost all of which are located in the foothills of the Baboquivari, Sierrita, and San Luis Mountains.
Areas around shallow ground water in the vicinity of Arivaca are predicted to be sensitive as well.
There are limitations to this attempt to model sensitive areas, for instance, the map does not predict the Gunsight Mountain Archaeological District east of the Diamond Bell Ranch.
More refined environmental data are needed to capture areas along secondary drainages.
Nonetheless, given human needs for water and the pattern of distribution for archaeological sites in particular, the predicted high sensitivity areas should capture many cultural and historical resources within the Altar Valley subarea.
IV.
SUMMARY The most important observation that can be made about cultural and historic resources in the Altar Valley subarea is how little is known of the area.
Only a little more than five percent of the area has been investigated meaning that the vast majority of the landscape and the cultural resources it contains is unknown.
Comparison of the maps showing archaeological survey and site locations and land ownership demonstrates that where investigations have occurred in the past, archaeological sites are found, leading to a further conclusion that more inspection will result in more sites being identified.
Despite the limited degree of archaeological survey coverage, what information has been collected demonstrates that over 11,000 years of human history is represented in the Alter Valley.
This makes the Altar Valley one of the few basins in the region to contain a record of each period in the sequence of human development through time enhancing its potential as a place with high scientific and educational value.
Both Arivaca and Sasabe are historic communities that are products of Euro-American frontier settlement in 19th century with potential archaeological and architectural assets, as is the Cerro Colorado ghost town site.
Lastly, Native American claims identify the Altar Valley as part of their traditional use areas.
Baboquivari Peak, on the western edge of the subarea is a known and highly significant traditional cultural place and the possibility that other places with traditional cultural value exist in the subarea is high, especially those places associated with the archaeological record.
In short, the subarea, while virtually unknown, has rich cultural and historical resources values that will only be increase as more data are collected.
Since the majority of the Subarea is composed of state trust lands, and since these lands are potentially convertible into private lands for development, there is a further need to identify cultural and historical resources, evaluate their significance and where warranted, protect them for future generations.
[ Next ]
return to top of page
TABLE OF CONTENTS _________________________________________________________________
SDCP Footer Image SDCP Home
