Personalize this site LIVING WITH WILDLIFE in Coyote Country The name "Coyote" (Canis Latrans) is derived from the Aztec word "coyote."
They are found throughout the United States (except Hawaii) and in most of Canada.
Prior to 1900, coyotes were restricted to areas west of Coyote in cactus the Mississippi in the United States and the west of Ontario's Lake Nipigon in Canada
The coyote is a member of the Canid family of which includes both wolves and domestic dogs.
The coyote's success is attributed to the decline of wolf populations and the coyote's own ability to adapt.
Coyotes have adjusted very well to human-disturbed environments, and now thrive in close proximity to people.
Coyotes are opportunistic hunters, They prey on small mammals, domestic pets, livestock and domestic fowl but will readily eat carrion and plants.
A coyote will adjust its diet depending on the food that is available.
In Colorado, coyotes are classified as a game species and may be taken year-round with either small game or furbearer license.
Landowners may kill coyotes, without a license on their land if the coyotes threaten their property or livestock.
Physical Appearance
Coyotes range in color from near black to off-white.
Coyotes in the southwest deserts are the smallest and the lightest in color, whereas those in the northern forests are the largest and darkest.
Colorado coyotes are usually rust colored with white or gray throat and belly.
Like other predators, coyotes vary in size.
The males are larger than the females.
The average size of a coyote is 37 inches long and 18 inches high.
Their weight varies from 20 to 50 pounds.
The coyote is distinguished by its long narrow snout, pointed ears and general dog-like appearance.
Tell-Tale Signs
Coyote tracks are very similar to other members of the dog family.
Imprints show four toes and toe nails; front tracks are larger than the rear.
The front tracks are 2 to 3 inches long and 2 inches wide.
Rear tracks are 2 Coyote howling inches long and 1 1/2 inches wide.
Their scat is variable in size and consistency, depending on diet.
It often contains hair, berries, bone fragments and seeds.
You are likely to find droppings along trails, atop knolls, near boulders or prominent tufts of grass.
Coyotes may be the most vocal of all land mammals.
Although most people are familiar with the coyotes howl, the animal actually has a language which incorporates a variety of sounds.
They have long clear calls in addition to barks and yips.
Their vocalization are designed to bring individuals together or let other coyotes know their location.
Habitat
Coyotes have expanded their range over the last century.
They are found in all habitats, ranging from grassland and deserts to urban areas and mountains.
Coyotes are common in areas where rabbits, mice and gophers live.
These may include lush range-lands or overgrazed pastures.
In order to provide shelter for their pups, coyotes den in a wide variety of places, including brush-covered slopes, steep banks, rock ledges, thickets and hollow logs.
They will also dig their own burrows, or use other animal dens.
Behavior
Coyotes may travel alone, in pairs or small groups.
One factor that seems to affect coyote sociability is prey size.
In populations where the major prey items are small rodents, coyotes tend to be solitary.
In populations where large animals like deer, are available, large groups of coyotes are formed.
Coyotes tend to be more social during winter, when carrion is a very important food source.
Females generally have a home range of a few square miles; males wander over larger areas.
They are generally nocturnal and sometimes diurnal.
When coyotes are in close association with man with no disturbance (trapping or hunting), they are less timid and are frequently seen during the day.
Coyotes have excellent senses of hearing and smell.
Coyotes are very clever predators.
They have been known to kill porcupines without being quilled.
They will also use teamwork to bring down prey.
Mating and Breeding
Coyotes typically pair for life.
If one dies, the other will look for another mate.
They are capable and will breed with domestic dogs.
Breeding occurs between January and March.
Males are capable of breeding when they are less than one year old.
Pups are born from April to mid May.
The litter size is determined by local population density and food availability.
More pups are born when there are low coyote densities and when food sources are abundant.
The female prepares the den.
The male assists in the raising of the young and initially supplies most of the food.
The pups are born blind and hairless.
They begin eating meat at 8 weeks of age and start hunting between 8-12 weeks.
The pups disperse between November and March.
The family may hunt together temporarily in mid-winter but do not form true packs.
People should never approach pups or attempt to take them from a denning area.
Even if you see pups unattended, their parents are usually just a short distance away.
Adults rarely abandon their young.
The Cunning Coyote
Perhaps no other wild animal has endured the wrath of humans while evoking such genuine heartfelt admiration than the coyote.
Some people curse their existence; Native Americans consider them to be the smartest animal on earth ("God's dog") and Coyote jumping many urbanites revel in opportunities to see and hear these vocal predators.
Coyotes are extremely adaptable animals and rapidly adjust to changing conditions.
In the past, wildlife managers have found that coyote populations can actually expand rather than decline in response to eradication attempts.
As a result, a variety of lethal and non-lethal control methods are used to manage populations and control damage.
Found in most of North America, coyotes are most abundant on the open prairie and deserts.
They are comfortable in the country, mountains or in cities, as long as there is appropriate shelter and food.
As a result, people must be aware of their presence and take precautions to avoid conflict with them.
With a better understanding of coyotes and their habitat, humans can coexist with these adaptable and cunning animals
When Coyotes Meet People
Coyotes' behavior varies depending upon its environment.
In the wild where they are actively hunted and trapped, coyotes are generally elusive.
Near cities or in areas where hunting and trapping is not allowed, coyotes may be aggressive.
In urban settings, they can lose their fear of people and may threaten domestic pets.
Although attacks on humans are extremely rare, there have been cases where coyotes have attacked young children.
What To Do If You Live In Coyote Country *
Use a loud, authoritative voice to frighten the animal
Do not allow dogs to run with coyotes.
Although it appears they are "playing " coyotes can turn on dogs to defend their territory.
Don't leave pet food outside.
This invites wildlife into your yard and problems may result.
* Protect livestock, especially chickens, young calves and sheep.
Contact your local extension office for appropriate methods to prevent depredation.
*
Keep your garbage in a storage facility or in a tightly sealed container.
Clean garbage cans regularly to reduce residual odors by using hot water and chlorine bleach.
What To Do If You Meet a Coyote * Coyotes provide an enjoyable wildlife viewing experience.
Keep your distance and do not approach the animals.
Enjoy the opportunity to view wildlife.
*
Keep your pets on a leash when walking them.
If a coyote approaches you or your pet, you can throw rocks or sticks to frighten it away.
Use a loud, authoritative voice to frighten the animal
.
Who Do You Call?
Central Regional Office
6060 Broadway
Denver, CO 80216
(303)291-7227 or 297-1192
OR for a list of DOW Office phone numbers, see DOW Offices.
Sources, References and Additional Reading
The Clever Coyote, 1951, by S.P Young and H.H.T. Jackson, Mammalian Species #79, The Stackpole Company, Pennsylvania.
Coyotes: Biology, Behavior and Management, 1978, M. Bekoff, Academic Press, New York.
Social Ecology and Behavior of Coyotes, 1986, M. Bekoff and M.C Wells, Advances in the Study of Behavior.
Coyote Space Use in Relation of Prey Abundance, 1991, L.S. Mills and F.F Knowlton, Canadian Journal of Zoology, 69.
A Coyote Reader, 1993, W. Bright, California Press, Berkeley.
Colorado Wildlife, 1990, J. Rennicke, Falcon Press, Montana.
This page last updated 12/08/03.
Headlines for Monday, February 02, 2004 'WOMEN ONLY' HUNTER ED CLASS IN COLORADO SPRINGS WILDLIFE OFFICIALS TO HOLD PUBLIC MEETINGS ON BIG GAME SEASON STRUCTURE LOWER DEER, ELK HARVEST REDUCED NUMBER OF COLORADO ANIMALS TESTED FOR CWD IN 2003 CHILD FAMILY NAMED LANDOWNER OF THE YEAR BY THE DOW, GORE FAMILY ALSO HONORDED AS LANDOWNERS WILDLIFE SOCIETY PRINT HONORS DOW, LATE BIOLOGIST VOLUNTEERS NEEDED FOR DOW TRANSPORT TEAM, TRAINING MARCH 3 DOW ASKS FOR HELP WITH CATCHING A POACHER NEAR CARBONDALE DOW USING LOW-FLYING AIRCRAFT IN MULE DEER STUDY AREA IOWA MAN SENTENCED IN POACHING CASE HUNTERS ARE REMINDED TO COMPLETE AND RETURN CRANE SURVEYS
More News
[butt1.gif]
[butt2.gif]
[butt3.gif]
[butt4.gif]
[butt5.gif]
[butt6.gif]
[butt7.gif]
[butt9.gif]
[butt11.gif]
[butt12.gif]
[butt15.gif]
[butt13.gif]
[butt10.gif]
[butt8.gif]
[VOL_butt.gif]
[FAQ_butt.gif]
[butt14.gif]
[butt16.gif]
Hunting Home 5-Yr Season Structure Big Game Small Game Turkey Waterfowl Hunter Education Hunter Outreach Regulations Brochures Disabled Accessibility HIP Registration Operation Game Thief Rules/Regulations Walk-In Access Prgm More...
Fishing Home Licenses Conditions/Stocking Aquatic Research Disabled Accessibility Fishing is Fun Program Fly fishing Master Angler Program Records Regulations Brochure Rules/Regulations More...
Buy and Apply Special Licensing
Viewing Home Workshops Events Calendar Disabled Accessibility Etiquette Heritage Foundation State Wildlife Areas More...
Habitat Home Coexisting with Wildlife Conservation Partnership Developing Heritage Foundation Improvement Program Natural Diversity Info.
Partnership Program River Watch State Wildlife Areas Waterfowl Stamp Wetlands Program More...
Education Home Colorado Correlations Teaching Envir.
Science Teacher Workshops Resource Catalogs Coexisting with Wildlife Events Calendar Hunter Education Mammals Guide Natural Diversity Info.
Outdoors Woman River Watch Species Profiles Volunteer Wildlife Mgmt Ed. Fund More...
Conservation Home Species List Black-Tailed Prairie Dog Grassland Plan Gray Wolf Guidelines Gunnison Sage-Grouse Lynx Partnership Wildlife in Danger
CWD Home Test Results
Press Releases Video Image Database SITE MAP
About Home Offices/Phone #'s Annual Reports Careers Events Calendar Law Enforcement License Agents State Wildlife Areas Strategic Plan Volunteer Wildlife Mgmt Ed. Fund SITE MAP
Commission Home Agendas/Mailings Calendar 5-Yr Season Structure Members Rules/Regulations Strategic Plan
