Skip ACF banner and navigation Department of Health and Human Services logo [USEMAP:acf_bnr_text.gif] Questions? Privacy Site Index Contact Us Home | Services | Working with ACF | Policy/Planning | About ACF | ACF News Search Navagation Bar Factsheets/Publications Report on Domestic Adoption in Romania Chapter I. Introduction and Overview
This report is the product of a joint undertaking between the National Authority for Child Protection and Adoption (NACPA) in Romania and the U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, under sponsorship of the U.S. Agency for International Development.
It is based largely on work conducted in the field in Romania from December 3, 2001, to December 11, 2001.
The purpose of the project is to examine current domestic adoption practices and to make recommendations regarding changes in policy and practice to facilitate the development of an efficient, effective system of domestic adoption.
Site visits were made to Departments for Child Protection (DPCs) offices in three Sectors in Bucharest and in Ilfov Judet.
These sites were selected in part because of weather related travel difficulties outside of Bucharest.
However, a range of domestic adoption and other child protection activities were in evidence in these sites and we believe our findings are valid and generally reflect the state of domestic adoption practice in Romania.
In addition to the site visits, interviews were conducted with a variety of stakeholders in the system, including service providers, funders, the NACPA, the Department of Child and Family Protection Ombudsman, adoptive parents, and maternal assistants who provide foster family care.
While the focus of the report is domestic adoption, the report must necessarily consider adoption within the context of the entire range of activities that comprise the "child protection" or child welfare system in Romania.
To develop an effective domestic adoption program requires that adoption be treated as one component of a continuum of child protection services in which a child's individualized needs are assessed and the most appropriate services provided.
Therefore, findings and recommendations in this report address a number of issues within the child protection system particularly as they relate to the domestic adoption program.
The NACPA coordinates child protection activities in Romania.
These include adoption, foster care, institutional care, reintegration of children with their families, placement with relatives, independent living for children who are or were in care, and maternal and child centers and other services designed to maintain children in their own home and prevent out-of-home placement of children.
The Romanian Committee for Adoption (RAC) is the central authority for adoption in Romania.
A list of children eligible for adoption is sent by the local DPC to the RAC and the list is then made available to other judets for up to 60 days to determine if there are prospective Romanian adoptive parents.
Local DPCs send information to the RAC on prospective adoptive parents and waiting families should be registered with the RAC.
The local Commission for Child Protection must issue a certificate approving a family to adopt, following an assessment and recommendation by the DPC.
This approval process includes the family appearing before the local Commission for Child Protection.
Once the certificate is issued, a child may be placed or "entrusted" to the family for the purpose of adoption for a period of at least three months.
The DPC monitors the adjustment of the child and the family during this time.
If the adjustment in the home is satisfactory, the Commission for Child Protection makes a recommendation for the adoption to proceed.
The RAC must approve the adoption.
The final step in domestic adoption is the court decision to legalize the adoption.
Broad child welfare reforms have been implemented in Romania and it is evident that these efforts are beginning to have a positive impact on the delivery of services in some locations.
The NACPA has made the promotion of domestic adoption a component of the national strategy for child welfare reform.
This strategy encompasses a number of steps to be accomplished including adopting regulations, laws or standards taking into account international conventions on adoption; reducing and simplifying time limits and procedures; development of economic supports such as global tax relief or other measures; organizing public awareness campaigns, both nationally and locally; providing seminars and conferences on adoption; disseminating informational materials on adoption and consideration of intercountry adoption only as a last resort when domestic options have not been successful.
We saw evidence and heard about programs where domestic adoptions are experiencing success.
However, this success is not reflected evenly in judets across the country.
According to figures provided by the NACPA, 1,154 domestic adoptions occurred during the first eleven months of 2001.
(January 2001-November 2001) During that same time period an additional 1,272 children were placed with approved families for the purpose of adoption.
These adoptions should be legalized once the adjustment period has been completed.
The number of adoptions legalized in 2001 is on track with the 1,219 domestic adoptions that occurred in 2000.
At the same time, intercountry adoptions accounted for 3,035 adoptions in 2000 and 1,413 adoptions in 2001 before the suspension of new intercountry adoption applications in June 2001.
Where domestic adoptions are occurring, they most often involve infants or very young children.
It is reported that most Romanian families prefer to adopt young, healthy children and currently the number of young, healthy children exceeds the number of requests to adopt.
This supports a belief expressed by many of the professionals we met that Romanian families will only adopt infants.
As a result, older children, sibling groups, or those with either physical or mental disabilities may be considered unadoptable and may not benefit from adoption services.
Efforts to place these children in adoptive homes appear to be minimal and are often focused on intercountry placement.
A domestic adoption program based on a child-centered model, rather than an infant adoption model, is crucial if Romania is to provide adequate adoption services to the large numbers of children in the system who might benefit.
Underpinning this model is "a central and critical value in the adoption of older children, and, indeed, in the adoption practice of all special needs children, is that all children are potentially adoptable."^1 A child-centered adoption model is typically utilized in the United States in State child welfare agencies that place children of all ages, from infants to teens, children from diverse ethnic groups, sibling groups and children with physical, mental or emotional disabilities.
Specific recommendations are described in detail in Section III; however, the basic findings fall under four areas: 1.
A child-centered adoption program model rather than an infant adoption model is crucial for a child protection system with large numbers of children in care who need placement in permanent families.
Efforts are being made and should continue to design a domestic adoption program that utilizes a child-centered adoption model.
A child centered adoption model is characterized by these factors: * The model is child focused and designed to find a family that best meets the needs of a particular child.
* Adoption is seen as a service for any child who cannot be reunited with their birth family, regardless of the child's age, ethnicity or special needs.
* Families from many socio-economic levels are encouraged to adopt by providing needed supports, including financial support and services to the child and family, both prior to and after the adoption.
* The adoptive home study uses a strengths based approach to explore a family's parenting abilities, ability to cope with adversity and willingness or experience in seeking help and resources as needed.
Pre-service training is part of the home study process.
* A variety of both general and child specific recruitment methods are utilized to find families for children.
* Relatives and families providing foster family care are encouraged and supported in adopting children in their care.
* Openness in the adoption is supported and maintaining meaningful connections throughout the adopted person's life is encouraged.
* Post adoption services are available for the child and family after the adoption is legalized.
An infant adoption program is characterized by a number characteristics: * Efforts are made to find a child for a family, rather than a family for a child.
* Adoption is a service only for abandoned or orphaned infants.
* Children who are older or have special needs are seen as "unadoptable" which then becomes a self-fulfilling prophecy.
* The adoptive home study process screens out potential adoptive families rather than screening in families through a strengths-based assessment.
* Assumptions are made that families will seek the service and recruitment of families isn't necessary.
* When recruitment does occur, infants and very young children are featured.
* Relatives and families providing foster family care are not encouraged to adopt.
* Secrecy about adoption is promoted and maintaining connections is not supported.
2.
While there have been improvements in child protection laws in recent years, standards of practice, rules or policies and methodologies are needed to carry out the intent of these laws and to encourage consistent practice across the country.
Standards for foster family care have been implemented and are seen as helpful, however, standards are needed for each program area in child protection.
New adoption legislation is under development with USAID and other donor assistance.
Adoption standards are being developed by USAID with the assistance of adoption experts.
These should both greatly enhance practice.
(Since this report was completed, the Government of Romania approved the Strategy for Implementation of Measures from the Report of the Independent Group for International Adoption Analysis and a legislative package is under development that addresses national or domestic adoption and international adoption procedures.)
3.
A training and technical assistance program for child protection staff and DPCs is needed to encourage consistent practice and conformity to policy and to enhance the knowledge, skills and abilities of child protection staff.
The staff's ability to assess a child's needs and develop individualized service plans requires specialized training.
The training must address utilizing a child-centered adoption model, beliefs regarding the adoptability of children, including older children and those with special needs and preparing children for adoptive placement.
Where successful domestic adoption and foster family care programs have been implemented, opportunities are needed to share this information between DPCs and to build on the strengths currently in the system.
4.
National and local public awareness and adoption recruitment strategies are needed to let the public know about the children who need adoptive families, change negative perceptions about adoption, and to encourage adoption.
A public awareness campaign began airing television spots in November 2001.
These spots are addressing a range of child protection issues, including national or domestic adoption.
These positive efforts need to be expanded to include general and child specific adoption recruitment at both a national and local level.
^1 Cole, Elizabeth S. (1997) "The Adoption of Older Children."
In Avery, Rosemary J., ed. Adoption Policy and Special Needs Children.
Westport, Connecticut: Greenwood Publishing Group, Inc. back
Home Back Top
Please send all comments and questions on this subject to Questions.
Please send all comments and Web feedback to Feedback.
Updated on February 20, 2003
