Position Statement Request Prize Zone Machine [anarule.gif] November 21, 1997 Re: Position Statement Request Prize Zone Machine CRS 12-47-901(5)(n)(I) Regulation 47-922 Dear Mr. Kreutz:
Your letter dated September 22, 1997 to Executive Director Renny Fagan was referred to me for response pursuant to Regulation 47-200 (copy attached).
This regulation governs the issuance of position statements and declaratory orders under the Colorado Liquor, Beer and Special Event codes.
While not specifically requested pursuant to this regulation, your letter appears to request a "statement of position" on the legality of the placement of "Prize Zone" game machines in liquor licensed establishments.
As I indicated in my October 17, 1997 letter to you, our Division=s position in this matter needed to be in harmony with that of the Limited Gaming Division.
They have reviewed this letter as it relates to "Slot Machines and concur with our position.
As you are aware, the Colorado Liquor Code under CRS 12-47-901(5)(n)(I) makes it illegal for anyone licensed to sell at retail "To authorize or permit any gambling, or the use of any gambling machine or device.
This statute then goes on to exempt those activities and equipment legally authorized and operated under Bingo and Raffles laws, Limited Gaming laws, and Pari-mutuel Racing laws.
Liquor Code Regulation 47-922 further addresses this issue by prohibiting the use of gambling devices, as defined by CRS 18-10-102, and slot machines, as defined by CRS 12-47.1-103(26).
This regulation, like CRS 12-47-901(5)(n), also exempts state authorized and operated legal gambling (lottery, limited gaming, bingo and raffles and pari-mutuel racing).
Issues Reviewed
The critical issue in analyzing the legality of the placement of "Prize Zone" machines is first to determine if this machine and its use would meet the definition of gambling, gambling device or slot machine.
If the "Prize Zone" machine falls within any of these definitions then the use of this machine must be reviewed to see if it fits into one of the statutory exceptions found under these definitions.
The brochure you provided for these machines (copy attached) shows that in playing the "Prize Zone" machine a person would place money into the machine and play one of seven games.
Based upon the player's skill or luck (the card games options shown in the brochure would involve luck and perhaps some level of skill), prize bucks can be earned.
The "Prize Zone" machine also has an "insta-prize" function which appears to be strictly driven by chance.
If a sufficient level of prize bucks is earned by a player a prize coupon is printed detailing the prize won by the player.
The player then collects the prize from the retailer where the machine is located.
Prizes offered in the playing of the machine, by way of example in the brochure, range from free games to a color TV.
The applicable statutory and constitutional definitions that must be reviewed to determine if this machine is a gambling device or a slot machine are as follows:
Gambling - CRS 18-10-102 (2)
A means risking any money, credit, deposit, or other thing of value for gain contingent in whole or in part upon lot, chance, the operation of a gambling device, or the happening or outcome of an event, including a sporting event, over which the person taking a risk has no control, but does not include: (Specific statutory exemptions analyzed follow)
-- Bona fide contests of skill, speed, strength, or endurance in which awards are made only to entrants or the owners of entries;
-- Any game, wager, or transaction which is incidental to a bona fide social relationship, is participated in by natural persons only, and in which no person is participating, directly or indirectly, in professional gambling;
Gambling - Device CRS 18-10-102 (3)
A device means any device, machine, paraphernalia, or equipment that is used or usable in the playing phases of any professional gambling activity, whether that activity consists of gambling between persons or gambling by a person involving the playing of a machine; except that the term does not include a crane game, as defined in section 12-47.1-103(5.5) C.R.S.
Professional Gambling 18-10-102(8)
A Professional gambling means:
(a) Aiding or inducing another to engage in gambling, with the intent to derive a profit therefrom; or
(b) Participating in gambling and having, other than by virtue of skill or luck, a lesser chance of losing or a greater chance of winning than one or more of the participants.
Slot Machine - CRS 12-47.1-103(26)
A machine means any mechanical, electrical, video, electronic, or other device, contrivance, or machine which, after insertion of a coin, token, or similar object, or upon payment of any required consideration whatsoever by a player, is available to be played or operated, and which, whether by reason of the skill of the player or application of the element of chance, or both, may deliver or entitle the player operating the machine to receive cash premiums, merchandise, tokens, or redeemable game credits, or any other thing of value other than unredeemable free games, whether the payoff is made automatically from the machines or in any other manner.
(b) A slot machine does not include:
(I) Vintage slot machine models which were introduced on the market prior to 1984 and are not used for gambling purposes or in connection with limited gaming;
(II) Crane games.
Slot Machine Constitutional Definition - Article XVIII Section 9(4)(c) Colorado State Constitution.
c.
A Slot machine means any mechanical, electrical, video, electronic, or other device, contrivance, or machine which, after insertion of a coin, token, or similar object, or upon payment of any required consideration whatsoever by a player, is available to be played or operated, and which, whether by reason of the skill of the player or application of the element of chance, or both, may deliver or entitle the player operating the machine to receive cash premiums, merchandise, tokens, redeemable game credits, or any other thing of value other than unredeemable free games, whether the payoff is made automatically from the machines or in any other manner.
ANALYSIS
I. Based upon a review of these statutory and constitutional provisions, the "Prize Zone" machine you describe in your letter meets the definition of a A slot Machine because:
A.
This machine is a mechanical, electrical, or video electronic device.
B.
This machine requires a player to insert consideration (by means of a coin or token) into the machine.
C.
The outcome of play on the machine is due to the application of skill or chance, or both.
D.
The machine delivers or entitles the player operating the machine to receive merchandise, tokens, redeemable game credits or other things of value (up to a Color T.V.).
E.
The "Prize Zone" machine does not appear to be a statutorily exempted vintage slot machine or a crane game.
Given the constitutional definition of a A slot machine, it would be inappropriate for either the Liquor Enforcement Division or Limited Gaming Division by position statement or otherwise to create its own exemptions for devices falling within the definition of a A slot machine.
II.
The issue of whether the "Prize Zone" machine fits within the definition of a A gambling Device requires a more detailed analysis.
Because the Colorado Liquor Code does not define a gambling Devices, an analysis of the relevant provisions of the Colorado Criminal Code is necessary.
The definition of a a gambling Device in the Criminal Code is tied back into the definition of a professional Gambling.
Therefore, if a device is either used or usable for a professional Gambling it would be a a gambling Device and prohibited under the Liquor Code=s statutory and regulatory provisions.
The definition of a professional Gambling has two options; one option involves inducing another person to engage in gambling with the intent to derive a profit, and the other option involves participating in gambling with a greater chance of winning.
It is important to note that, the "Prize Zone" machine meets the general definition of a gambling because a person risks money for gain (prizes) over the outcome of an event over which the person has no control (the order the cards are dealt in the card game options and the insta-prize feature of the machine).
In addition, the most commonly noted statutory exceptions to gambling (contests of skill and social exception) are not met because the "Prize Zone" machine cannot be an entrant in a contest of skill as contemplated under the statute.
Further, the social exception only applies to natural persons and is, regardless, not allowed when professional gambling occurs.
The owners of the "Prize Zone" machine are obviously placing it in licensed establishments to make a profit which meets the first option of a professional Gambling (18-10-102(8)(a) CRS).
Because the owners of the "Prize Zone" machine can also control the programming of the machine it is obvious that they would have a greater chance to win than the machine players, thus also meeting the second option of a professional Gambling (18-10-102(8)(b) CRS).
The "Prize Zone" therefore, meets the definition of a a gambling Device and is not a crane game which is the only statutory exception noted within the definition of a gambling Device .
FINDING
Based upon our analysis of the "Prize Zone" machine, and the relevant statutory provisions, it is the position of the Liquor Enforcement Division that these machines are Gambling Devices within the meaning of CRS 12-47-901(5)(n)(I) and Slot machines within the meaning of Regulation 47-922.
Based upon this position, these machines could only be legally authorized and operated within a liquor licensed premises if done so under the auspices of a Limited Gaming license issued by the Division of Gaming.
The "Prize Zone" machine also does not appear to be a gambling device that is permitted under other currently permitted forms of gambling including: Bingo and Raffles, the State Lottery and Pari-mutuel Racing.
Our Division does not regulate these licensed activities and any activities or machines used under these forms of gambling can only occur with the approval and licensure from the appropriate regulatory authorities.
APPEAL PROCEDURES
Pursuant to Regulation 47-200 this position statement may be appealed to the State Licensing Authority (Renny Fagan, Executive Director Dept. of Revenue) within thirty (30) days.
I have attached a copy of that regulation to provide you with guidance in this matter.
Sincerely,
David C. Reitz
Director
cc: Position Statement File: 12-47-901 CRS, Regulation 47-922
Division of Gaming
Home.gif (322 bytes) Deptbut.gif (277 bytes) Arrowup.gif (249 bytes) STDIRBUT.gif (3632 bytes)
[ State Home | Dept.
Home | Top ]
filename:S:\kreutz97.dav
