Governor Bill Owens Calendar of Events Press Releases Presentations Publications Media Coverage Links Grants Index Page OEMC OEMC Residential Programs Commercial 
The creation of local recycling programs across the state of Colorado has been met with overwhelming success in some communities and significant difficulties in others.
A recycling program within any community is dependent upon a variety of elements that work together to ensure achievement and sustainability.
In 1997 the Governor's Office of Energy Management and Conservation (OEMC) funded two studies that evaluated thriving Colorado recycling programs and projects that have faced challenges to growth and sustainability.
The purpose of this report is to provide a summary of the findings from these studies, and to assist programs in overcoming challenges and ensuring success.
The goals of the studies conducted in 1997 were to identify elements that either served as components of an active recycling program or as challenges to a program's objectives.
The programs that were the focus of the research were operated by state or local government, and had all received grants from OEMC to help implement or operate recycling services.
Each program manager was surveyed, and interviews were conducted on-site to glean additional information about the recycling programs.
The data was then analyzed to develop a list of elements that helped maintain or hinder recycling programs.
The results of these studies show that the achievements or challenges of a recycling program is based on a combination of elements, and is not usually dependent on only one or two.
Based on survey data, the successful recycling program elements include (see Diagram A): * support from political boards, top managers and the community; * a program vision that was created through an individual or group of individuals; * a paid program manager and labor force; * programs that set and implemented obtainable goals; * a recycling budget to run and operate the program; * efficient operations; * partnerships; * program convenience for users; * educational and public relations outreach; * high participation rates; * equipment that is owned and reliable; and * programs that demonstrate the ability to adapt to circumstance and creatively solve problems.
Successful Recycling Program Elements The survey data also identified elements that surfaced as challenges to a program's survival: * leadership; * community support; * political support; * partnerships with others; * program convenience for users; * participation; * securing funds; and * purchasing equipment.
This report highlights the top elements of a successful program as well as those that serve as major obstacles to communities that are struggling to create a local niche for recycling.
Colorado Community Recycling Programs II.
Successful Recycling Programs
In the first study that focused on recycling successes, information was gathered from the following recycling program managers: * Bruce Philbrick and Mick Mercer, City of Loveland The City of Loveland has very efficient recycling operations, which include a multitude of drop-off sites for a variety of materials.
* T.J. Quirk, Colorado State University CSU has achieved its goal of reducing the number of dumpsters on campus and improving the aesthetics of its recycling program.
* Kasey Geoghegan, Summit Recycling Project The Summit Recycling Project has maximized partnerships to implement, grow and expand recycling.
* Nancy Andrews, City of Durango The City of Durango's new recycling facility and curbside collection program are very efficient and convenient for its residents.
* Joe Lippis, Colorado Department of Corrections, Cañon City DOC achieved its goal of implementing prison recycling, and plans to expand recycling within a 100-mile radius during the next four years.
* Susan Koster, City of Lafayette The City of Lafayette's recycling program has strong political and community support.
Of the many elements that contribute to a thriving recycling program, there is a majority that stand out as being critical to long-term success and survival.
These elements include: * strong political, community and top management support; * program leadership and vision; * paid program manager and labor force; * obtainable goals; * partnerships; * program convenience for users; and * equipment that is owned and reliable.
The recycling coordinators interviewed in the study stated that if any of these factors were not considered, then their programs would probably not be in existence.
Support from political boards or top managers is very important if a recycling program is to run smoothly and be sustainable.
They typically respond when there are requests for recycling changes or when monetary support or other program-related resources are needed.
The Summit Recycling Project is one example of a program that receives much support from its board of directors.
Kasey Geoghegan, executive director of the Summit Recycling Project, usually makes decisions independently, but consults with the board members when major issues arise.
The board members are typically recruited by word of mouth or through local advertisements, which attracts people who are interested in recycling and improving the program.
When local funding is needed, Geoghegan must meet with Summit County commissioners.
The City of Lafayette has a Waste Reduction Advisory Committee (WRAC) to help support its recycling program.
WRAC is a subcommittee of the City Council comprised of volunteers who make recycling recommendations and advise the council on recycling issues.
Since all committee members volunteer their time, they have the freedom to decide what projects they want to develop.
The City Council in Durango has been supportive of the community's recycling needs.
It recently approved funding and construction for a recycling facility that processes and bales metals, plastics, papers and cardboard.
Summit Recycling Project Drop-Off Facility Summit Recycling Project drop-off facility
Community support is just as important as that from managers and political boards.
Without the support of communities, there would be little participation in recycling programs, and ultimately political boards would not be supportive.
The Town of Frisco recently conducted a community survey, which confirmed residents believe the Summit Recycling Project is the strongest program in the town and is of high priority to them.
Businesses and community members have showed their support at an annual auction fund-raiser for the program.
The amount of money raised each year at the auction has steadily increased.
The composting program developed by the City of Durango has received much support from its community.
In 1995, 950 people participated in composting workshops and bought home composting bins.
The community also shows support for recycling by participating in the curbside collections and drop-off centers.
line Joe Lippis "Anything that is usable should be used and all of our facilities and departments should be doing all they can to recycle and reuse everything."
line Leadership and vision are two other elements that contribute to the survival of recycling programs.
Without vision, recycling programs may never be formed, and without leadership, they may never be sustained.
According to Nancy Andrews, recycling coordinator for the City of Durango, the entire community had a vision for a comprehensive recycling program when they became aware that their local landfill was closing.
Concerned citizens proposed curbside recycling to the City Council as a means of reducing waste.
Andrews prepared a curbside recycling proposal that was implemented in 1990.
Joe Lippis with the Colorado Department of Corrections (DOC) in CaÒon City is the coordinator of its recycling program.
Lippis was instrumental in developing prison recycling, and his vision has expanded to include nine Cañon City correctional facilities, one Buena Vista correctional facility, the San Carlos correctional facility, Pueblo Minimum Center, Colorado Mental Health Institute, Cañon City businesses, Fremont County School District and Social Services, and the Holy Cross Abbey Monastery.
With the exception of the City of Lafayette, all of the programs evaluated possess paid recycling coordinators and labor.
This is almost essential to ensure that the daily responsibilities of operating a recycling program are carried out effectively.
The recycling coordinator with Colorado State University (CSU) is a full-time state classified position, line Chris Booth (New CSU Director) "This program would not be where it is today without student labor.
Their energy and enthusiasm has been instrumental in the success we enjoy today."
line and the responsibilities include administration, budgeting, marketing, negotiation with vendors and strategic planning.
CSU also employs 12 part-time students to pick up recyclables at each building on campus.
The Summit Recycling Project is managed by an executive director whose main responsibilities are to keep the board of directors informed of changes, obtain additional funding, oversee the drop-off sites, provide timely reports and educate the community.
In addition to the executive director, there are two full-time operation managers and two adults and four youth that work part-time.
The implementation of obtainable goals also is necessary for a program to thrive.
The City of Loveland initially wanted to create an effective waste management program that encompassed recycling.
The goal was to design a new recycling program based on volume rates.
Bruce Philbrick and Mick Mercer, recycling coordinators with the City of Loveland, feel they have been successful in achieving their goals.
CSU has overall goals of reducing the number of dumpsters on campus, improving the aesthetics of the recycling program and reducing injuries associated with solid waste.
Goals also are set by the number of tons collected each year.
In 1996 CSU recycled 623 tons of material.
The goal for 1998 is to recycle 1,100 tons of material.
The Summit Recycling Project has a strategic plan for 1997-2002 in which seven strategic goals and objectives have been established.
They include local market development, improved operations, education, additional funding, incentives, precycling and national recognition.
Kasey Goeghegan
line Kasey Goeghegan "Partnerships we have developed in Summit County have been a key to our development.
As a non profit we are dependent on community support -- a broad based support from local government, business and individuals has enabled us to be successful."
line The formation of partnerships with other organizations or departments is another critical factor in the overall success of a recycling program.
Although the City of Loveland has its own solid waste department, it relies on other departments within the city to make the program work.
For example, the utility department charges all citizens a flat rate fee for recycling, solid waste and hazardous waste.
New residents must contact the utility department, which provides them with a recycling packet and explains the service.
In addition, the City of Loveland works with local grocery stores to sell trash stamps.
The Summit Recycling Project receives cooperation from volunteers, businesses and local government to make recycling a success.
It also relies on local government departments' in-kind services to help run the recycling program.
The Public Works Department with the City of Durango has developed interdepartmental and external partnerships to make its recycling program work.
City Market, a local grocery store, is utilized as a drop-off station.
The City's Parks Department has donated land for a composting demonstration site, and La Plata County has donated classroom space for conducting composting workshops.
In order to have high participation rates, a recycling program should be convenient for its users.
All of the programs evaluated have well-maintained drop-off centers that are almost always open.
The City of Loveland and the City of Durango both have curbside programs, which make recycling even more convenient for residents.
Loveland Recycling Program City of Loveland curbside recycling program
Owning reliable equipment for daily recycling operations is necessary for any program to remain active.
Summit Recycling Project, the City of Durango, Colorado Department of Corrections, and the City of Lafayette own recycling equipment.
Loveland's solid waste department leases its equipment from the city's vehicle maintenance, and Colorado State University's recycling program leases its equipment from the university motor pool.
Without the proper equipment, a program cannot expand or even provide basic recycling services.
Colorado Community Recycling Programs
line Bruce Philbrick "The city of Loveland attributes its success in residential solid was management to the following program components: volume-based rates for solid waste collection and disposal; co-collection of solid waste and recyclables; and aggressive efforts to recover to recover recyclables and yard waste through curbside and drop-off programs.
As a rsult, the City is now diverting more than 50% of its wastestream from landfill disposal."
line III.
Recycling Programs with Challenges
The second study evaluated the challenges that have inhibited the growth of the following community recycling programs: * Delta County * Eagle County * Gilpin County * Morgan County * Saguache County
The elements described in the previous section are critical to the success of almost any recycling program.
The study conducted on recycling programs with challenges found that the lack of three of those elements - leadership, community support and political support - were considered to be major obstacles to implementing a recycling program within a community.
Other challenges such as management and labor, and program convenience have hindered the growth and sustainability of some recycling programs.
Many of the programs evaluated reported that leadership is a major challenge because of the lack of skills necessary to operate a successful recycling program.
Leadership skills include economic planning, strategic planning and goal setting, communications, and education/outreach.
When many of the programs were first implemented, they had supportive environmental leaders; however, most were volunteers who did not have sufficient experience in coordinating a recycling program.
Delta, Gilpin and Eagle counties all relied on volunteer leadership, and as a result their programs did not last long.
In Delta County, the volunteers who originally led the program did not have clear goals and made decisions based on unrealistic costs.
Morgan County's recycling program had strong leadership in the early 1990s because the county manager supported recycling efforts.
Despite their support for recycling, when new county commissioners were elected in 1994, the county manager's position was eliminated.
line Alberta Nail "For a recycling program to be successful, leadership is essential coupled witha depndable funding source."
line Another major challenge for the programs evaluated in this study is the absence of strong community support.
For many of the programs, community support is often inconsistent and unreliable, which may be due to the fact that recycling is not a high priority among residents.
Because some of the recycling programs are operated on such limited funds, they typically rely on volunteers to help make them work.
Unfortunately, some of the programs reported that volunteers are often unreliable and there are high turnover rates.
Saguache County Landfill Drop-Off Containers Saguache Count Landfill drop-off containers
Saquache County Landfill Bailing Operation Saguache County Landfill bailing operation
The strong need for political support was a significant challenge for all of the programs being evaluated in this particular study.
Several elements were identified that contributed to the lack of support, including financial support, the priority that a county gives recycling and the absence of commitment to recycling sustainability.
Morgan County commissioners have trouble justifying the start-up costs (initial investments vs. long-term returns) for a recycling program.
As a result, funding that is necessary to run a program is usually not approved.
Gilpin County has seen a dramatic shift in priorities during the last 10 years as a result of rapid development in the casino industry.
This has significantly limited the priority list due to serious growth issues; therefore, commissioners do not consider recycling an urgent issue for the county, and only want to minimally invest in the program.
Communities in the San Luis Valley are concerned about recycling, but there has been isolated political support necessary to sustain a recycling program, namely in Saguache County.
Despite many attempts by citizens in this area to include recycling in future solid waste planning, the San Luis Valley commissioners have not rallied for recycling.
Management and labor are two other challenges that some recycling programs have faced.
Some of the program coordinators have many responsibilities, including collecting recyclables, operating the program, tracking the budget, educating the public and finding end-markets.
Delta County's recycling program manager works long hours, often 60 hours per week, but is paid for a 30-hour workweek.
In addition to management, forming a labor force to help run the recycling services can be a major difficulty for any program on a limited budget.
As mentioned earlier, some of the programs use volunteers, which can sometimes prove to be unreliable.
Program convenience is important in making a recycling program successful, and without it, the participation rate decreases.
In Morgan, Eagle, Gilpin and Saguache counties, there are no curbside recycling services.
Instead, each program uses a drop-off station that either has limited hours or is not conveniently located.
Morgan County utilizes six transfer stations to house the recycling containers; however, the greatest challenge to the program's convenience is the limited hours the sites are open.
In Saguache County, the closest drop-off center is in Alamosa, 70 miles from Saguache.
The recycling coordinator stated there could be 15 drop-off sites in the county that would make the program more convenient.
Colorado Community Recycling Programs V. Conclusions
The communities that were evaluated in the two studies are diverse, and thus face strengths and weaknesses that are unique to their individual recycling programs.
Some communities are more isolated than others, and may not have access to recycling facilities or end markets.
Other communities may have supportive environments that contribute needed funding and participation.
Most programs likely have a combination of challenges and achievements.
The successful recycling programs mentioned in this report still have obstacles to overcome, but they have managed to gain the support of those involved, especially the community.
They have proven the ability to adapt to new circumstances - changes in operations, staff, funding, equipment, etc. - and creatively solve problems.
Colorado Community Recycling Programs Acknowledgments
The grants and studies that served as the basis for this report were funded by the Governor's Office of Energy Management and Conservation (OEMC) and prepared by Paula Volkin of Volkin and Associates.
OEMC thanks its grant recipients who participated in the surveys.
Without their valuable input and willingness to share their information with others, this report would not be possible.
Governor's Office of Energy Management and Conservation 225 East 16th Avenue, Suite 650 Denver, CO 80203 303-894-2383 fax: 303-894-2388 E-mail: oemc@state.co.us Web address: www.state.co.us/oemc
Colorado Governor's Office of Energy Management 
Rick Grice, Executive Director Governor's Office of Energy Management and Conservation 225 E. 16th Avenue, Suite 650, Denver, CO 80203 303-894-2383 o 800-632-662 o TDD: 800-659-2656 o Fax: 303-894-2388 Send comments, suggestions or questions to: oemc@state.co.us ___________________________________________________________________
Programs Residential | Commercial 
Calendar of Events | Press Releases | Presentations | Publications | Media Coverage | Links | Grants | Home What's New | How It Works | Success Stories
