HUMAN SERVICES CENTER George S. Mickelson
Center for the Neurosciences
What's New
RECREATION CONFERENCE SET FOR MARCH 3
The Therapeutic Recreation Society of the South Dakota Parks and Recreation Association (SDPRA) will hold the Therapeutic Recreation Spring Conference at the South Dakota Human Services Center (HSC).
The conference will be held on Wednesday, March 3, 2004, in the HSC Multi-Purpose Room.
Pre-registration is required.
The conference is sponsored by SDPRA and HSC, with support provided by Yankton Area Mental Wellness, Inc.
Continuing Education Units will be provided for conference participants.
Application will be made for professional credit for chemical dependency counselors, nursing home administrators, and social workers.
For more information or to pre-register for the conference, contact Colleen Craig-Davis, CTRS, HSC Therapeutic Recreation Coordinator, at colleen.craig-davis@state.sd.us (605) 668-3252.
HSC PATIENTS SET TO CELEBRATE NEW YEARS EVE
[image002.jpg]
Vickie McDonald, RN (pictured far left), serves as a Human Service Nurse for the South Dakota Human Services Center (HSC) Adult Chemical Dependency Treatment Unit, as well as a member of the Altar Society of Saint Columbia Catholic Church, Irene, South Dakota.
The Altar Society donated pizza for patients of the HSC Adult Chemical Dependency and all Adolescent Treatment Program units.
Jody Smith (pictured right), Program Director for HSC Special Programs, and Cory D. Nelson, HSC Administrator, accepted the donation of pizzas for the patients.
Full story...
Patients at the South Dakota Human Services Center will be celebrating New Years Eve with other patients on their treatment unit.
Instead of the traditional holiday toast, they will be enjoying toasty pizza for their celebration snack.
The pizza is being provided by Altar Society of Saint Columba Catholic Church, Irene, South Dakota.
Vickie McDonald, RN, serves as a Human Service Nurse for the South Dakota Human Services Center Adult Chemical Dependency Treatment Unit.
The Altar Society members are committed to serving others in need.
The group usually serves The Banquet near New Years Eve but we were unable to do that this year.
Since I work at HSC, I knew the patients would appreciate this special way of celebrating the new year, said McDonald, who also serves as a member of the contributing Altar Society members.
The church group provided pizza for all Adolescent Treatment Program units, as well as the Adult Chemical Dependency Treatment Program, all of which are under the direction of Jody Smith, Program Director for Special Programs.
Cory D. Nelson serves as HSC Administrator.
HSC staff are grateful for the generosity of the Irene Altar Society to provide this special New Years Eve celebration for the patients of the adolescent and chemical dependency treatment units.
This can be an especially difficult time for adolescents who are spending their first holiday away from their family.
It is also a difficult time for patients in chemical dependency treatment who are learning to celebrate special events without the use of drugs or alcohol, said Nelson.
New Years Eve is a time when everyone celebrates.
This is a way for the patients to participate by celebrating, too.
Its really great that the Altar Society can do this for the patients.
HSC patients appreciate these extra treats so much, McDonald said.
The HSC staff and patients extend gratitude to the community for the support that is provided for the patients in so many ways all throughout the year.
**********
HSC PATIENTS SUPPORT STAFF IN IRAQ
[image004.jpg]
Deanna Branaugh, Certified Therapeutic Recreation Specialist for the South Dakota Human Services Center, displays decorations that were sent to Human Services Center (HSC) staff who are serving in military active duty in Iraq.
With Love from South Dakota was the message on the decorations.
Patients made the decorations to show support for HSC staff who are serving in the military and will be away from home for the holidays.
Full story
With Love from South Dakota, was the message on decorations that were sent to Human Services Center (HSC) staff who are serving in military active duty in Iraq.
Patients from HSC Acute Adult Treatment Program Units of Aspen 1 and 2 and Cedar 2 made Christmas ornaments for two of our employees that are stationed in Iraq, said Deanna Branaugh, Certified Therapeutic Recreation Specialist, who serves patients from that program.
Patients created simple ornaments made of construction paper that were decorated with paint and cotton balls.
The patients, with the help of staff, created approximately 100 decorations.
They were decorated with the words With Love from South Dakota.
A heart design was used to indicate the word love.
These decorations were mailed out right after Veterans day to hopefully guarantee delivery for Christmas decorating, Branaugh said.
The goal was to let these staff know that we are grateful for their service, both here at HSC and in Iraq.
Making decorations was a small gesture to show our great appreciation to active military personnel who will be away from home and family for the holidays, Branaugh said.
Branaugh incorporates various activities in therapeutic recreation to develop skills for patients to use upon discharge.
From this activity, the patients may be inspired make table favors for their community nursing home or to decorate their own home with inexpensive craft projects, Branaugh said.
The patients were pleased to participate in this activity.
Some of the patients could especially relate to the feelings of loneliness during the holidays when people usually prefer to be with family.
Because of their hospitalization, some of the patients will be unable to be home this Christmas.
Like military personnel on active duty, hospitalized patients have to be away from loved ones this holiday season too, Branaugh said.
**********
HSC ADOLESCENTS SHARE
HOLIDAY CHEER WITH COMMUNITY
[image006.jpg]
Stephanie Knakmuhs (pictured on left), Therapeutic Recreation Specialist for the South Dakota Human Services Center Adolescent Program, delivered gifts to the Julia Hussein (pictured on right), Communications Dispatcher for the Yankton Police Department.
Patients from the HSC Adolescent Program made a variety of gifts that were donated and delivered to the Yankton Police Department, Yankton Fire Department and the Yankton Area Chamber of Commerce.
Making and donating handmade craft items guides patients from the HSC Adolescent Program in identifying the needs of others, recognizing the contributions that community leaders make, expressing appreciation for support given to HSC throughout the year, gaining positive reinforcement for their own good deeds, and sharing the joy of the holiday season.
Full story...
Patients from the South Dakota Human Services Center spread holiday cheer to local leaders.
The adolescents delivered handmade gifts to the Yankton Police Department, Yankton Fire Department and the Yankton Area Chamber of Commerce.
The adolescents designed and prepared craft items during group sessions at the HSC Adolescent Treatment Program.
Merry Kostroun, Therapy Aide for the HSC Oak 1 Adolescent Treatment Program, coordinates the adolescents craft projects and promoted the sharing of holiday cheer.
The craft projects provides the adolescents an opportunity to work as a team to create something that brings praise and recognition to the group.
The adolescents enjoy this creative outlet and get such positive reinforcement for their work.
These craft activities also help the adolescents focus on other people when they are hospitalized and away from their family during the holiday season, Kostroun said.
The adolescents made a quilt that will be used as a drawing prize for the Yankton Fire Department Christmas party.
They gave a variety of Christmas tree decorations to the Yankton Police Department and the Yankton Area Chamber of Commerce.
HSC receives outstanding support from the community all throughout the year.
The adolescent patients and the staff who serve them are proud to give back to the community.
This is one way to show the Centers appreciation for the cooperation that is consistently extended to HSC, said Cory D. Nelson, HSC Administrator.
The police officers provided the adolescents with a tour of the Police Department, showing them the cells and booking area.
The adolescents also toured the new Chamber of Commerce building, Kostroun said.
The recipients of the gifts were very appreciative and kind to the adolescents.
Everyone enjoyed the nice outing, where the kids gave from the heart and reaped the rewards of kindness and praise from people in the community, she said.
While everyone agrees the adolescents are very creative, they often get their ideas from a wide variety of sources.
Adolescents go through craft magazines and choose items to make, or they have items at home that spark an idea for a new project, Kostroun said.
The kids in the group are eager to try any new project, whether it is hand sewing, machine sewing, tying blankets, stuffing pillows, gluing, or glittering something, she said.
Supplies for the craft items are often donated to HSC.
Supplies for the Sewing Group are funded through HSC and often come from donations made to the Center.
The adolescents also make items for a craft fair.
The craft fair is open to HSC patients and staff to purchase items and the proceeds are used to purchase more supplies.
The patients in the group are also given the opportunity to make their own blankets, pillows, dolls, or teddy bears.
They are proud to give their handmade creations to loved ones for holiday presents, Kostroun said.
For anyone wishing to share the holiday spirit with others, donations are requested for craft supplies.
The Adolescents are always in need of fabric, pillow stuffing, and quilt batting.
Those items need to be purchased most often to keep the adolescent craft group active, Kostroun said.
**********
ALA SUPPORTS VETERANS FOR PAST SERVICE
[image008.jpg]
Tara Gill, South Dakota Human Services Center Volunteer Coordinator; (pictured left to right) Joyce List, State Department Gift Shop Chairman for American Legion Auxiliary (ALA) serving the Human Services Center Yankton; Shirley Baker, ALA District 7 President from Pickstown; and Irene Sears, State ALA Department President from Rapid City, and 20 ALA volunteers participated in the Veterans Gift Shop.
The event, held on December 1^st at HSC, allowed veterans hospitalized at HSC to select the gifts of their choice for their loved ones.
The gifts were wrapped and mailed by the members of the ALA to the veterans families at no cost to the veteran or their family.
Full story...
Many people have been sending holiday packages to veterans serving in the military this year.
For many years the American Legion Auxiliary (ALA) has been helping veterans hospitalized for the holidays send Christmas presents to their loved ones at home.
Joyce List of Yankton serves as the State Department Gift Shop Chairman for ALA, serving the Human Services Center (HSC).
It is Joyces responsibility to recruit volunteers, collect donated gifts from other ALA units, set-up the gifts, and coordinate all the selection, wrapping and mailing.
List is no newcomer to this role.
She has efficiently been serving in this volunteer role for the past six years.
List worked closely with Tara Gill, HSC Volunteer Coordinator, to obtain the names, ages and mailing addresses of their loved ones from veterans hospitalized at HSC.
The ALA volunteers then set up tables with gifts and helped the hospitalized veterans choose gifts for their loved ones.
The veterans select the gifts of their choice, and have the gifts wrapped and mailed to their family, all at no cost to the veteran or their family.
The ALA covers all expenses, List said.
The Veterans Gift Shop was held on Monday, December 1, 2003 at HSC. Shirley Baker, District 7 President from Pickstown, and Irene Sears, State ALA Department President from Rapid City, were also in Yankton to attend and assist with the Yankton ALA Veterans Gift Shop.
The ALA provides the Veterans Gift Shop at five locations across the state.
We serve Fort Meade, the Host Springs VA, the Hot Springs State Home, the VA Center in Sioux Falls, and HSC here in Yankton.
Last year we served 2,300 veterans and provided thousands of gifts for veterans hospitalized across the state, Sears said.
The goal of the Auxiliary is to increase awareness for patriotism and to show respect, love and honor to veterans.
The Veterans Gift Shop is one way to accomplish that goal during the holiday season, Sears said.
We do this because we want to.
It is so important to us to honor those who served in the military.
While the volunteers agreed that they participate to give back to the veterans who served our country, they also note that the Veterans Gift Shop is a nice way to begin the holiday season.
The Auxiliary volunteers willingly help with this gift shop.
There is always a nice variety of gifts donated for veterans to choose from.
The Auxiliary members enjoy seeing the veterans find just the right gift for their loved ones, List said.
The volunteers reminisced about the extra special moments from past Veterans Gift Shops.
There was an especially sick veteran hospitalized in a medical facility.
The ALA volunteers, as well as one of his family members, helped him select the gifts for his loved ones.
The next day he died.
The family was so pleased to receive those gifts.
They said they would always remember what his last gifts to them were, Sears said.
A couple of years ago after Christmas, we received a card from the sister of a veteran.
She wrote that the veteran had little or no contact with his family for years.
He was able to be home for Christmas that year and was able to actually present the gifts that he had selected for each family member.
She explained that he just cried when gave out the gifts.
He was so glad to be back with his family, Sears said.
The gift of giving to others can keep on giving.
That was especially evident in one other touching experience for the ALA volunteers.
Several years ago they received a check in the mail for nearly $700.00.
One family, with children now grown, had sent the check as a thank you to the ALA.
They explained that it was to cover the costs over all the years for the gifts that their father had sent to them with the help from the ALA.
The veterans themselves are also remembered by the ALA.
Each veteran who is hospitalized for the holidays receives a special Christmas gift.
They also receive gifts or greetings for Valentines Day, Memorial Day, Independence Day and other holidays or special days throughout the year.
Sears personally delivered to hospitalized veterans more than 500 Valentines that were handmade by the American Legion Auxiliary Juniors.
The ALA Juniors are those under age 18 who meet the criteria for membership.
When they turn age 18, ALA Juniors can become ALA members to keep going the spirit of service to those who have served our countrys armed forces.
**********
Updated (1/20/04)
_____ _____ ____ _____ _____
SD Home | DHS Home | Feedback | Help
