[USEMAP:banner.gif] [USEMAP:dehlogo1.gif]
There is no evidence to date of BSE affecting American cattle.
* Does BSE affect humans? * Is it possible to get vCJD from eating food purchased in the United States? * What is being done to determine whether the newly recognized vCJD is occurring in the United States? * What is the current risk to American consumers traveling to Europe of acquiring vCJD? * What countries have reported cases of BSE or are considered to have a substantial risk associated with BSE? * Is BSE Affecting Cattle in the United States? * Is the disease, BSE, affecting cattle in Europe the same as the disease, CWD, affecting elk and deer in the US?
Does BSE affect humans?
BSE is a disease that affects cattle.
However, there is a disease similar to BSE called variant Creutzfeldt-Jakob Disease (CJD), or vCJD, which is found in humans.
There have been a small number of cases of vCJD reported, primarily in the United Kingdom, occurring in people who consumed beef contaminated with an infective agent.
[(As of February 2001, there have been a total of 92 cases of vCJD worldwide-including 88 in the U.K., three in France and one in Ireland.)
There is strong scientific evidence (epidemiological and laboratory) that the agent that causes BSE in cattle is the agent that causes vCJD in people.
There are no reported cases of vCJD in the United States.
The disease, vCJD, which primarily affects younger persons, is very hard to diagnose until the disease has nearly run its course.
In its early stages, the disease may manifest itself through neurologic symptoms but it is not until the latter stages of the disease that brain abnormalities detectable by xray or MRI can be seen.
Is it possible to get vCJD from eating food purchased in the United States?
The disease, vCJD, has been associated with the consumption of foods produced from BSE infected animals.
Because BSE has never been found in the U.S., it is unlikely that food purchased in the US such as at a grocery store or restaurant would be contaminated.
The U.S. Department of Agriculture's Animal and Plant Health Inspection Service has restricted the importation of live ruminants, such as cows and sheep, and food products from these animals from BSE countries since 1989, and from all European countries since 1997.
Thus it is highly unlikely that a person would contract vCJD today by eating food purchased in the United States..
It is important for consumers to know that:
* No meat products from the 31 countries identified as having BSE or at risk for having BSE are allowed in the U.S.
This includes meat products used in human, animal, and pet foods.
Milk and milk products continue to be imported into the US from these countries because milk and milk products are not believed to pose any risk for transmitting BSE to humans.
Experiments have shown that milk from BSE-infected cows has not caused infections in the same species or in other test animals.
* FDA requires that gelatin-containing products such as candy or capsules imported from the 31 countries identified as having BSE or at risk for having BSE be manufactured under specific guidance and certified as such to ensure they are safe for American consumers.
FDA guidelines require gelatin to be made from non-BSE herds and use only specific parts of BSE-free animals in the rendering process.
* Dietary supplements and cosmetic products containing bovine materials from animals originating in the 31 countries where BSE has been found or is at risk for being found, are excluded from the US.
What is being done to determine whether the newly recognized vCJD is occurring in the United States?
With heightened concern about vCJD in Europe, the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention have enhanced their vCJD surveillance in the U.S.
To date, there have been no cases of vCJD identified in the United States.
What is the current risk to American consumers traveling to Europe of acquiring vCJD?
In the United Kingdom, the current risk appears to be extremely small, perhaps about 1 case per 10 billion servings of beef.
In the other countries of Europe, the current risk, if it exists at all, would not likely be any higher than that in the United Kingdom, except possibly in Portugal.
In the 12-month period ending June 15, 2000, Portugal had about half the reported incidence of BSE cases per 1 million adult cattle as that reported in the United Kingdom; however, Portugal has only recently implemented BSE-related public health control measures.
According to the Centers for Disease Control and Prevention, the current risk of acquiring vCJD from any specific country cannot be precisely determined because cattle products from one country might be distributed and consumed in others.
For travelers concerned about reducing their possible risk of acquiring vCJD from food, CDC suggests:
(1) when traveling in Europe, avoid eating beef and beef products or
(2) when traveling in Europe, eat only select beef or beef products, such as solid pieces of muscle meat (versus ground beef products such as burgers and sausages that contain meat from various parts of the animal).
Solid pieces of muscle meat may have less opportunity for contamination with tissues such as the brain or spinal cord that might harbor the BSE agent.
Milk and milk products from cows are not believed to pose any risk for transmitting the BSE agent because experiments have shown that milk from BSE-infected cows has not caused BSE in cows or other test animals.
When and how did BSE in cattle occur?
BSE has been of great concern since 1986, when it was first reported among cattle in the United Kingdom.
At its peak, in January 1993, almost 1,000 new cases per week were identified.
The outbreak in the United Kingdom may have started from the feeding of scrapie-contaminated sheep meat-and-bone meal to cattle.
Scrapie is a disease of sheep that is related to BSE in cattle.
There is strong evidence that the outbreak in cattle was amplified in the United Kingdom by feeding rendered bovine meat-and-bone meal to young calves.
The nature of the transmissible agent in BSE is not known.
Currently, the most accepted theory is that the agent is a modified form of a normal cell surface component known as a prion protein, which is a pathogenic form of the protein.
Why or how this substance changes to become disease-producing is still unknown.
Prions are resistant to common treatments, such as heat, to reduce or eliminate its infectivity or presence.
What countries have reported cases of BSE or are considered to have a substantial risk associated with BSE? These countries are: Albania, Austria, Belgium, Bosnia-Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Croatia, Czech Republic, Denmark, Federal Republic of Yugoslavia, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Ireland, Italy, Liechtenstein, Luxembourg, Former Yugoslavia Republic of Macedonia, The Netherlands, Norway, Oman, Poland, Portugal, Romania, Slovak Republic, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland and United Kingdom (Great Britain including Northern Ireland and the Falkland Islands).
Is BSE Affecting Cattle in the United States? There are no known cases of the BSE in the United States due to the active surveillance and import measures taken by the Food and Drug Administration and the U.S. Department of Agriculture over the past ten years.
These and other federal and state agencies and industry groups have taken a series of actions to prevent the introduction of BSE into the US food supply.
For example, to prevent BSE from entering the United States, firm restrictions were placed on the importation of live ruminants and ruminant products including meat, meat-and-bone meal, offals, glands, etc., from countries where BSE was known to exist.
These restrictions were later extended to include importation of ruminants and certain ruminant products not only from BSE-positive countries, but also countries thought to be at high risk for BSE, even if the disease hadn't been identified in those countries.
In addition, FDA prohibits the use of most mammalian protein in the manufacture of animal feeds given to ruminants because this kind of feeding practice is believed to have initiated and amplified the outbreak of BSE in the United Kingdom.
Is the disease, BSE, affecting cattle in Europe the same as the disease, CWD, affecting elk and deer in the US?
BSE is a disease of cattle.
However, a related disease, Chronic Wasting Disease (CWD), does occur in a small number of American elk and deer in certain parts of the country, particularly Colorado and Wyoming.
FDA is working closely with other government agencies and the public health community to address CWD in wild and domesticated herds.
Wildlife officials in Colorado and Wyoming have advised individuals not to harvest, handle, or consume any wild deer or elk, especially in those states, that appear to be sick, regardless of the cause.
Nancy Napolilli, Program Manager Food Safety 
Environmental Health Offices
State of Alaska | Department of Environmental Conservation | Division of Environmental Health | Index Division webmaster: EHwebmaster@dec.state.ak.us
